 Chapter 1 Definitions:  When  used  in  this  chapter, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the context otherwise requires:"Assessing unit" means: (a) a city, town, or county with the  power to  assess  real  property, unless the city, town or county is part of a consolidated assessing unit;
    (b) a consolidated assessing unit; or
    (c) a village as provided in section  fourteen  hundred two  of  this chapter.
	"Assessment"  means  a  determination made by assessors of (1) the valuation of real property,  including  the  valuation  of  exempt  real property  and (2) whether or not real property is subject to taxation or special ad valorem levies."Assessors" mean  an  elected  or  appointed  officer  or  body  of officers  charged  by law with the duty of assessing real property in an assessing unit for the  purposes  of  taxation  or  special  ad  valorem levies,  for  county,  city,  town,  village, school district or special district purposes. "Board  of  assessment  review"  means  the  body  of  officers constituted  by  subdivision one of section five hundred twenty-three of this chapter and, in the case of villages, by subdivision one of section fourteen hundred eight of this chapter which is empowered  to  hear  and determine complaints in relation to assessments.
   "Chief  executive  officer" means (a) in the case of cities, the mayor, except in cities having a city manager in  which  case  it  shall mean the city manager, (b) in the case of villages, the mayor and (c) in the case of towns, the supervisor.
   "Collecting  officer" means an elected or appointed officer of any municipal corporation or special district authorized by law  to  receive and collect taxes, special ad valorem levies or special assessments.
 "Commissioner" means the commissioner of taxation and finance.
    "Comptroller" means the state comptroller.
    "Consolidated assessing unit" means an assessing unit established pursuant to article sixteen of this chapter.
    "County  equalization  agency"  means  the  board  of supervisors, commissioners of equalization or other county agency authorized by  this chapter or any other law to establish county equalization rates.
    "County  equalization  rate" means the percentage of full value at which taxable real property in a city or town is assessed as  determined by a county equalization agency for purposes of apportioning county real property taxes.
   	"County  treasurer"  means  the  chief  fiscal officer of a county charged by law with performing the duties of treasurer, by whatever name known or called.
    "Infant" or "minor" means a person who has not attained  the age of eighteen years.
    "Department" means the department of taxation and finance.
    "Municipal  corporation"  means  a county, city, town, village or school district.
   	"Parcel" means a separately assessed lot, parcel, piece or portion of real property, except  publicly  owned  bridges  and  land  used  for street,  road,  highway  or  parkway  purposes.  A  parcel  shall not be bisected by a municipal corporation  boundary  line  except  that  in  a special  assessing unit a parcel may be bisected by a school district or village boundary line.
   	"Real property", "property" or "land" mean and include:
    (a)  Land  itself,  above  and  under  water,  including   trees   and undergrowth  thereon  and  mines,  minerals, quarries and fossils in and under the same, except mines belonging to the state;
    (b) Buildings and other articles  and  structures,  substructures and superstructures  erected  upon,  under  or  above  the  land, or affixed thereto, including bridges and wharves and piers and the  value  of  the right to collect wharfage, cranage or dockage thereon;
    (c)   Surface,   underground   or  elevated  railroads,  and  railroad structures, substructures and  superstructures,  tracks  and  the  metal thereon,  branches,  switches and other fixtures permitted or authorized to be made, laid or placed in,  upon,  above  or  under  any  public  or private street or place;
    (d)  When  owned  by  a  telephone company all telephone and telegraph lines, wires, poles, supports and inclosures for  electrical  conductors upon,  above  and  underground.  For purposes of this paragraph the term "real property" shall not  include  station  connections  and  the  term"telephone  company"  shall  mean a company subject to regulation by the public service commission which provides, to the general  public  within its  local exchange area, non-cellular switched local exchange telephone service at the points of origination and termination of the signal.
    (e) Mains, pipes and tanks permitted or authorized to be made, laid or placed in, upon, above or under any public or private  street  or  place for  conducting  steam,  heat,  water, oil, electricity or any property, substance or product capable of transportation or conveyance therein  or that is protected thereby;
    (f)  Boilers,  ventilating  apparatus,  elevators,  plumbing, heating, lighting  and  power   generating   apparatus,   shafting   other   than counter-shafting  and  equipment  for  the  distribution of heat, light, power, gases and liquids, but shall not  include  movable  machinery  or equipment  consisting  of  structures  or  erections to the operation of which machinery is essential,  owned  by  a  corporation  taxable  under article  nine-a  of  the  tax law, used for trade or manufacture and not essential for the support of the building, structure or  superstructure, and removable without material injury thereto;
    (g)  Forms  of  housing  adaptable  to motivation by a power connected thereto, commonly called "trailers" or "mobile homes", which are or  can be used for residential, business, commercial or office purposes, except those  (1)  located  within the boundaries of an assessing unit for less than sixty days, (2)  unoccupied  and  for  sale  or  (3)  “recreational vehicles"  that  are  four  hundred  square  feet  or less in size, self propelled or towable by an automobile or light duty truck  and  used  as temporary  living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. The value of any trailer or mobile home shall be  included  in  the assessment  of  the land on which it is located; provided, however, that if either the trailer or mobile home or the land on which it is  located is  entitled  to any exemption pursuant to article four of this chapter, other than the exemption authorized by section four hundred  twenty-five of  this  chapter,  such  trailer  or  mobile  home  shall be separately assessed in the name of the owner thereof;
    (h) Special franchises as defined in  subdivision  seventeen  of  this section.
    (i)  When  owned  by  other  than  a telephone company as such term is defined in paragraph (d) hereof, all lines, wires, poles,  supports  and inclosures for electrical conductors upon, above and underground used in connection  with the transmission or switching of electromagnetic voice, video and data signals between  different  entities  separated  by  air, street  or  other  public  domain,  except  that such property shall not include: (A) station connections; (B) fire and surveillance alarm system property; (C) such property  used  in  the  transmission  of  news  wire services;  and  (D)  such  property  used in the transmission of news or entertainment  radio,  television  or  cable  television   signals   for immediate,  delayed or ultimate exhibition to the public, whether or not a fee is charged therefor.
     Spent  fuel  pools  and dry cask storage systems in which nuclear fuel is stored and is pending further or final disposal from  a  nuclear power  station  following the permanent cessation of power operations of such station. 12-a. "Revaluation", "reassessment" or  "update"  means  a  systematic review  of the assessments of all locally assessed properties, valued as of  the  valuation  date  of  the  assessment  roll   containing   those assessments,  to  attain  compliance with the standard of assessment set forth in subdivision two of section three hundred five of this chapter. 13. "School authorities" mean the  board  of  education,  trustees  or corresponding officers, whether one or more, of a school district. "Special  ad  valorem levy" means a charge imposed upon benefited real property in the same manner and at  the  same  time  as  taxes  for municipal   purposes   to  defray  the  cost,  including  operation  and maintenance, of a special  district  improvement  or  service,  but  not including any charge imposed by or on behalf of a city or village.
"Special  assessment"  means a charge imposed upon benefited real property in proportion to the  benefit  received  by  such  property  to defray  the  cost,  including  operation  and  maintenance, of a special district improvement or service or of a special improvement or  service, but does not include a special ad valorem levy.
 	"Special  district"  means a town or county improvement district, district corporation or other district established for  the  purpose  of carrying  on,  performing  or  financing  one  or  more  improvements or services intended to benefit the health, welfare, safety or  convenience of  the  inhabitants  of  such  district or to benefit the real property within such district, and in which real property is subject  to  special ad valorem levies or special assessments for the purposes for which such district was established.
	"Special  franchise"  means  the  franchise,  right, authority or permission to construct, maintain or operate in, under, above,  upon  or through  any  public street, highway, water or other public place mains, pipes, tanks, conduits, wires or transformers, with their appurtenances, for conducting water, steam, light, power,  electricity,  gas  or  other substance.  For  purposes of assessment and taxation a special franchise shall include the value of the tangible  property  situated  in,  under,
 above, upon or through any public street, highway, water or other public place  in  connection  therewith.  The  term special franchise shall not include central office equipment or  station  equipment  (except  public telephone  terminal  equipment)  which first appears on assessment rolls prepared on the basis of taxable status  dates  occurring  on  or  after October  first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-five  and which is owned by a telephone company as defined in paragraph (d) of subdivision  twelve  of this  section,  or  owned  by  a  telephone  corporation  as  defined in subdivision seventeen of section two  of  the  public  service  law  and certified  by the public service commission under section ninety-nine of such law, nor shall it include  property  of  a  municipal  corporation, public  benefit  corporation or special district, nor shall it include a crossing less than two hundred fifty feet in length of a public  street, highway,  water  or other public place outside a city or village, unless such crossing be the continuation of  an  occupancy  of  another  public street, highway, water or other public place.
   "State  board"  or "board" means the state board of real property
  tax services. ”State equalization rate" means the percentage of  full  value  at which  taxable  real  property  in  a  county,  city, town or village is assessed as determined by the commissioner.
   "Tax"  or "taxation" means a charge imposed upon real property by or on behalf of a county, city, town, village  or  school  district  for municipal or school district purposes, but does not include a special ad valorem  levy or a special assessment. The term "tax" or "taxes" as used in articles five, nine, ten and eleven of this chapter  shall  for  levy and collection purposes include special ad valorem levies.
   "Tax  lien" means an unpaid tax, special ad valorem levy, special assessment or other charge imposed upon real property by or on behalf of a municipal corporation or special district which is an  encumbrance  on real property, whether or not evidenced by a written instrument.










Chapter 2: Real Property Tax
 
 	Electronic real property tax administration. 1. Notwithstanding any  provision  of  law  to  the  contrary,  the  commissioner is hereby authorized to establish  standards  for  electronic  real  property  tax administration  (E-RPT).  Such  standards  shall set forth the terms and conditions under which the various tasks associated with  real  property tax  administration  may be executed electronically, dispensing with the need for paper documents. Such tasks shall include any  or  all  of  the
  following:
    (a) The filing of exemption applications;
    (b) The filing of petitions for administrative review of assessments;
    (c) The filing of petitions for judicial review of assessments;
    (d)  The  filing  of  applications  for  administrative corrections of
  errors;
    (e) The issuance of statements of taxes;
    (f) The payment of taxes, subject to the provisions of  sections  five
  and five-b of the general municipal law;
    (g) The provision of receipts for the payment of taxes;
    (h)  The  issuance  of  taxpayer  notices  required  by law, including sections five hundred eight, five hundred ten, five hundred ten-a,  five hundred  eleven,  five  hundred twenty-five and five hundred fifty-one-a through five hundred fifty-six-b of this chapter; and
    (i) The furnishing of notices  and  certificates  under  this  chapter relating  to  state  equalization  rates, residential assessment ratios, special franchise assessments, railroad ceilings, taxable  state  lands, advisory  appraisals,  and  the  certification  of  assessors and county directors or real property tax services, subject to  the  provisions  of subdivision five of this section.
	Such  standards  shall  be developed after consultation with local government officials, the office of court administration in the case  of standards  relating to petitions for judicial review of assessments, and the office of the state comptroller in the case of standards relating to payments or taxes and the issuance of receipts therefor.
	Taxpayers shall not be required to accept  notices,  statements of  taxes,  receipts  for  the  payment  of  taxes,  or  other documents electronically unless they have so elected. Taxpayers who  have  not  so elected  shall  be  sent  such  communications  in  the manner otherwise provided by law.
    The governing board of any municipal  corporation  may,  by  local law,  ordinance  or  resolution,  determine  that  it  is  in the public interest for such  municipal  corporation  to  provide  electronic  real property  tax administration. Upon adoption of such local law, ordinance or resolution, such municipal corporation shall  comply  with  standards set forth by the commissioner.
    The  standards  prescribed  by  the commissioner pursuant to this section relating to communications with taxpayers shall provide for the collection  of  electronic contact information, such as e-mail addresses and/or social network usernames, from  taxpayers  who  have  elected  to receive  electronic  communications in accordance with the provisions of this section. Such information shall be exempt from public disclosure in accordance with section eighty-nine of the public officers law.
    When a document has been transmitted electronically  in  accordance with  the  provisions  of  this section and the standards adopted by the commissioner hereunder, it shall be deemed  to  satisfy  the  applicable legal  requirements  to the same extent as if it had been mailed via theUnited States postal service.
    On and after January first, two thousand twenty,  whenever  the commissioner  is obliged by law to mail a notice of the determination of a  tentative  state  equalization  rate,  tentative  special   franchise
assessment,    tentative   assessment   ceiling   or   other   tentative determination of the commissioner  that  is  subject  to  administrative review,  the  commissioner  shall  be authorized to furnish the required notice  by  e-mail,  or  by  causing it to be posted on the department’s website, or both, at his or her discretion. When providing notice  of  a tentative  determination  by causing it to be posted on the department’s website, the commissioner also shall e-mail the parties required by  law to  receive  such  notice,  to  inform them that the notice of tentative determination has been posted on the website. Such notice  of  tentative determination  shall not be deemed complete unless such emails have been sent.  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  law  to  the  contrary,  the commissioner  shall  not  be  required to furnish such notices by postal mail, except as provided by paragraphs (d) and (e) of this subdivision.
	 When providing notice of a tentative determination  by  e-mail  or posting  pursuant to this subdivision, the commissioner shall specify an e-mail  address   to   which   complaints   regarding   such   tentative determination  may be sent. A complaint that is sent to the commissioner by e-mail to the specified e-mail address by the date prescribed by  law for  the  mailing  of  such complaints shall be deemed valid to the same extent as if it had been sent by postal mail.
    When a final determination is made in such a matter, notice of the final determination  and  any  certificate  relating  thereto  shall  be furnished   by   e-mail  or  by  a  website  posting,  or  both  at  the commissioner's discretion, and need not  be  provided  by  postal  mail, except  as  provided by paragraphs (d) and (e) of this subdivision. When providing notice of  a  final  determination  by  website  posting,  the commissioner  also  shall  e-mail the parties required by law to receive such notice, to inform them that the notice of final  determination  has been posted on the website. Such notice of final determination shall not be deemed complete unless such emails have been sent.
    If an assessor has advised the commissioner in writing that he or she prefers to receive the notices  described  in  this  subdivision  by postal mail, the commissioner shall thereafter send such notices to that assessor by postal mail, and need not send such notices to that assessor by  e-mail.  The  commissioner shall prescribe a form that assessors may use to advise the commissioner of their preference for postal mail.
	If the commissioner learns that  an  e-mail  address  to  which  a notice  has been sent pursuant to this subdivision is not valid, and the commissioner cannot find a valid e-mail  address  for  that  party,  the commissioner shall resend the notice to the party by postal mail. If the commissioner  does  not have a valid e-mail address for the party at the time the notice is initially required to be sent, the commissioner shall send the notice to that party by postal mail. On or  before  November  thirtieth,  two  thousand  nineteen,  the commissioner  shall  send a notice by postal mail to assessors, to chief executive  officers  of  assessing  units,  and  to  owners  of  special franchise   property  and  railroad  property,  informing  them  of  the provisions of this section. The notice to be  sent  to  assessors  shall include  a copy of the form prescribed pursuant to paragraph (d) of this subdivision.
   As used in this subdivision, the term  "postal  mail"  shall  mean mail  that is physically delivered to the addressee by the United States postal service.

State  board.  There  is  hereby created in the department of
  taxation and finance a separate and  independent  state  board  of  real
  property tax services, to consist of five members to be appointed by the
  governor,  by  and  with  the advice and consent of the senate. Of those
  five members appointed by the governor, one  such  person  shall  be  an
  individual  actively  engaged  in  the commercial production for sale of
  agricultural crops, livestock and livestock products of an average gross
  sales value of ten thousand dollars or more. Said  individual  shall  be
  appointed in the first instance to a term of eight years upon expiration
  of  an  existing term. Said initial term shall commence on the first day
  of January next succeeding the year in which  the  existing  term  shall
  expire.  The governor shall designate one of the members as the chairman
  of the board, who shall  serve  as  chairman  at  the  pleasure  of  the
  governor.  A  majority  of the duly appointed members shall constitute a
  quorum and not less than a  majority  of  such  members  concurring  may
  transact  any  business,  perform  any duty or exercise any power of the
  board. The members of the board shall be appointed for  terms  of  eight
  years, commencing on the first day of January next following the year in
  which  the term of his predecessor expired, except that the terms of the
  members first  appointed  shall  expire  as  follows:  one  on  December
  thirty-first,  nineteen hundred sixty-one, one on December thirty-first,
  nineteen hundred sixty-three, one  on  December  thirty-first,  nineteen
  hundred  sixty-five,  one  on  December  thirty-first,  nineteen hundred
  sixty-seven,  and  one  on  December  thirty-first,   nineteen   hundred
  eighty-two.  Vacancies  occurring  otherwise  than by expiration of term
  shall be filled for  the  unexpired  term.  All  members  shall  receive
  necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
Powers of the state board of real property tax services. 1.
  The powers, functions, duties, and obligations of  the  state  board  of
  real property tax services shall be separate from and independent of the
  authority of the department of taxation and finance. Such board shall be
  empowered to adopt such guidelines as may be necessary for the effective
  management of its decision-making process.
    2.  The  state  board  of  real  property  tax services shall have the
  following powers in relation to real property tax administration:
    * (a) The power  to  determine  the  final  special  franchise  value,
  special  franchise assessment, railroad ceiling, state equalization rate
  or any other equalization product established pursuant to  this  chapter
  for  which  a  complaint  has  been  filed, as provided by sections four
  hundred  eighty-nine-o,  four  hundred  eighty-nine-ll,   four   hundred
  ninety-nine-pppp,  six  hundred  fourteen,  twelve  hundred  ten, twelve
  hundred fifty-three, and twelve hundred sixty-three of this chapter;
    * NB Effective until January 1, 2027
    * (a) The power  to  determine  the  final  special  franchise  value,
  special  franchise assessment, railroad ceiling, state equalization rate
  or any other equalization product established pursuant to  this  chapter
  for  which  a  complaint  has  been  filed, as provided by sections four
  hundred  eighty-nine-o,  four  hundred   eighty-nine-ll,   six   hundred
  fourteen,  twelve  hundred  ten,  twelve hundred fifty-three, and twelve
  hundred sixty-three of this chapter;
    * NB Effective January 1, 2027
    (b) The power to hear and determine reviews relating to determinations
  made by county equalization agencies,  as  provided  by  sections  eight
  hundred sixteen and eight hundred eighteen of this chapter; and
    (c) The power to hear and determine reviews relating to determinations
  of  STAR  eligibility  made by the department of taxation and finance as
  provided by section four hundred twenty five of this chapter.
    3. The provisions of section five hundred twenty-five of this  chapter
  shall apply so far as practicable to a hearing conducted by the board of
  real property tax services pursuant to this chapter.

Assumption  of responsibilities by the department of taxation
  and finance. 1. On and after the effective date  of  this  section,  the
  functions,  powers  and  duties  of  the  state  board  of real property
  services as formerly established by this  chapter  shall  be  considered
  functions,  powers  and  duties  of  the  commissioner  of  taxation and
  finance, except to the extent provided by section two hundred-a of  this
  article.
    2.  On  and  after  the effective date of this section, the functions,
  powers and duties of the office of real property  services  as  formerly
  established  by  this  chapter shall be considered functions, powers and
  duties of the commissioner of taxation and finance.
    3. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, rule, or regulation  to
  the  contrary,  upon  the  transfer of functions from the office of real
  property services to the department of taxation and finance pursuant  to
  this  section,  all  employees  of  the office of real property services
  substantially engaged in the performance of  the  transferred  functions
  shall  be  transferred  to  the  department  of  taxation  and  finance.
  Employees transferred pursuant to  this  section  shall  be  transferred
  without  further  examination  or  qualification  and shall retain their
  respective  civil  service  classifications,   status   and   collective
  bargaining unit designations and collective bargaining agreements.
    4.  All  books,  papers,  and  property of the office of real property
  services shall be delivered to the commissioner. All books, papers,  and
  property  of  the  office of real property services shall continue to be
  maintained by the department.
    5. For the purpose of succession of all functions, powers, duties  and
  obligations transferred and assigned to, devolved upon and assumed by it
  pursuant  to  this  section,  the department shall be deemed and held to
  constitute the continuation of the office of real property services.
    6. Any business or other matter undertaken or commenced by  the  state
  board of real property services, the office of real property services or
  the  executive  director  thereof  pertaining  to  or connected with the
  functions,  powers,  obligations  and  duties  hereby  transferred   and
  assigned  to  the  commissioner  or  the  department  and pending on the
  effective date of this section, may be conducted and  completed  by  the
  commissioner  or  the  department  in the same manner and under the same
  terms and conditions and with  the  same  effect  as  if  conducted  and
  completed  by  the  state board of real property services, the office of
  real property services or its executive director.
    7. (a) All  rules,  regulations,  acts,  orders,  determinations,  and
  decisions  of the state board of real property services or the office of
  real property services, in force  at  the  time  of  such  transfer  and
  assumption,   shall   continue  in  full  force  and  effect  as  rules,
  regulations,  acts,  orders,  determinations  and   decisions   of   the
  department  until  duly modified or abrogated by the commissioner or the
  department.
    (b) All acts, orders, determinations, and decisions of the state board
  of real  property  services  pertaining  to  the  functions  and  powers
  provided in section two hundred-a of this article shall continue in full
  force  and  effect  as acts, orders, determinations and decisions of the
  state board of real property tax services.
    8. Whenever the state board of real property services, the  office  of
  real  property  services  or  its  executive  director is referred to or
  designated in any law, contract or document pertaining to the functions,
  powers, obligations and duties hereby transferred to and assigned to the
  commissioner or the department, such reference or designation  shall  be
  deemed  to  refer  to  the  commissioner or department, as applicable or
  indicated by the context.

    9. No existing right  or  remedy  of  any  character  shall  be  lost,
  impaired or affected by any provisions of this section.
    10.  No  action  or  proceeding  pending on the effective date of this
  section, brought  by  or  against  the  state  board  of  real  property
  services, the office of real property services or its executive director
  shall  be affected by any provision of this section, but the same may be
  prosecuted  or  defended  in  the  name  of  the  commissioner  or   the
  department.  In all such actions and proceedings, the commissioner, upon
  application of the court, shall be substituted as a party.
    11. All appropriations or reappropriations made to the office of  real
  property  services to the extent of remaining unexpended or unencumbered
  balance thereof, whether allocated or unallocated and whether  obligated
  or unobligated, are hereby transferred to and made available for use and
  expenditure by the department subject to the approval of the director of
  the  budget  for  the same purposes for which originally appropriated or
  reappropriated and shall be payable on vouchers certified or approved by
  the commissioner on audit and warrant of the comptroller.
    12. All assets and liabilities of the office of real property services
  are hereby transferred to and assumed by the department.
Powers  and  duties  of  the commissioner in relation to real
  property tax administration. 1. The commissioner shall:
    (a) Assess special franchises;
    (b) Establish state equalization rates for each county, city, town and
  village;
    (c) Approve assessments of state lands subject to taxation;
    (d) Have general supervision of the function of  assessing  throughout
  the state;
    (e)  Investigate,  from  time  to  time,  the  methods  of  assessment
  throughout the state, and confer with, advise and assist  assessors  and
  other officials whose duties relate to assessments;
    (f) Furnish assessors with such information and instructions as may be
  necessary   or   proper   to  aid  them  in  making  assessments,  which
  instructions shall be followed and compliance with which may be enforced
  by him or her;
    (g) Prescribe, and in his or her discretion furnish  to  assessors  at
  the  expense  of  the  state,  forms  relating to assessments, including
  applications for exemption from  real  property  taxation,  which  forms
  shall  be  used by the assessors and applicants for an exemption granted
  pursuant to this or any other chapter, and the use  of  which  shall  be
  enforced by the commissioner;
    (h)  Obtain  from  state  and local officers, bodies or other agencies
  such information as may be necessary for the  proper  discharge  of  the
  duties  conferred  upon  him  or  her  in  relation to real property tax
  administration, which information shall  be  furnished  on  his  or  her
  demand;
    (i) Inquire into the provisions of the laws of other states and confer
  with  the appropriate officials thereof regarding the most effectual and
  equitable methods of assessing and taxing real property;
    (j) Prepare an annual report to the legislature  which  shall  include
  therein  recommendations  concerning amendments to existing law and such
  other information as he or she may deem advisable;
    (k)  Adopt   and   amend   such   rules,   regulations,   orders   and
  determinations,  not  inconsistent with law, as may be necessary for the
  exercise of his or her powers and the performance of his or  her  duties
  under this chapter;
    (l) Establish railroad ceilings for railroad real property;
    (m)  Exercise  and  perform  such  other  powers  and duties as may be
  conferred or imposed on him or her by law.
    (n) Monitor the quality of local assessment  practices  by  individual
  assessing units.
    (o)  Impose,  collect  and  receive  such  charges  or  fees as may be
  authorized by statute.
    (p)  Promulgate  rules  and  regulations  for  the  ascertainment  and
  reporting  of  "assessment record billing owner" information, as defined
  in section one hundred three of the eminent domain  procedure  law,  for
  the purposes of the administration of such law.
    2.  In  any instance where an assessing unit has acted pursuant to the
  rules,  regulations,  orders,  determinations  or  instructions  of  the
  commissioner  acting pursuant to the authority conferred upon him or her
  by this chapter, and such action is the subject of  a  judicial  review,
  the  commissioner  may  upon  request  of the assessing unit assist such
  assessing unit by the filing of a brief amicus curiae  or  through  such
  other means as may be appropriate.
    3.  The commissioner may adopt rules and regulations, as necessary, to
  implement the computerized statewide school district address  match  and
  income  verification system set forth in section one hundred seventy-one
  of the tax law.

    4. Any records that come into the commissioner's custody in the course
  of discharging the duties imposed upon him or her by this chapter  shall
  be  subject to public access to the full extent provided by this chapter
  and the public officers law, and shall not be  subject  to  the  secrecy
  provisions of the tax law. Powers  and  duties  of  the commissioner in relation to real
  property tax administration. 1. The commissioner shall:
    (a) Assess special franchises;
    (b) Establish state equalization rates for each county, city, town and
  village;
    (c) Approve assessments of state lands subject to taxation;
    (d) Have general supervision of the function of  assessing  throughout
  the state;
    (e)  Investigate,  from  time  to  time,  the  methods  of  assessment
  throughout the state, and confer with, advise and assist  assessors  and
  other officials whose duties relate to assessments;
    (f) Furnish assessors with such information and instructions as may be
  necessary   or   proper   to  aid  them  in  making  assessments,  which
  instructions shall be followed and compliance with which may be enforced
  by him or her;
    (g) Prescribe, and in his or her discretion furnish  to  assessors  at
  the  expense  of  the  state,  forms  relating to assessments, including
  applications for exemption from  real  property  taxation,  which  forms
  shall  be  used by the assessors and applicants for an exemption granted
  pursuant to this or any other chapter, and the use  of  which  shall  be
  enforced by the commissioner;
    (h)  Obtain  from  state  and local officers, bodies or other agencies
  such information as may be necessary for the  proper  discharge  of  the
  duties  conferred  upon  him  or  her  in  relation to real property tax
  administration, which information shall  be  furnished  on  his  or  her
  demand;
    (i) Inquire into the provisions of the laws of other states and confer
  with  the appropriate officials thereof regarding the most effectual and
  equitable methods of assessing and taxing real property;
    (j) Prepare an annual report to the legislature  which  shall  include
  therein  recommendations  concerning amendments to existing law and such
  other information as he or she may deem advisable;
    (k)  Adopt   and   amend   such   rules,   regulations,   orders   and
  determinations,  not  inconsistent with law, as may be necessary for the
  exercise of his or her powers and the performance of his or  her  duties
  under this chapter;
    (l) Establish railroad ceilings for railroad real property;
    (m)  Exercise  and  perform  such  other  powers  and duties as may be
  conferred or imposed on him or her by law.
    (n) Monitor the quality of local assessment  practices  by  individual
  assessing units.
    (o)  Impose,  collect  and  receive  such  charges  or  fees as may be
  authorized by statute.
    (p)  Promulgate  rules  and  regulations  for  the  ascertainment  and
  reporting  of  "assessment record billing owner" information, as defined
  in section one hundred three of the eminent domain  procedure  law,  for
  the purposes of the administration of such law.
    2.  In  any instance where an assessing unit has acted pursuant to the
  rules,  regulations,  orders,  determinations  or  instructions  of  the
  commissioner  acting pursuant to the authority conferred upon him or her
  by this chapter, and such action is the subject of  a  judicial  review,
  the  commissioner  may  upon  request  of the assessing unit assist such
  assessing unit by the filing of a brief amicus curiae  or  through  such
  other means as may be appropriate.
    3.  The commissioner may adopt rules and regulations, as necessary, to
  implement the computerized statewide school district address  match  and
  income  verification system set forth in section one hundred seventy-one
  of the tax law.

    4. Any records that come into the commissioner's custody in the course
  of discharging the duties imposed upon him or her by this chapter  shall
  be  subject to public access to the full extent provided by this chapter
  and the public officers law, and shall not be  subject  to  the  secrecy
  provisions of the tax law.


Office of real property tax services. There is hereby created
  within the department of taxation and finance an office of real property
  tax services. The head of the office shall be a deputy commissioner  for
  real  property tax services, who shall also be the executive officer for
  and secretary of the state board of  real  property  tax  services.  The
  deputy commissioner for real property tax services shall be appointed by
  the  governor.  He  or  she  shall  exercise  such  powers and duties in
  relation to real property tax administration as may be delegated to  him
  or her by the commissioner, shall report directly to the commissioner on
  the  activities  of the office, and shall hold office at the pleasure of
  the commissioner. The commissioner may appoint such officers, employees,
  agents, consultants and  special  committees  as  he  or  she  may  deem
  necessary  to  carry  out  the  provisions  of  this  chapter, and shall
  prescribe their duties.

Oaths and affidavits; subpoenas. Each member of the board, and
  any officer or employee of the state board of real property tax services
  duly authorized  by  resolution  of  the  board,  shall  have  power  to
  administer  oaths,  take  affidavits  and  certify  acknowledgements  in
  relation to any matter or proceeding in the exercise of  the  powers  or
  duties  of the board under this chapter or any other law and in relation
  to any written instrument authorized or required to be  filed  with  the
  board.  The  board or any officer or employee of the state board of real
  property tax services duly authorized by resolution of the  board  shall
  have  power  to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the
  production  of  books,   papers   and   documents   pertinent   to   the
  investigations  and  inquiries  which it is authorized to conduct and to
  examine  them  in  relation  to  any  matter  which  it  has  power   to
  investigate,  and  to issue commissions for the examination of witnesses
  who are out of the state or unable to attend before the board or excused
  from attendance. A subpoena issued under this section shall be regulated
  by the civil practice law and rules.
Execution of instruments. Whenever the board is authorized or
  required by law to execute  an  instrument,  such  instrument  shall  be
  executed  by  affixing  the name of the board and, underneath such name,
  the signature of one or more of  the  members  of  such  board  or  such
  officer  or employee of the state board of real property tax services as
  may be designated by the board. No acknowledgment of  the  execution  of
  any such instrument shall be necessary for the purpose of recordation or
  for any other purpose.
Official  seal.  The  board  shall have an official seal. Its
  records, proceedings and copies of  all  papers  and  documents  in  its
  possession  and  custody  may  be authenticated in the usual form, under
  such seal and the signature of any one of the members of  the  board  or
  such  officer  or  employee  of  the  state  board  of real property tax
  services as may be designated by the board, and  shall  be  received  in
  evidence  in  the  same  manner  and with like effect as deeds regularly
  acknowledged or proven.
Powers of commissioner upon neglect or refusal of officials to
  perform duties. 1. Whenever  it  appears  to  the  satisfaction  of  the
  commissioner  that  any  assessor  or  other public officer, employee or
  board of assessment review whose duties relate directly to real property
  tax administration has failed to comply  with  the  provisions  of  this
  chapter  or  any  other  law  relating  to such duties, or the rules and
  regulations of the commissioner made pursuant thereto, after  a  hearing
  on  the  facts,  the  commissioner  may  issue  an  order directing such
  assessor, officer, employee or board of assessment review to comply with
  such law, rule or regulation.
    2. If any assessor or other  public  officer,  employee  or  board  of
  assessment  review  whose  duties  relate  directly to real property tax
  administration shall willfully and intentionally refuse  or  neglect  to
  perform  any duty or do any act required by or pursuant to this chapter,
  in addition to any other penalty provided by law, such assessor,  public
  officer,  employee  or  member  of  a  board  of assessment review shall
  forfeit to the municipal corporation  of  which  such  assessor,  public
  officer,  employee  or  member  is  an officer a sum not to exceed fifty
  dollars for  each  willful  and  intentional  violation,  which  may  be
  recovered by the commissioner.
    3.  Where  a  property owner is, in a proceeding conducted pursuant to
  this section, found to be directly affected by the  violation  of  state
  law or rule, the commissioner in its order shall establish procedures by
  which an assessor, officer, employee or board of assessment review whose
  duties  relate  directly to real property tax administration, whether or
  not a party to the proceeding, shall remedy the failure to  comply  with
  such  state  law  or  rules with respect to an assessment roll filed not
  more than three years prior to the commencement of the proceeding.  Such
  remedy   may   include  reconvening  the  board  of  assessment  review,
  identifying the class of persons eligible to complain when the board  of
  assessment  review reconvenes, and issuing instructions to such board of
  assessment review on the law and any documentation required of  eligible
  complainants  in relation to the findings of the commissioner. A copy of
  such order shall be mailed to such assessor, officer, employee or  board
  of  assessment  review  and to each municipal corporation which utilizes
  such assessment roll. Such order shall, where appropriate,  require  the
  assessing  unit to mail a copy of the order to each eligible complainant
  whose name and address is readily ascertainable from the record  of  the
  proceeding.
    4.  (a)  Where  the  commissioner  has ordered the board of assessment
  review to reconvene to receive complaints, a copy of the order shall  be
  mailed by the assessing unit to each eligible complainant, which mailing
  shall  be  accompanied  by  the  form prescribed by the commissioner for
  complaints on tentative  assessments  or  such  other  form  as  may  be
  prescribed  for such purpose. Included with such order and form shall be
  a notice stating the  date,  time  and  place  at  which  the  board  of
  assessment  review  will reconvene. This material shall be mailed to the
  eligible complainant no later than fifteen days prior to the meeting  of
  the  board  of assessment review. On the date and time specified in such
  notice, the board of  assessment  review  will  reconvene  to  hear  any
  complaints  filed  pursuant  to such order and shall have the powers and
  duties set forth in section five hundred twenty-five  of  this  chapter,
  except  that  it may receive only complaints with respect to assessments
  of those parcels to which the commissioner's order applies.  A  petition
  for  review  of the assessment of such property pursuant to either title
  one or one-A of article seven of this chapter may be filed no later than
  thirty days after the determination of the board of assessment review is

  mailed to the petitioner,  notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  section
  seven hundred two or seven hundred thirty of this chapter.
    (b) The assessor shall correct the assessment roll upon receipt of the
  verified  statement  of  changes from the board of assessment review. If
  the assessor no longer has custody of  the  assessment  roll  when  such
  verified  statement  is received, he or she shall forward a copy of such
  verified statement and a copy of the commissioner's order to the  person
  having  custody  of  the assessment roll or tax roll, which person shall
  thereupon make the appropriate  corrections.  The  assessor  shall  also
  forward a copy of the verified statement of changes to the clerk of each
  tax levying body which levies taxes on such assessment roll.
    (c)  Where  a  tax,  special assessment or special ad valorem levy has
  been paid prior to the correction of  the  tax  roll  pursuant  to  this
  section  and  the  order  of the board of assessment review results in a
  reduction of the tax liability of a parcel, the tax levying  body  shall
  refund to the person who paid such tax, special assessment or special ad
  valorem  levy  the  amount which exceeds the tax, special assessment, or
  special ad valorem levy due upon the corrected tax roll. Any such refund
  shall be a charge upon each municipal corporation or special district to
  the extent that the taxes, special assessments  or  special  ad  valorem
  levies were levied on its behalf or as is otherwise provided by law with
  respect  to  Nassau  and  Suffolk  counties;  provided, however, that no
  application need be made by the petitioner for such refund. The verified
  statement of changes provided to the clerk of  the  tax  district  shall
  constitute  an  application for refund for the purposes of this section.
  Where a refund is not made within ninety days  of  the  receipt  of  the
  verified statement of changes, interest in the amount of one percent per
  month shall be added to the amount to be refunded for each month or part
  thereof in excess of ninety days and paid to the property owner.
    (d) Where taxes, special assessments or special ad valorem levies have
  been  levied  prior  to  the correction of the tax roll pursuant to this
  section and the verified statement of changes of the board of assessment
  review results in an increase in the tax liability of a  parcel  or  the
  imposition of a tax liability upon a parcel, the additional tax, special
  assessment,  or  special  ad valorem levy shall be levied, collected and
  accounted for as provided in the commissioner's order.
    (e) The provisions of title three of  article  five  of  this  chapter
  shall  apply  as  far  as practicable to the correction of an assessment
  roll or tax roll and, if applicable, to a refund of  taxes  pursuant  to
  this  section;  provided however that no application, except as provided
  herein, need be made for such correction or refund.
    5. If an assessor, or other  public  officer,  employee  or  board  of
  assessment  review  whose  duties  relate  directly to real property tax
  administration fails or refuses to comply with the commissioner's  order
  within  ten  days  after service of such order or within such time as is
  prescribed by the  commissioner  for  compliance  with  its  order,  the
  commissioner  may commence a special proceeding pursuant to article four
  of the civil practice law and  rules  to  compel  compliance  with  such
  order.  Such special proceeding shall be commenced by the counsel to the
  department of taxation and finance, except that the attorney general  of
  the  state shall commence such proceeding on behalf of the department if
  he or she deems it necessary.
Property subject to taxation.  All real property within the
  state shall be subject to real property  taxation,  special  ad  valorem
  levies   and   special  assessments  unless  exempt  therefrom  by  law.
  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or of any  other  general,
  special  or  local  law  to  the  contrary,  personal  property, whether
  tangible or intangible, shall not be liable to ad valorem taxation.
Valuation  date.  All  real property subject to taxation, and
  assessed as of a March first taxable status date, shall be valued as  of
  the  preceding first day of July. The valuation date of real property in
  a city or town not subject to the provisions of this  section  shall  be
  determined  as  of  the  date provided by law applicable to such city or
  town, or if not so provided, then as of the taxable status date  of  the
  city  or  town.  The  valuation date of the real property entered on any
  assessment roll shall be imprinted or otherwise indicated at the top  of
  the first page of each volume of such roll.
Taxable status date. 1. The taxable status of real property in
  cities and towns shall be determined annually according to its condition
  and ownership as of the first day of March  and  the  valuation  thereof
  determined  as  of  the applicable valuation date. The taxable status of
  real property in a city or town not subject to the  provisions  of  this
  section shall be determined as of the date provided by law applicable to
  such  city  or  town,  or  if  not  so provided, then as of the date the
  assessment  roll  is  completed  and  filed  prior  to  the  hearing  of
  complaints  in  connection  therewith. The date of taxable status of the
  real property contained on any assessment roll  shall  be  imprinted  or
  otherwise  indicated at the top of the first page of each volume of such
  roll.
    2. The taxable status  date  of  real  property  assessed  for  school
  district  and  village  purposes  shall be determined in accordance with
  sections thirteen hundred two and  fourteen  hundred  of  this  chapter,
  respectively.  The date of taxable status of the real property contained
  on any village assessment roll shall be imprinted or otherwise indicated
  at the top of the first page of each volume of such roll.
    3.  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  law  to  the contrary,
  whenever any person, association  or  corporation  not  entitled  to  an
  exemption  from  taxation acquires title to property which is exempt, in
  whole or in part, from taxation,  such  property  shall  be  immediately
  subject  to  taxation  pursuant  to  section five hundred twenty of this
  chapter, except that, in cities with a  population  of  one  million  or
  more, such property shall become subject to taxation pursuant to section
  four hundred ninety-four of this chapter.
    4.  The  taxable  status of a special franchise shall be determined on
  the basis of its value and its ownership as of the first day of  January
  of  the  year  preceding  the year in which the assessment roll on which
  such property is to be assessed is completed and filed in the office  of
  the  city  or  town clerk, except that taxable status of such properties
  shall be determined on the basis of ownership as of  the  first  day  of
  January  of  the  second year preceding the date required by law for the
  filing of  the  final  assessment  roll  for  purposes  of  all  village
  assessment rolls.
    5.  Notwithstanding  any  other provision of law to the contrary, in a
  city with a population of one million or more, whenever any  corporation
  or association entitled to exemption from taxation pursuant to paragraph
  (a) of subdivision one of section four hundred twenty-a or paragraph (a)
  of  subdivision one of section four hundred twenty-b of this chapter, or
  any local law adopted pursuant to such  provisions,  acquires  title  to
  real  property  that  is not exempt, in whole or in part, from taxation,
  such property shall, provided that it otherwise qualifies for  exemption
  pursuant  to  such  provisions, be immediately subject to exemption from
  taxation in accordance with section four hundred ninety-four-a  of  this
  chapter.
Subject of assessment. All assessments shall be against the
  real property itself which shall be liable to sale pursuant to  law  for
  any unpaid taxes or special ad valorem levies.
    * NB (Effective until ruling by Commissioner of Internal Revenue)
    *  §  304.  Subject of assessment. 1. All assessments shall be against
  the real property itself which shall be liable to sale pursuant  to  law
  for any unpaid taxes or special ad valorem levies.
    2.  Where  real  property  in  whole or part is rented for residential
  purposes pursuant to a lease, or to the same occupant or  occupants  for
  twelve consecutive months duration or longer, or if the dwelling unit is
  subject  to  the  regulation  and  control  of residential rents and the
  occupants' rights and obligations of tenancy are created  and  protected
  by  such  regulation  and  control, a renter has an interest in the real
  property and is subject to articles nine and ten  of  this  chapter,  or
  laws  of  any municipality covering the levy and collection of taxes and
  the  enforcement  of  collection  of  delinquent  taxes,  whichever   is
  governing.  Nothing  in this subdivision shall relieve the owner of real
  property from the obligation for  paying  all  taxes  due  on  the  real
  property  under  his ownership or vitiate the sale of said real property
  for unpaid taxes or  special  ad  valorem  levies.  The  owner  of  real
  property, or his designated agent, is obligated to apply the first money
  received  each  month  from the renter to taxes due on the real property
  under his ownership.
    3. As used in this section the term "rent" means the amount  paid  for
  the  right  of  occupancy of a dwelling unit excluding charges for heat,
  gas, electricity, furnishings and board. Where such charges are included
  in the amount paid but are not treated consistently among dwelling units
  located within the real property and where such charges and  the  amount
  thereof are not separately set forth in the lease, the amount paid shall
  be reduced in the following manner:
    (A)  Fifteen percent of the rental paid shall be deducted for heat, or
  heat and gas;
    (B) Twenty percent of the rental paid shall be deducted for heat,  gas
  and electricity;
    (C) Twenty-five percent of the rental paid shall be deducted for heat,
  gas, electricity and furnishings;
    (D)  Fifty percent of the rental paid shall be deducted for heat, gas,
  electricity, furnishings and board.
    4. The attorney general shall prepare and submit to  the  commissioner
  of  internal  revenue  of  the United States a request for a ruling that
  payments of real property taxes made by a renter  in  such  municipality
  with  an  interest  in real property pursuant to subdivision two of this
  section, with respect to such  interest,  will  be  deductible  by  such
  renter pursuant to paragraph a of subdivision one of section one hundred
  sixty  four of the internal revenue code of nineteen hundred fifty-four,
  as amended.
    5. Immediately after the effective date of  this  section  and  on  or
  before  the  tax  status  date  of  the ensuing fiscal year and annually
  thereafter,  the  owner  of  the  real  property  shall  file  with  the
  appropriate  assessment department of the municipality in which the real
  property is located the rent roll covering all units of  said  property,
  including  names  of  those  renters  whose  interest  is  described  in
  subdivision two of this section and those renters who  have  elected  an
  interest as described in subdivision four of this section. This schedule
  of  rents  shall  include  all  units whether rented or not, and whether
  residential or not.  The assessors shall assign an assessed valuation to
  each rental unit of said real property by establishing the  relationship
  of  the  yearly  rent  for  the  unit  to the total yearly rent roll and

  applying this ratio to the assessment established for the real  property
  as  a  whole,  less  the assessment on that portion of the real property
  which the assessor may determine is not held for rental purposes.  Taxes
  on  such  real  property  not held for rental purposes shall be assessed
  solely against  the  owner  of  the  real  property  and  shall  not  be
  considered  in  determining  the assessed valuation of each rental unit.
  Where the residential real property is completed  after  the  first  tax
  status  day  after the effective date of this section, the owner of such
  real property shall file the required  information  with  the  assessors
  after  completion.  In  the  event  the  assessors  reassess  said  real
  property, the relationships established for the prior assessments  shall
  be applied to the new assessments. The assessments so established may be
  entered  on  the  assessment  roll itself or attached as an appendage to
  such assessment roll but in any event  the  assessments  for  said  real
  property  shall be deemed a composite of the total of the assessments of
  each individual unit's assessment, and those renters whose  interest  is
  described  in subdivision two of this section and those renters who have
  elected an interest as described in subdivision  four  of  this  section
  shall  be  personally  liable  for  the  taxes levied on the assessments
  declared for their respective units. It shall be the  responsibility  of
  the owner of the real property to notify the assessors of all changes in
  occupancy  including  notification  when a vacant unit is occupied or an
  occupied unit becomes vacant. The assessors on or before tax status  day
  will issue in writing to the owner a listing of the assessments assessed
  for  each unit. This listing shall state the amount of taxes each renter
  whose interest is described in subdivision two of this section and  each
  renter  who  has elected an interest as described in subdivision four of
  this section must pay each calendar month of the assessing unit's fiscal
  year. The landlord shall make this listing available to each tenant upon
  occupancy  and  thereafter  upon  receipt  of  such  listing  from   the
  assessors.
    * NB (Effective pending ruling by Commissioner of Internal Revenue)
Assessment  methods  and  standard. 1. The existing assessing
  methods in effect in each assessing unit on the effective date  of  this
  section may continue.
    2.  All  real  property  in each assessing unit shall be assessed at a
  uniform percentage of value (fractional assessment) except that, if  the
  administrative  code  of a city with a population of one million or more
  permitted, prior  to  January  first,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-one,  a
  classified  assessment  standard, such standard shall govern unless such
  city by local law shall elect to be governed by the provisions  of  this
  section.
    3. Any assessing unit in which assessments are at full value by reason
  of a revaluation may adopt a level of assessment in accordance with this
  section.
Assessment using the comparable sales, income capitalization
  or cost method. 1. As used in this section, the  following  terms  shall
  have the following meanings:
    (a) "Mixed-use property" means a property with a building or structure
  used for both residential and commercial purposes.
    (b)  "Non-residential  property"  means  a property with a building or
  structure used for commercial purposes.
    2. When determining  the  value  of  a  mixed-use  or  non-residential
  property  using  the  comparable  sales,  income  capitalization or cost
  method, the following shall be  considered  when  selecting  appropriate
  sales  or rentals comparable to the subject property; provided, however,
  that the following requirements shall  apply  only  to  assessing  units
  other than cities having a population of one million or more:
    (a)  sales  or rentals of properties exhibiting similar use or the use
  at the  time  of  sale  in  the  same  real  estate  market.  Comparable
  properties  should  include  properties located in proximate location to
  the subject property unless there is an inadequate number of appropriate
  sales or rentals within the same market; and
    (b) sales or rentals of properties that are similar in age, condition,
  use or the use at the time of  sale,  type  of  construction,  location,
  design, physical features and economic characteristics including but not
  limited to similarities in occupancy and market rent.
Additional  tax  on  class  one  property.  1.  Generally.
  Notwithstanding any provision of any general, special or  local  law  to
  the  contrary,  any  city  with  a  population of one million or more is
  hereby authorized and  empowered  to  adopt  and  amend  local  laws  in
  accordance with this section imposing an additional tax on certain class
  one  properties,  as  such  properties  are  defined in section eighteen
  hundred two of this chapter, excluding vacant land.
    2. Definitions. As used in this section:
    (a) "Commissioner of finance" means the commissioner of finance  of  a
  city having a population of one million or more, or his or her designee.
    (b)  "Department of finance" means the department of finance of a city
  having a population of one million or more.
    (c) "Net real property tax" means the real property  tax  assessed  on
  class  one  property  after  deduction  for  any  exemption or abatement
  received pursuant to this chapter.
    3. Additional tax. A local law enacted pursuant to  this  section  may
  provide  for  a  real  property  tax  surcharge  in  an amount (a) up to
  twenty-five percent of net real  property  taxes  for  the  fiscal  year
  beginning July first, two thousand three, and (b) up to fifty percent of
  net  real  property  taxes  for  fiscal years beginning on or after July
  first, two thousand four.
    4. Property subject to additional tax. Such surcharge shall be imposed
  on class one property,  excluding  vacant  land,  that  provides  rental
  income  and  is not the primary residence of the owner or owners of such
  class one property, or the primary residence of the parent or  child  of
  such owner or owners.
    5.  Rental  income,  primary residence and/or relationship to owner or
  owners. The property shall be deemed to be the primary residence of  the
  owner  or  owners thereof, if such property would be eligible to receive
  the real  property  tax  exemption  pursuant  to  section  four  hundred
  twenty-five  of this chapter, regardless of whether such owner or owners
  has filed an application for, or the  property  is  currently  receiving
  such  exemption.  Proof  of  primary  residence  and  the  resident's or
  residents' relationship to the owner or owners and the absence of rental
  income shall be in the form of a certification as required by local  law
  or the rules of the commissioner.
    6.  Rules.  The department of finance of any city enacting a local law
  pursuant to this section shall have, in addition to any other functions,
  powers and duties which have been or may be conferred on it by law,  the
  power  to  make  and  promulgate rules to carry out the purposes of this
  section including, but not limited to, rules  relating  to  the  timing,
  form and manner of any certification required to be submitted under this
  section.
    7.  Penalties.  (a)  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  any general,
  special or local law to the  contrary,  an  owner  or  owners  shall  be
  personally  liable  for any taxes owed pursuant to this section whenever
  such owner or owners fail to comply with this section or the  local  law
  or  rules  promulgated  thereunder,  or  makes  such false or misleading
  statement or omission and the commissioner determines that such act  was
  due  to  the  owner  or  owners'  willful  neglect,  or  that under such
  circumstances such act constituted a fraud on the department. The remedy
  provided herein for an action in personam shall be in  addition  to  any
  other   remedy  or  procedure  for  the  enforcement  of  collection  of
  delinquent taxes provided by any general, special or local law.
    (b) If the commissioner should determine, within three years from  the
  filing of an application or certification pursuant to this section, that
  there  was a material misstatement on such application or certification,
  he or she shall proceed to impose a penalty tax against the property  of

  five  hundred  dollars,  in  accordance  with  the  local  law  or rules
  promulgated hereunder.
    8. Cessation of use. In the event that a property granted an exemption
  from  taxation pursuant to this section ceases to be used as the primary
  residence of such owner or owners or his, her or their parent or  child,
  such owner or owners shall so notify the commissioner of finance.


Local government defined.  "Local government" when used in this
  title, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the context otherwise
  requires, means a county, city or town with the  power  to  assess  real
  property for the purpose of taxation.

Assessor.  1.  Selection. Each local government to which this
  title applies which has the power to assess real property  for  purposes
  of  taxation  shall  have  one assessor. An appointive assessor shall be
  appointed by the legislative body of the local government except that in
  a local government where department heads and other local  officers  are
  appointed  by  the  chief  executive  officer,  such  assessor  shall be
  appointed by such officer. Any resident of the state, otherwise eligible
  for appointment as assessor, may be appointed assessor. An assessor  may
  be   employed  by  the  local  government  in  any  other  position  not
  incompatible with the office of assessor.
    2. Term of office. The term of office of assessor shall be  six  years
  except  as  otherwise provided in subdivision seven of this section. The
  terms for appointive assessors  shall  commence  on  the  first  day  of
  October,  nineteen  hundred  seventy-one and each sixth year thereafter.
  Where a town has exercised the option to elect one assessor, as provided
  by section three hundred twenty-nine of this article, the term for  such
  elected  assessor  shall  be  as  of  the first day of January, nineteen
  hundred ninety-four and each sixth year thereafter.
    3. Classification. The position of appointive assessor shall be in the
  classified service, notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision (e) of
  section thirty-five of the civil service law.
    4. Minimum qualification standards. No person shall  be  eligible  for
  appointment  as  assessor  unless  he  meets  the  minimum qualification
  standards established for such office by the commissioner.
    5. Certification and continuing education. (a) All assessors,  whether
  appointed   or   elected,  must  obtain  commissioner  certification  of
  successful completion of the basic  course  of  training  and  education
  prescribed by the commissioner pursuant to this title.
    (b)  In  addition  to  the basic course of training and education, all
  appointive assessors and any assessor elected to a six-year  term  shall
  also  complete additional courses in a continuing training and education
  program prescribed by the commissioner pursuant  to  the  provisions  of
  this title.
    6.  Training;  services by state; county cooperation. The commissioner
  shall provide training programs including but not limited to courses  of
  training  and  education  required to be completed by local officers and
  employees and by  candidates  for  certification  as  eligible  for  the
  position  of  assessor  in accordance with the provisions of this title.
  Such programs shall be provided by the commissioner for counties, cities
  and towns to which this title is applicable.  Counties  shall  cooperate
  with the commissioner in providing such programs.
    7.  Indefinite  term  for assessors. Notwithstanding the provisions of
  subdivision two of this section, the office of assessor  shall  have  an
  indefinite term (a) where the office of assessor is a full time position
  as  determined  by  the  local  legislative  body and on or after August
  first, nineteen hundred seventy is classified in the  competitive  class
  of the civil service at the request of the local legislative body or (b)
  where  on  July  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred  seventy the office of
  assessor is classified in the competitive class of the civil service and
  has an indefinite term pursuant to law.

Minimum  qualification  standards  for  assessors,  appraisal
  personnel and candidates eligible for  certification  as  assessor.  The
  commissioner  shall  establish  for  counties, cities and towns to which
  this title applies minimum qualification standards (a) for  appointments
  to  the positions of (i) assessor, except assessors of local governments
  not subject to the provisions of  section  three  hundred  ten  of  this
  title,  and  (ii)  other  administrative  positions  having professional
  appraisal duties  relating  to  the  assessment  of  real  property  for
  purposes  of  taxation,  and  (b)  for  applicants  for certification as
  candidates eligible for the position of assessor, other  than  assessors
  or assessors-elect, pursuant to subdivision ten of section three hundred
  ten  of  this  title.  Such  standards  shall  be set forth in rules and
  regulations promulgated by the commissioner.

Acting  assessor.  1. In the event that an assessor appointed
  pursuant to the provisions of section three hundred ten of this title is
  unable to perform the duties of the office or the office becomes vacant,
  the appointing authority may  by  resolution  designate  or  appoint  an
  acting  assessor.  Where  an  acting assessor is designated or appointed
  pursuant to this section, the  appointing  authority  shall  notify  the
  commissioner   within   fifteen  days  of  making  such  designation  or
  appointment. The acting assessor shall function as assessor  until  such
  time  as  the  assessor  is  able  to  resume  the  position  or until a
  replacement is appointed. In the event an acting assessor  functions  as
  assessor  for  more  than six months, then such acting assessor shall be
  required to meet the  minimum  qualification  standards  and  to  obtain
  certification as required by this title for persons elected or appointed
  to the office of assessor.
    2.  In  the  event  that an elective assessor is unable to perform the
  duties of the office, the legislative body may by  resolution  designate
  or appoint an acting assessor. Where an acting assessor is designated or
  appointed  pursuant  to  this section, the legislative body shall notify
  the commissioner within fifteen  days  of  making  such  designation  or
  appointment.  The  acting  assessor  shall  function  as the assessor or
  member of the board of assessors until such time as the assessor is able
  to resume the position, a replacement is appointed, or  a  successor  is
  elected.  In  no event may an acting assessor appointed pursuant to this
  subdivision function as assessor for more  than  three  months.  Nothing
  herein  shall  be  deemed  to  supersede  the  provisions  of the public
  officers law on the filling of vacancies in elective offices.

Orientation. Within one month of commencing a term of office,
  any assessor,  whether  elected  or  appointed,  who  has  not  obtained
  commissioner  certification  pursuant  to this title, shall attend a one
  day orientation course prescribed by the commissioner. Such  orientation
  course  shall  be  designed  to  provide the prospective assessor with a
  general knowledge of the responsibilities of the assessor and a  general
  understanding  of  the appropriate state and local government structure.
  No assessor shall continue in office or receive compensation  where  the
  commissioner determines that he or she has failed to file with the clerk
  of  the  assessing  unit  a certificate of attendance of the orientation
  course.

Certification of assessors. 1. Any person appointed or elected
  to the office  of  assessor  shall  be  certified  by  the  commissioner
  pursuant  to  this section within a minimum of one year and a maximum of
  three years after he or she commences his or her term of office,  unless
  he  or  she has been previously certified by the commissioner and his or
  her certification has not expired. The period within which each assessor
  must become certified shall be established by the commissioner  by  rule
  based  upon one or more general characteristics of the assessing unit or
  units in which the assessor serves, including, but not  limited  to  (a)
  number  of  parcels;  (b)  classification  of  parcels  by  use; and (c)
  complexity of real property. At least  once  during  each  twelve  month
  period  preceding  the date by which the commissioner requires permanent
  certification pursuant to this section, each  assessor  must  obtain  an
  interim  certification from the commissioner. Such interim certification
  shall   evidence   satisfactory   progress   in   obtaining    permanent
  certification  by successful completion of one or more components of the
  required  training.  The  commissioner  shall  transmit   such   interim
  certificate  to  the  assessor and to the appropriate city or town clerk
  for filing.
    2. An assessor shall be certified upon successful  completion  of  the
  basic  course  of training and such examinations as may be prescribed by
  the commissioner. The basic course of training shall  be  prescribed  by
  the  commissioner  in  accordance  with  the classification of assessing
  units established by the commissioner pursuant  to  subdivision  one  of
  this section.
    3.  (a)  An  assessor  or  assessor-elect  may  be  certified  by  the
  commissioner  if  such  person  satisfies  the   minimum   qualification
  standards  established  by  the commissioner for appointed assessors and
  passes a comprehensive examination conducted by  the  commissioner.  The
  commissioner  shall  annually  conduct  examinations  for  such purpose.
  Examinations shall be of such character as to fairly test and  determine
  knowledge,  skills  and  abilities  necessary  to  perform the duties of
  assessor with respect to appraisal and assessment procedures, applicable
  laws, rules and regulations and the size  and  complexity  of  assessing
  units.
    (b)  The commissioner may, in its discretion, waive any of the courses
  of  training  or  may  certify  without  examination  any  assessor   or
  assessor-elect, provided that such person is:
    (i)  a  member  of the institute of assessing officers of the New York
  state assessor's association or is a member of the American institute of
  real estate appraisers; or
    (ii) designated as a senior real property appraiser by the society  of
  real estate appraisers; or
    (iii)  designated  a  certified  assessment evaluator or an accredited
  assessment evaluator  by  the  international  association  of  assessing
  officers.
    4.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of this subdivision or any other
  law, the travel and other actual and necessary expenses incurred  by  an
  appointed  or  elected assessor, or by a person appointed assessor for a
  forthcoming term, or by an assessor-elect prior to the  commencement  of
  his  or  her  term,  in satisfactorily completing courses of training as
  required by this title or as approved  by  the  commissioner,  including
  continuing  education  courses  prescribed by the commissioner which are
  satisfactorily completed by any  elected  assessor,  shall  be  a  state
  charge  upon  audit  by  the  comptroller.  Travel  and other actual and
  necessary  expenses  incurred  by  an  acting  assessor  who  has   been
  exercising  the  powers  and  duties  of the assessor for a period of at
  least six months, in attending training courses no earlier  than  twelve

  months  prior  to  the  date  when courses of training and education are
  required, shall also be a state charge upon audit  by  the  comptroller.
  Candidates  for  certification as eligible for the position of assessor,
  other  than  assessors or assessors-elect, shall be charged for the cost
  of training materials and shall  be  responsible  for  all  other  costs
  incurred  by  them in connection with such training. Notwithstanding the
  foregoing provisions of this subdivision, if the provider of a  training
  course has asked the commissioner to approve the course for credit only,
  so that attendees who successfully complete the course would be entitled
  to receive credit without having their expenses reimbursed by the state,
  and  the  commissioner  has agreed to do so, the travel and other actual
  and necessary expenses incurred by such attendees shall not be  a  state
  charge.
    5.  Notwithstanding the provisions of sections three hundred eight and
  three hundred  thirty-four  of  this  title,  a  village  assessor,  who
  satisfies   the  minimum  qualification  standards  established  by  the
  commissioner pursuant to subdivision four of section three  hundred  ten
  of  this  title, may complete the basic course of training prescribed by
  the commissioner pursuant  to  this  section.  Where  such  training  is
  successfully  completed,  a  village  assessor  shall  be  certified  as
  provided by this section.
    6. Whenever an individual  is  appointed  to  fill  a  vacancy  in  an
  elective  office  of  assessor,  the commissioner shall compute any time
  limitation imposed by this title or any rule adopted  pursuant  to  this
  title from the next January first following that appointment rather than
  from the date of that appointment.
    7.  In  a  county  which  has  the  power  to assess real property for
  purposes of taxation with one assessor appointed  as  provided  in  this
  title,  the  travel  and other actual and necessary expenses incurred by
  appraisal personnel employed in the office of such assessor in attending
  courses of training as required by this subdivision  shall  be  a  state
  charge upon audit by the comptroller.
    8. To the extent funds are appropriated, all payments pursuant to this
  section shall be made from the local assistance account.

Certification as eligible for the position of assessor. 1. Any
  person who is not an assessor may  be  certified  as  eligible  for  the
  position of assessor where such person:
    (a)  meets  the  minimum  qualification  standards  prescribed  by the
  commissioner for such  purpose  and  successfully  completes  the  basic
  course  of  training  and passes an examination demonstrating successful
  completion of such course prescribed by the commissioner;
    (b) meets the  minimum  qualification  standards  established  by  the
  commissioner for appointed assessors and passes an examination conducted
  by the commissioner for this purpose; or
    (c) possesses a professional designation as described in paragraph (b)
  of subdivision three of section three hundred eighteen of this title and
  the  commissioner,  in  its  discretion,  waives  any  of the courses of
  training or examination.
    2. Such certification shall specify that such person is  eligible  for
  the  position  of  assessor  in  accordance  with  the classification of
  assessing units established by the commissioner pursuant to  subdivision
  one  of  section  three hundred eighteen of this title. Certification as
  eligible for the position of assessor shall be for  a  period  of  three
  years  and  may  be  renewed after the expiration of this period with or
  without examination in accordance with regulations  established  by  the
  commissioner.  Upon request by an assessing unit, the commissioner shall
  provide a list of candidates certified as eligible for the  position  of
  assessor pursuant to this section.

Failure   to  obtain  or  maintain  certification.  1.  The
  commissioner shall conduct a hearing upon notice to the assessor and the
  clerk of the local  government  for  which  the  assessor  serves,  such
  hearing  to  be  conducted within the county where the assessing unit is
  located no later than thirty days after delivery of such  notice,  where
  it appears that an assessor has failed:
    (a)  within the applicable period to file, with the clerk of the local
  government  for  which  the  assessor  serves,  a  certificate  of   the
  commissioner  stating  that  he or she has fulfilled the requirements of
  section three hundred eighteen of this title; or
    (b) to file, with the clerk of the  local  government  for  which  the
  assessor serves, a temporary certificate as provided in subdivision four
  of this section; or
    (c)  to  meet  the  standards  required by subdivision four of section
  three hundred ten of this title for appointive assessors; or
    (d) to file, with the clerk of the  local  government  for  which  the
  assessor serves, a certificate issued by the commissioner that he or she
  has completed the one day orientation course; or
    (e)  to maintain the continuity of any interim certification issued by
  the commissioner; or
    (f)  to  complete  continuing   education   as   prescribed   by   the
  commissioner,  pursuant to subdivision five of section three hundred ten
  of this title, for appointive assessors.
    2. If, after such hearing, the commissioner finds that an assessor has
  failed  to  comply  with  any  applicable  requirements  as  stated   in
  subdivision  one of this section, the appointment of that assessor shall
  be revoked if appointive, or the office of that  assessor  shall  become
  vacant if elective.
    3.  No  assessor,  once  having  been so removed from office, shall be
  appointed to the unexpired term of the office from which he or  she  has
  been removed.
    4.  In  the event that an assessor shall have been unable to enroll in
  or complete any course of training and education for reasons beyond  his
  or  her  control  and  as  a  result  thereof,  is  not  certified,  the
  commissioner may issue a temporary certificate  which  will  enable  the
  assessor  to continue in office pending completion of such course at the
  earliest date when such course is next available  as  specified  by  the
  commissioner.   Such temporary certificate shall be filed with the clerk
  of the local government for which the assessor serves and  shall  permit
  the  assessor  to  continue  in office for the period set forth therein.
  Upon the expiration of such temporary certificate and after a hearing as
  hereinabove provided, the appointment of an assessor shall be revoked in
  the case of an appointive assessor or such office shall become vacant in
  the case of an  elective  assessor  unless  the  assessor  has  filed  a
  certificate as hereinabove provided.
    5.  In  any  hearing  conducted  pursuant to this section, a statement
  signed by the secretary  of  the  commissioner  or  other  state  office
  employee  as  designated  by rule of the commissioner stating that he or
  she has made a diligent search of the records of the department and  has
  found  no  record, entry or filing of a specified nature, shall be prima
  facie evidence that the  records  of  the  department  contain  no  such
  record, entry or filing.

Local  government  appraisal  personnel.  No  person shall be
  employed by a  local  government  and  assigned  professional  appraisal
  duties  which  relate to the assessment of real property for purposes of
  taxation unless he or she  meets  the  minimum  qualification  standards
  established  by  the commissioner. Such appraisal personnel shall attend
  courses of training and education prescribed by the  commissioner  under
  this title.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section or any other
  law,  in  a  county  which  has  the  power  to assess real property for
  purposes of taxation with one assessor appointed  as  provided  in  this
  title,  the  travel  and other actual and necessary expenses incurred by
  appraisal personnel employed in the office of such assessor in attending
  courses of training as required by this section shall be a state  charge
  upon audit by the comptroller.

Local  government  appraisal  personnel.  No  person shall be
  employed by a  local  government  and  assigned  professional  appraisal
  duties  which  relate to the assessment of real property for purposes of
  taxation unless he or she  meets  the  minimum  qualification  standards
  established  by  the commissioner. Such appraisal personnel shall attend
  courses of training and education prescribed by the  commissioner  under
  this title.  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section or any other
  law,  in  a  county  which  has  the  power  to assess real property for
  purposes of taxation with one assessor appointed  as  provided  in  this
  title,  the  travel  and other actual and necessary expenses incurred by
  appraisal personnel employed in the office of such assessor in attending
  courses of training as required by this section shall be a state  charge
  upon audit by the comptroller.

Option to change to single appointed assessor. In any city or
  town which has retained the office of elective assessor, the legislative
  body of such city or town may adopt a local law providing that from  and
  after  a date set forth in such local law, which date must be within one
  year after the date on which such local law was adopted, there shall  be
  but  one  assessor, to be appointed as provided in section three hundred
  ten of  this  title.  The  legislative  body,  in  its  discretion,  may
  determine  that  a  local  law adopted pursuant to this section shall be
  subject to a mandatory or permissive referendum, or  not  subject  to  a
  referendum.  Any  such  referendum  shall  be  conducted  in  the manner
  prescribed in section twenty-three or twenty-four of the municipal  home
  rule  law,  as  the case may be. On December thirty-first of the year in
  which such local law shall  take  effect,  the  term  or  terms  of  all
  assessors then in office shall terminate.

Option to change to sole elected assessor. In any city or town
  where  the  option  to  retain  elective  assessors  was  exercised   in
  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  former  section  fifteen  hundred
  fifty-six of this chapter, the legislative body of such city or town may
  adopt a local law providing that from and after the first day of January
  first following the next biennial  or  general  election  at  which  the
  electors would vote for an assessor, there shall be but one assessor, to
  be  elected  at  that election. The legislative body, in its discretion,
  may determine that a local law adopted pursuant to this section shall be
  subject to a mandatory or permissive referendum, or  not  subject  to  a
  referendum.  Any  such  referendum  shall  be  conducted  in  the manner
  prescribed in section twenty-three or twenty-four of the municipal  home
  rule  law,  as  the case may be. On December thirty-first of the year in
  which such local law shall  take  effect,  the  term  or  terms  of  all
  assessors then in office shall terminate.

Adoption  of  local  law.  No  "charter law", as such term is
  defined in section thirty-two of the municipal home rule law, nor  local
  law  shall  be adopted which is inconsistent with the provisions of this
  title. No local law adopted pursuant to the  provisions  of  this  title
  shall  be  subject  to  a  mandatory  or permissive referendum except as
  provided  in  section  three  hundred  twenty-eight  or  three   hundred
  twenty-nine of this title.

Inconsistent  laws  inapplicable.  Provisions of all general,
  special, local or other laws which are inconsistent with the  provisions
  of  this  title  shall  be inapplicable to counties, cities and towns to
  which this title applies but if not inconsistent  shall  apply  to  such
  counties, cities and towns.

Local governments to which title applies. 1. This title shall
  apply to all counties except counties  wholly  within  a  city  and  all
  cities  and  towns  in  the state except (a) a city with a population of
  five million or more, (b) a city or town in a county having the power to
  assess property for purposes of taxation.
    2. The provisions of section three hundred ten of this title shall not
  be applicable to a county having the power to assess real  property  for
  tax  purposes  where  on  August  first,  nineteen  hundred seventy such
  assessments were made by a board of assessors nor shall such section  be
  applicable  to  a city with a population of one hundred thousand or more
  as of the federal census taken in the year nineteen hundred seventy.  In
  the  event  that  any  county  or  city  in  a subsequent year meets the
  requirements of  this  subdivision,  the  provisions  of  section  three
  hundred  ten  of  this  title shall continue to be applicable unless the
  legislative body of the county or city adopts a  local  law  to  provide
  that such section shall not be applicable to such county or city.
    3.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one of this section,
  the provisions of section three hundred thirty-six of this  title  shall
  apply  to  every  assessing unit and consolidated assessing unit in this
  state.
    4. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision two of this  section,
  subdivision  five of section three hundred ten of this title shall apply
  to the city of Albany on and after January first, two thousand nineteen,
  provided that an assessor whose term commenced prior to  January  first,
  two  thousand  nineteen  shall  have  until  January first, two thousand
  twenty-one to complete requirements of paragraph (a) of such subdivision
  five.

Statement  of  disclosure for assessors. 1. Definitions. When
  used in this section and unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the
  context otherwise requires:
    a. The term "appropriate body" or "appropriate bodies" shall mean:
    (i) in the case of any municipal  corporation  which  has  created  or
  hereafter  creates  a  board  of  ethics or conflicts of interests board
  which is in existence at the time an annual statement of  disclosure  is
  due,  and  which  has  been  designated  by  local  law,  ordinance,  or
  resolution to be the repository for completed  statements  of  financial
  disclosure, such board of ethics or conflicts of interests board;
    (ii)  in  the  case  of any municipal corporation which has created or
  hereafter creates a board of ethics  or  conflicts  of  interests  board
  which  is  in existence at the time an annual statement of disclosure is
  due, and which has not been  designated  by  local  law,  ordinance,  or
  resolution  to  be  the repository for completed statements of financial
  disclosure, such board of ethics or conflicts of interests board;
    (iii) in the case of any municipal corporation for which no  board  of
  ethics  or  conflicts  of interests board is in existence at the time an
  annual statement of disclosure is due, the clerk of the county in  which
  such municipal corporation is located; and
    (iv)  in  the  case  of  a  consolidated  assessing unit, the board of
  directors thereof.
    b. "Assessor" has the meaning defined therefor in subdivision three of
  section one hundred two of this chapter and includes any other municipal
  officer or employee engaged in  the  assessment  of  real  property  for
  purposes  of  taxation and also includes a municipal officer or employee
  assigned professional appraisal duties which relate to the assessment of
  real property for purposes of taxation.
    c. "Statement of disclosure" shall mean a statement disclosing (i) the
  description of any real property owned by the assessor in the  assessing
  unit  or  in  any contiguous municipal corporation. For purposes of this
  subparagraph of disclosure, "property owned by" means  any  property  in
  which  the  assessor  has a financial interest in excess of one thousand
  dollars, whether such property is owned  by  the  assessor  directly  or
  through  a  corporation  in which the assessor is an officer or in which
  the assessor owns more than five percent of  the  shares.  It  shall  be
  sufficient  to  meet the requirements for this item of disclosure if the
  assessor shall state the acreage of the property, the square footage  of
  any structure on the property, the use whether residential or commercial
  to  which the structure is put, the municipal corporation in which it is
  located, and the general section of the  municipal  corporation  (north,
  south,  east,  west,  center);  (ii)  the  name  of any employer and the
  position held; (iii) the name of any corporation of which  the  assessor
  is  (A)  an  officer, director or employee, or (B) in which the assessor
  owns more than five percent of  the  shares  and  the  position  of  the
  assessor; (iv) a description of any self-employment (if it provided more
  than  two  thousand  dollars  of  gross  income in the previous calendar
  year); (v) if the assessor is licensed to practice any profession by the
  state of New York, and  the  assessor  practices  such  profession,  the
  nature  of  the  practice and the types of business in which the clients
  engage. For the purposes of this subparagraph of disclosure, it shall be
  sufficient to describe the types of business in which the clients engage
  as a broad category encompassing the majority of the assessor's clients;
  (vi) types of gifts, except gifts from relatives,  of  more  than  fifty
  dollars  in value; (vii) persons or firms to whom money in the amount of
  more than one thousand dollars is owed not  including  credit  cards  or
  bank  loans;  and (viii) persons or firms, except relatives, who owe the
  assessor an amount in excess of one thousand dollars.  With  respect  to

  any  such  subparagraph  of  disclosure, the assessor shall also provide
  information with respect to the  members  of  the  assessor's  immediate
  family, unless, after a reasonable effort by the assessor, the spouse or
  other  immediate  family member refused to disclose such information, in
  which case, the statement shall so state such  refusal.  Such  statement
  shall not require the disclosure of any values of property or amounts of
  compensation.
    2.  Posting  of statute. The chief executive officer of each municipal
  corporation shall cause a copy of this section to be kept  posted  in  a
  public   building  under  the  jurisdiction  of  his  or  her  municipal
  corporation where public notices are generally posted in  the  municipal
  corporation.  Failure  to post any such copy shall have no effect on the
  duty of compliance with this section, nor with the  enforcement  of  the
  provisions thereof.
    3. Filing of statement of disclosure by assessors. Notwithstanding the
  provisions  of  any general, special, or local law to the contrary, each
  assessor, except an assessor who is compensated in  an  amount  of  less
  than twenty thousand dollars annually in the aggregate for serving as an
  assessor  or  who  is  required to file an annual statement of financial
  disclosure by an appropriate body as provided for in article eighteen of
  the general municipal law, shall file an annual statement of  disclosure
  with  the appropriate body, as defined in this section, on the fifteenth
  day of May. Such statement of disclosure shall contain  the  information
  and shall be in the form set forth hereinbelow:
  1. Name_______________________________________________________________
  2. (a) Title of Position______________________________________________
     (b) Department, Agency or other Governmental Entity________________
     (c) Address of Present Office______________________________________
     (d) Office Telephone Number________________________________________
  3.  (a) If married, please give spouse's full name including maiden name
     where applicable.
                                                                         .
     (b) List the names of all unemancipated children.
     _____________________________________________________________________
     _____________________________________________________________________
     _____________________________________________________________________
     _____________________________________________________________________
     _____________________________________________________________________
     Answer each of the following questions completely,  with  respect  to
     the  calendar  year  ending  the  December 31st preceding the date of
     filing of this statement of disclosure unless another period or  date
     is  otherwise  specified.  If  additional  space  is  needed,  attach
     additional pages.
 
     1. Describe any real property in which you have a financial  interest
     greater  than  $1,000  (whether  owned  by  you  or  owned  through a
     corporation in which you are an officer or in which you own more than
     5% of the  shares)  in  the  assessing  unit  or  in  any  contiguous
     municipal corporation:
 
     a. Acreage of the property:
 
     b. Square footage of any structure or structures on the property:
 
     c. Municipal corporation in which located:

     d.  General  area  of  municipal corporation in which the property is
     located (north, south, east, west, central):
 
     e. Use of structure (residential, commercial, industrial):
 
     2.  Name  any  employer other than the municipal corporation in which
     you are employed as assessor and the position you hold:
 
     3. Name any corporation in which a) you are an officer,  director  or
     employee, or b) in which you own more than five percent of the shares
     and give your position in it:
 
     4.  Describe  any  self-employment  (if  it  provided  more  than two
     thousand dollars of gross income in the previous calendar year):
 
     5. If you are licensed to practice any profession by the state of New
     York, and you practice  that  profession,  give  the  nature  of  the
     practice  and  the  general  types  of business in which your clients
     engage:
 
     a. Type of profession (e.g., lawyer, real estate broker, pharmacist):
 
     b. General types of business in which  a  majority  of  your  clients
     engage  (e.g., real estate development, general practice, healthcare,
     general business):
 
     6. Types of gifts, except gifts from immediate  family  or  relatives
     within  the  third  degree of consanguinity or affinity, of more than
     fifty dollars in value:
 
     7. Persons or firms to whom money in the  amount  of  more  than  one
     thousand  dollars  is  owed not including credit cards or bank loans;
     and
 
     8. Persons or firms, except relatives,  who  owe  you  an  amount  in
     excess of one thousand dollars.
    4. Other laws. No local law, ordinance, or resolution shall be adopted
  which is inconsistent with the provisions of this section.

Applicability. The provisions of this title shall apply to any
  city having a population of five million or more inhabitants.  The  term
  "city", as used in this title, shall mean any such city.

Minimum  qualification  standards for assessors and appraisal
  personnel. The commissioner shall establish for  cities  to  which  this
  title  applies  minimum  qualification standards for appointments to the
  positions of (a) chief or inferior assessor and (b) other administrative
  positions  having  professional  appraisal  duties   relating   to   the
  assessment  of  real  property  for purposes of taxation. Such standards
  shall  be  set  forth  in  rules  and  regulations  promulgated  by  the
  commissioner.

Certification  of  assessors.  1. Any person appointed to the
  office of chief or inferior assessor or city assessor shall be certified
  by the commissioner pursuant to this section within a maximum  of  three
  years  after  he  or  she  commences  his or her appointment or by April
  first, two thousand nine whichever date is later, unless he or  she  has
  been   previously   certified   by  the  commissioner  and  his  or  her
  certification has not expired.
    2. An assessor shall be certified upon successful  completion  of  the
  basic  course  of training and such examinations as may be prescribed by
  the commissioner. The basic course of training shall  be  prescribed  by
  the  commissioner  based upon one or more general characteristics of the
  assessing units as the commissioner shall determine.
    3. (a) An assessor may be certified by the commissioner if such person
  satisfies  the  minimum  qualification  standards  established  by   the
  commissioner  for  assessors  and  passes  a  comprehensive  examination
  conducted by the commissioner. The commissioner shall  annually  conduct
  examinations  for  such purpose. Examinations shall be of such character
  as to  fairly  test  and  determine  knowledge,  skills,  and  abilities
  necessary  to  perform  the duties of assessor with respect to appraisal
  and assessment procedures, applicable laws, rules, and  regulations  and
  the  size  and  complexity  of  assessing  units. The number of courses,
  course credit hours and their complexity shall be no  greater  than  the
  requirements  established  for  other  jurisdictions under section three
  hundred eighteen of this article. When applicable the  basic  course  of
  training  and  examinations  shall  be  consistently  similar  to  other
  jurisdictions throughout the state.
    (b) The commissioner may, in its discretion, waive any of the  courses
  of  training  or  may certify without examination any assessor, provided
  that such person is:
    (i) an active member of the institute of assessing officers of the New
  York state assessor's  association  or  is  a  member  of  the  American
  institute of real estate appraisers; or
    (ii)  designated as a senior real property appraiser by the society of
  real estate appraisers; or
    (iii) designated a certified assessment  evaluator  or  an  accredited
  assessment  evaluator  by  the  international  association  of assessing
  officers.
    4. Notwithstanding the provisions of this  subdivision  or  any  other
  law,  the  travel and other actual and necessary expenses incurred by an
  assessor, in satisfactorily completing courses of training  as  required
  by  this  title or as approved by the commissioner, including continuing
  education   courses   prescribed   by   the   commissioner   which   are
  satisfactorily  completed  by any assessor, shall be a state charge upon
  audit by the comptroller. Candidates for certification as  eligible  for
  the position of assessor, other than assessors, shall be charged for the
  cost  of training materials and shall be responsible for all other costs
  incurred by them in connection with such training.
    5. In a city subject to this title, the travel and  other  actual  and
  necessary  expenses  incurred  by  appraisal  personnel  employed in the
  office of such assessor in attending courses of training as required  by
  this subdivision shall be a state charge upon audit by the comptroller.
    6. To the extent funds are appropriated, all payments pursuant to this
  section shall be made from the local assistance account.

Certification as eligible for the position of assessor. 1. Any
  person who is not an assessor may  be  certified  as  eligible  for  the
  position of assessor where such person:
    (a)  meets  the  minimum  qualification  standards  prescribed  by the
  commissioner for such  purpose  and  successfully  completes  the  basic
  course  of  training  and passes an examination demonstrating successful
  completion of such course prescribed by the commissioner;
    (b) meets the  minimum  qualification  standards  established  by  the
  commissioner for appointed assessors and passes an examination conducted
  by the commissioner for this purpose; or
    (c) possesses a professional designation as described in paragraph (b)
  of  subdivision  three of section three hundred fifty-four of this title
  and the commissioner, in its discretion, waives any of  the  courses  of
  training or examination.
    2.  Such  certification shall specify that such person is eligible for
  the position of  assessor  in  accordance  with  the  classification  of
  assessing  units established by the commissioner pursuant to subdivision
  one of section three hundred fifty-four of this title. Certification  as
  eligible  for  the  position  of assessor shall be for a period of three
  years and may be renewed after the expiration of  this  period  with  or
  without  examination  in  accordance with regulations established by the
  commissioner. Upon request by an assessing unit, the commissioner  shall
  provide  a  list of candidates certified as eligible for the position of
  assessor pursuant to this section.

Failure   to  obtain  or  maintain  certification.  1.  The
  commissioner shall conduct a hearing upon notice to the  chief  assessor
  and the clerk of the city for which the assessor serves, such hearing to
  be  conducted  within  the  city  where the assessing unit is located no
  later than thirty days after delivery of such notice, where  it  appears
  that an assessor has failed:
    (a)  within  the applicable period to file, with the clerk of the city
  for which the assessor serves, a certificate of the commissioner stating
  that he or she has fulfilled the requirements of section  three  hundred
  fifty-four of this title; or
    (b)  to  file,  with  the  clerk of the local government for which the
  assessor serves, a temporary  certificate  as  provided  in  subdivision
  three of this section.
    2. If, after such hearing, the commissioner finds that an assessor has
  failed   to  comply  with  any  applicable  requirements  as  stated  in
  subdivision one of this section, the appointment of that assessor  shall
  be revoked.
    3.  In  the event that an assessor shall have been unable to enroll in
  or complete any course of continuing training and education for  reasons
  beyond  his  or  her control and, as a result thereof, is not certified,
  the commissioner may issue a temporary certificate which will enable the
  assessor to continue in office pending completion of such course at  the
  earliest  date  when  such  course is next available as specified by the
  commissioner. Such temporary certificate shall be filed with  the  clerk
  of  the city for which the assessor serves and shall permit the assessor
  to continue in office  for  the  period  set  forth  therein.  Upon  the
  expiration  of  such  temporary  certificate  and  after  a  hearing  as
  hereinabove provided, the appointment of an assessor shall be revoked in
  the case of an assessor unless the assessor has filed a  certificate  as
  hereinabove provided.
    4.  In  any  hearing  conducted  pursuant to this section, a statement
  signed by the commissioner stating that he or she has  made  a  diligent
  search  of the records of the department and has found no record, entry,
  or filing of a specified nature, shall be prima facie evidence that  the
  records of the department contain no such record, entry, or filing.

City appraisal personnel. No person shall be employed by a city
  and   assigned   professional  appraisal  duties  which  relate  to  the
  assessment or adjudication of real property  for  purposes  of  taxation
  unless  he  or she meets the minimum qualification standards established
  by the commissioner. Such appraisal personnel shall  attend  courses  of
  training  and education prescribed by the commissioner under this title.
  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section or  any  other  law,  the
  travel  and  other  actual  and  necessary  expenses  incurred  by  such
  appraisal personnel employed in the office of such assessor in attending
  courses of training as required by this section shall be a state  charge
  upon audit by the comptroller.

Adoption of local law. No local law shall be adopted which is
  inconsistent with the provisions of this title.

Inconsistent  laws  inapplicable.  Provisions of all general,
  special, local or other laws which are inconsistent with the  provisions
  of  this  title  shall  be  inapplicable  to  cities to which this title
  applies, but if not inconsistent shall apply to such cities.

United States.  1.  Real property owned by the United States
  shall be exempt from taxation, except as otherwise provided by the  laws
  of the United States.
    2.  Real property occupied exclusively or in part by the United States
  pursuant to the provisions of the public buildings purchase contract act
  of  nineteen hundred fifty-four (Public Law 519, 83rd Congress) shall be
  exempt from taxation and exempt  from  special  ad  valorem  levies  and
  special  assessments  to  the  extent  provided  in section four hundred
  ninety of this chapter, during the period  that  the  United  States  is
  required  to  make  reimbursement  for  taxes  payable on such property,
  provided that the United States enters into an agreement  or  agreements
  with  the municipal corporation or corporations in which such properties
  are located, whereby it will undertake to pay a fair and reasonable  sum
  annually  on such property as taxes.  Where a part of the property is so
  occupied by the United States, such part only shall be  exempt  and  the
  remainder  thereof  shall  be  subject  to  taxation, special ad valorem
  levies and special assessments.   The sums  received  by  any  municipal
  corporation pursuant to this subdivision shall be devoted to purposes to
  which taxes may be applied.

United States or state property held under contract of sale.
  1.  Whenever the legal title of real property is in the  United  States,
  or  in  the  state  of  New  York, but the use, occupation or possession
  thereof is in a person, partnership, association or corporation under  a
  contract  of  sale  or  other  agreement  whereby a right to acquire the
  premises through an option, a first privilege  or  a  first  refusal  is
  granted, or whereby upon one or more payments the legal title thereto is
  to  be  or  may  be acquired by such person, partnership, association or
  corporation, his or its interest in such real property shall be assessed
  and taxed as real property and shall be entered in the  assessment  roll
  in  the  same  manner  as  if  such  person, partnership, association or
  corporation held the legal  title  to  such  property,  except  for  the
  addition  to  the  description  of  the words "interest under contract",
  "interest under option", or other appropriate words descriptive  of  the
  interest  in  the property so assessed.  Such assessment shall be at the
  full value of such interest.
    2.   The assessors shall add  to  the  assessment  roll  opposite  the
  description  of  any  such  interest  a  notation  stating that the real
  property itself so owned by the United States, or by the state,  is  not
  to be taxed.  Every notice of sale or other process and every conveyance
  or other instrument affecting the title to any such property, consequent
  upon  the  non-payment  of  any such tax, shall contain a statement that
  such legal title is not sold or to be sold or affected.
    3.   The classification of such interest  as  real  property  for  the
  purposes  of  taxation  under  this chapter shall not be affected by any
  provision of the contract or agreement under which the same is held.

State of New York.  1.  Real property owned by the state of
  New York or any department or agency thereof, including but not  limited
  to  real  property  described  in  subdivisions  two  and  three of this
  section, whether heretofore or hereafter acquired or constructed, is and
  shall be deemed to have been and to be exempt from taxation  and  exempt
  from  special  ad  valorem  levies and special assessments to the extent
  provided in section four hundred  ninety  of  this  chapter,  except  as
  otherwise provided in title two of article five of this chapter.
    2.    Real  property owned by the New York state employees' retirement
  system acquired or constructed pursuant  to  subdivision  h  of  section
  thirteen  of the retirement and social security law shall be exempt from
  taxation.
    3.  Real property owned by the New  York  state  teachers'  retirement
  system  acquired or constructed pursuant to subdivision eight of section
  five hundred eight of the education law shall be exempt from taxation.

Municipal corporations. 1. Real property owned by a municipal
  corporation within its corporate limits held for a public use  shall  be
  exempt  from  taxation  and  exempt  from  special ad valorem levies and
  special assessments to the  extent  provided  in  section  four  hundred
  ninety of this chapter.
    2.  Real  property  owned  by  a  municipal corporation not within its
  corporate limits  while  used  for  the  provision  of  fire  protection
  services  provided  that  some fire protection services are available to
  the municipal corporation in which the real property is located,  for  a
  public  park,  public  aviation  field, highway or for flood control and
  soil  conservation  purposes  as  provided  in   section   two   hundred
  twenty-three  of  the  county  law  shall be exempt from taxation by any
  municipal corporation in which it is  located,  provided  the  governing
  board thereof shall so agree in writing.
    3.  Real  property  owned  by  a  municipal corporation not within its
  corporate limits while used  as  a  sewage  disposal  plant  or  system,
  including  necessary  connections  and  appurtenances,  or real property
  owned by a municipal corporation having a population of  less  than  one
  hundred  thousand or a population of two hundred twenty-five thousand or
  more but less than three hundred thousand used as a water plant, pumping
  station, water treatment  plant,  water  shed  or  reservoir,  including
  necessary  connections  and  appurtenances  shall be wholly or partially
  exempt from taxation and wholly or  partially  exempt  from  special  ad
  valorem  levies and special assessments, by any municipal corporation in
  which located, provided the governing board thereof shall  so  agree  in
  writing.
    4.  The  aqueducts  which are a part of the water supply system of the
  city of New York shall be entitled to the exemption provided by law.
    5. Real property owned by a  municipal  corporation  acquired  by  tax
  deed,  by  referee's deed in tax foreclosure, pursuant to article eleven
  of this chapter or pursuant to a deed made in lieu  of  tax  foreclosure
  shall  be deemed to be held by it for a public use for a period of three
  years from the date of the deed and during such period shall  be  exempt
  from  taxation  and  special  ad valorem levies, but shall be liable for
  taxes for school purposes and special  assessments.  Any  such  property
  from  which  a municipal corporation is receiving revenue on the date of
  taxable status, however, shall not be so exempt.
    6. County reforested lands shall be entitled to the exemption provided
  in the county law.
    7. Real property owned by a municipal corporation  on  January  first,
  nineteen  hundred  sixty-eight  outside  the boundaries of the municipal
  corporation shall be exempt from taxation where: (a)  such  property  is
  used  for  public  aviation purposes; and (b) is served by three or more
  major passenger air carriers; and (c) payments in lieu of real  property
  taxes  are paid in accordance herewith. The owning municipal corporation
  shall make payments in lieu of real property taxes to the county,  town,
  school  districts and villages in which it is located in an amount which
  will not be less than the amount  of  taxes  finally  determined  to  be
  payable  pursuant to the law in effect on the effective date of this act
  or any agreement in effect on  the  effective  date  of  this  act  made
  pursuant  to  law. The owning municipal corporation is hereby authorized
  and empowered to make payments in lieu of real property taxes in  excess
  of the amounts required by this subdivision.
    8.  Real  property  owned  by  a  municipal corporation not within its
  corporate limits while used for a municipal  electrical  generation  and
  distribution  system, including necessary connections and appurtenances,
  shall be  wholly  or  partially  exempt  from  taxation  and  wholly  or
  partially exempt from special ad valorem levies and special assessments,

  by  any  municipal  corporation in which located, provided the governing
  board thereof shall so agree in writing.

School  districts  and  boards  of  cooperative  educational
  services.   Notwithstanding any limitation  contained  in  section  four
  hundred  six  of  this  chapter,  all  real  property  owned by a school
  district  or  board  of  cooperative  educational   services   and   all
  improvements  thereon  leased  by such a district or board provided that
  such leased improvements are used for educational purposes and provided,
  further, that such lease provides that such district or board is  liable
  for  all  taxation,  special  ad  valorem levies and special assessments
  levied upon such improvements shall be exempt from taxation  and  exempt
  from  special  ad  valorem  levies and special assessments to the extent
  provided in section four hundred ninety of this chapter.

School  districts  and  boards  of  cooperative  educational
  services.   Notwithstanding any limitation  contained  in  section  four
  hundred  six  of  this  chapter,  all  real  property  owned by a school
  district  or  board  of  cooperative  educational   services   and   all
  improvements  thereon  leased  by such a district or board provided that
  such leased improvements are used for educational purposes and provided,
  further, that such lease provides that such district or board is  liable
  for  all  taxation,  special  ad  valorem levies and special assessments
  levied upon such improvements shall be exempt from taxation  and  exempt
  from  special  ad  valorem  levies and special assessments to the extent
  provided in section four hundred ninety of this chapter.

Special districts.  Real property owned by a special district,
  or  the  property owners therein, within its boundaries used exclusively
  for the purpose for which such district was established shall be  exempt
  from  taxation  and  exempt  from  special ad valorem levies and special
  assessments to the extent provided in section  four  hundred  ninety  of
  this  chapter,  except  as  otherwise  provided  in  section two hundred
  seventy-two of the county law.

Special  districts.    Real  property  owned by a special
  district, or the  property  owners  therein,  not  within  its  district
  boundaries which is used as a sewage disposal plant or system, including
  necessary  connections  and  appurtenances,  or real property owned by a
  special district used as a water plant, pumping station, water treatment
  plant, or reservoir, including necessary connections and  appurtenances,
  shall  be  wholly  or  partially  exempt  from  taxation and exempt from
  special ad valorem levies and special assessments to the extent provided
  in section four  hundred  ninety  of  this  chapter,  by  any  municipal
  corporation  in  which  located,  providing  the governing board thereof
  shall so agree in writing.

Special water districts. Real property in the county of
  Oswego owned by a  special  water  district,  not  within  its  district
  boundaries  and  used  as  a  pumping  station,  water  treatment plant,
  pipeline and/or  reservoir,  including  all  necessary  connections  and
  appurtenances, for purposes of drawing water from Lake Ontario, shall be
  wholly  exempt  from  taxation and exempt from special ad valorem levies
  and special assessments to the extent provided in section  four  hundred
  ninety  of this chapter if: (a) such special district makes available to
  customers within the county of Oswego at least  twenty-five  percent  of
  the  water  drawn  from  Lake  Ontario; (b) the municipal corporation in
  which such property is situated  shall  use  or  shall  have  created  a
  special  assessment  district to use water from any of the facilities of
  said special water district; and (c) said special water  district  makes
  water  available  to  any users in such municipal corporation or special
  assessment district at the same rate as  it  is  supplied  in  the  said
  special  water  district to users in the municipal corporation where the
  said special water district's pipeline first enters  the  special  water
  district.  As used herein, "rate" shall include all user charges and any
  charges imposed upon real property by the special water district for the
  cost of capital improvements.
    2.  Real property in the county of Cayuga owned  by  a  special  water
  district,  not  within its district boundaries and used or to be used as
  or for  a  pumping  station,  water  treatment  plant,  pipeline  and/or
  reservoir,  including  all  necessary connections and appurtenances, for
  the purpose of supplying or drawing water from Lake  Ontario,  shall  be
  wholly  exempt  from  taxation and exempt from special ad valorem levies
  and special assessments to the extent provided in section  four  hundred
  ninety of this chapter if: (a) at any time hereafter, such special water
  district,  at the request of the county of Cayuga, supplies to customers
  within the county of Cayuga water drawn from Lake Ontario, and (b)  said
  special  water  district  makes  such water available to users in Cayuga
  county at the same  rate  as  it  is  supplied  to  users  in  the  most
  northwesterly  town  located within said special water district. As used
  herein, "rate" shall include all user charges and  any  charges  imposed
  upon real property by the special water district for the cost of capital
  improvements.
Public authorities.  Real property owned by public authorities
  enumerated  in  the  public  authorities  law  shall be entitled to such
  exemption as may be provided therein.
Industrial development agencies. 1. Real property owned by or
  under the jurisdiction, supervision or control of industrial development
  agencies  enumerated  in  the general municipal law shall be entitled to
  such exemption as may be provided therein.
    2. Application for such exemption must be made by the agency on a form
  prescribed by the commissioner and shall be filed in the office  of  the
  assessor  on  or before the appropriate taxable status date for the year
  in which the exemption is first claimed. At such time,  copies  of  such
  application  shall  be mailed or delivered to the chief elected official
  of each school district, city, county, town and village within which the
  project is located. Such application shall include  an  extract  of  the
  terms  of any agreement relating to the project. No application shall be
  required in subsequent years unless  the  terms  of  the  agreement  are
  modified or changed.
Industrial  development  agency railroad property. Railroad
  real property owned by or under the jurisdiction, supervision or control
  of an industrial development agency enumerated in the general  municipal
  law which is leased by such agency to a railroad company shall be exempt
  from  taxation  to the extent provided in the general municipal law, and
  from special ad valorem levies and special  assessments  to  the  extent
  that  the  assessed  valuation  of  such  property  exceeds the railroad
  ceiling of such property determined  in  accordance  with  the  earnings
  ratio  as  prescribed  in  title  two-A  or  two-B of this article on an
  assessment  roll  finally  completed  and  filed  in  nineteen   hundred
  eighty-nine.  For  assessment  rolls  completed and filed after nineteen
  hundred eighty-nine, the assessor may  adjust  the  assessment  of  such
  property  to  account  for  either physical changes to the property or a
  change in the level of assessment as  determined  by  the  commissioner.
  However,  following  a  revaluation or update, the assessor shall assess
  such property without regard to the restrictions of this section.
Public housing, publicly assisted housing and limited-profit
  nursing homes.  Real property owned by a municipal housing authority and
  "war  demobilization  emergency  housing"  shall  be  entitled  to   the
  exemption  provided in the public housing law.  Real property owned by a
  limited-profit housing company, a limited dividend housing company or  a
  housing  development  fund  company  shall  be entitled to the exemption
  provided in  the  private  housing  finance  law,  except  as  otherwise
  provided  in  section  four  hundred  twenty-two of this chapter.   Real
  property owned  by  a  limited-profit  nursing  home  company  shall  be
  entitled to the exemption provided in the public health law.
United Nations.  Real property owned by the United Nations or
  of any world-wide international organization of which the United  States
  shall  be  a  member  and  which  shall be established and shall provide
  international agencies in order  to  maintain  international  peace  and
  security,   develop   friendly   relations  among  nations  and  achieve
  international  cooperation  in  solving  international  problems  of  an
  economic,  social,  cultural or humanitarian character, by taking action
  which includes effective collective  measures  for  the  prevention  and
  removal  of  threats to peace, for the suppression of acts of aggression
  or other breaches of the peace and for the bringing  about  by  peaceful
  means,   and   in   conformity   with  the  principles  of  justice  and
  international law, of the  adjustment  or  settlement  of  international
  disputes  or  situations  which  might  lead  to  a breach of the peace,
  exclusively used for the purpose of establishing and maintaining thereon
  headquarters for offices and for places of assembly for carrying on  the
  functions  of  United  Nations  or  other  such world-wide international
  organization shall be exempt from taxation, special  ad  valorem  levies
  and  special  assessments.  The  exemption granted by this section shall
  continue with respect to such real property as long as  it  remains  the
  property   of   the  United  Nations  or  any  world-wide  international
  organization as herein described and is used exclusively for the purpose
  of maintaining thereon headquarters for offices and places  of  assembly
  for  carrying  on the functions of the United Nations or such world-wide
  international organization, and no longer. Any  building,  each  portion
  thereof,  and  the  land  on  which such building is constructed, to the
  extent and from time to time constituting  part  or  all  of  the  reuse
  project  defined  in  chapter  three  hundred  forty-five of the laws of
  nineteen  hundred  sixty-eight,  shall  be  exempt  from  real  property
  taxation,  provided  that  in  connection  with  such  reuse project, an
  agreement shall be entered into with the city of New York providing  for
  payments  in  lieu  of  property taxes with respect to any space in such
  reuse project that is not used for carrying  on  the  functions  of  the
  United   Nations   and  is  not  used  for  purposes  that  satisfy  the
  requirements for exemption  from  taxation  under  either  section  four
  hundred eighteen or section four hundred twenty-a of this article.
Foreign  governments.    1.    Real  property  of a foreign
  government which is a member of the United  Nations  or  any  world-wide
  international organization as defined in section four hundred sixteen of
  this  chapter,  the  legal  title  to  which  stands in the name of such
  foreign government or the principal resident representative or  resident
  representative  with  the rank of ambassador or minister plenipotentiary
  of  such  foreign  government  to  the  United  Nations  or  other  such
  world-wide international organization, used exclusively for the purposes
  of maintaining offices or quarters, for such representatives, or offices
  for  the  staff  of such representatives, shall be exempt from taxation,
  except levies made on  a  city-wide  or  borough-wide  basis  which  are
  collectible with the real property tax, and special ad valorem levies to
  the  extent provided in section four hundred ninety of this chapter.  If
  a portion only of  any  lot  or  building  of  any  such  government  or
  representative  is  used  exclusively for the purposes herein described,
  then such portion only shall  be  exempt  and  the  remainder  shall  be
  subject  to  taxation unless otherwise exempt from taxation by law.  The
  exemption granted by this section shall apply to taxes which become  due
  and payable after the date such property is used for the purposes herein
  stated,  and  shall continue with respect to such property as long as it
  remains the property of such government and is  used  for  the  purposes
  herein stated and no longer.
    2.    If  at  any  time  (a)  special  ad  valorem  levies  or special
  assessments levied against the property or (b) taxes with respect to the
  taxable portion of the property, if any, are in arrears,  the  exemption
  granted herein shall not apply until the arrears are fully paid.

Nonprofit  organizations;  mandatory  class.  1.  (a)  Real
  property owned by a corporation or association  organized  or  conducted
  exclusively  for  religious, charitable, hospital, educational, or moral
  or mental improvement of men, women or children purposes, or for two  or
  more  such purposes, and used exclusively for carrying out thereupon one
  or more of such purposes either by the owning corporation or association
  or by another such corporation or association  as  hereinafter  provided
  shall be exempt from taxation as provided in this section.
    (b)  Real  property  such  as  specified  in  paragraph  (a)  of  this
  subdivision shall not be exempt if any officer, member  or  employee  of
  the  owning  corporation or association shall receive or may be lawfully
  entitled to receive any pecuniary profit from  the  operations  thereof,
  except  reasonable compensation for services in effecting one or more of
  such purposes, or as proper beneficiaries  of  its  strictly  charitable
  purposes; or if the organization thereof for any such avowed purposes be
  a  guise  or  pretense  for  directly  or  indirectly  making  any other
  pecuniary profit for such corporation or association or for any  of  its
  members  or  employees;  or  if  it  be  not  in good faith organized or
  conducted exclusively for one or more of such purposes.
    2. If any portion of such real property is not so used exclusively  to
  carry  out  thereupon  one  or  more  of  such purposes but is leased or
  otherwise used for other purposes, such  portion  shall  be  subject  to
  taxation  and  the  remaining  portion  only  shall be exempt; provided,
  however, that such real property shall be  fully  exempt  from  taxation
  although  it  or  a  portion  thereof is used (a) for purposes which are
  exempt pursuant to this section or sections four hundred twenty-b,  four
  hundred  twenty-two,  four hundred twenty-four, four hundred twenty-six,
  four hundred twenty-eight, four hundred thirty or four hundred fifty  of
  this chapter by another corporation which owns real property exempt from
  taxation  pursuant  to  such sections or whose real property if it owned
  any would be exempt from taxation pursuant to  such  sections,  (b)  for
  purposes  which  are  exempt  pursuant  to  section  four hundred six or
  section four hundred eight of this chapter by a corporation  which  owns
  real  property  exempt  from  taxation pursuant to such section or if it
  owned any would be exempt from taxation pursuant to  such  section,  (c)
  for  purposes  which are exempt pursuant to section four hundred sixteen
  of this chapter by an organization which owns real property exempt  from
  taxation pursuant to such section or whose real property if it owned any
  would be exempt from taxation pursuant to such section, (d) for purposes
  relating  to  civil  defense  pursuant  to  the  New  York state defense
  emergency act, including but not limited to  activities  in  preparation
  for  anticipated  attack,  during  attack,  or following attack or false
  warning thereof, or in connection with drill or test ordered or directed
  by civil defense authorities, or (e) for purposes of a tax-free NY  area
  that  has  been  approved pursuant to article twenty-one of the economic
  development law, subject to the conditions that the real  property  must
  have  been owned by the corporation or association organized exclusively
  for educational purposes and exempt pursuant to  this  section  on  June
  first, two thousand thirteen, and that the exemption shall apply only to
  the  portion  of  such  real  property  that is used for purposes of the
  START-UP NY program; and provided further that such real property  shall
  be  exempt from taxation only so long as it or a portion thereof, as the
  case may be, is devoted to such exempt  purposes  and  so  long  as  any
  moneys  paid  for  such  use  do  not exceed the amount of the carrying,
  maintenance and depreciation charges of the property or portion thereof,
  as the case may be.
    3. Such real property from which no revenue is derived shall be exempt
  though not in actual use therefor by reason of the absence  of  suitable

  buildings  or  improvements  thereon  if  (a)  the  construction of such
  buildings  or  improvements  is  in  progress  or  is  in   good   faith
  contemplated  by  such  corporation  or  association  or  (b)  such real
  property  is held by such corporation or association upon condition that
  the title thereto shall revert in case any  building  not  intended  and
  suitable  for  one  or  more  such  purposes  shall be erected upon such
  premises or some part thereof.
    4. Such real property shall be so exempt although  it  is  used  as  a
  polling place upon days of registration and election.
    5. Such real property owned and actually used for hospital purposes by
  a  free  public  hospital which depends for maintenance and support upon
  voluntary charity, shall be so exempt from taxation although  a  portion
  thereof  is leased or otherwise used for the purposes of income, if such
  income is necessary for and is actually applied to the  maintenance  and
  support of such hospital.
    6. Such real property outside a city owned by a free public library or
  held  in  trust  by an educational corporation for free library purposes
  shall be so exempt from taxation although a portion thereof is leased or
  otherwise used for purposes of income, if such income is  necessary  for
  and is actually applied to the maintenance and support of such library.
    7.  Real  property  which  was,  on the first day of January, nineteen
  hundred eighty-three  owned  for  more  than  one  hundred  years  by  a
  corporation  organized exclusively for purposes specified in subdivision
  one of this section under a  grant  or  devise  and  a  special  charter
  granted  by  the  legislature  of  the  state  of  New  York  subject to
  conditions which raise doubt as to the  power  of  such  corporation  to
  convey  fee  title  to  the  property  shall,  if  the  property is used
  exclusively for educational purposes by an educational corporation which
  owns real property exempt from taxation, or whose real  property  if  it
  owned  any  would  be  exempt from taxation, as lessee for a term of not
  less than twenty-five years and if such lease  were  in  effect  on  the
  first  day  of  January,  nineteen hundred eighty-three and requires the
  lessee to pay all taxes levied against  the  property,  be  exempt  from
  taxation  to  the  same  extent  and  subject to the same conditions and
  exceptions as property owned and used  for  educational  purposes  by  a
  corporation  organized  exclusively for educational purposes, regardless
  of whether the moneys paid to the lessor by the lessee  are  limited  to
  the  amount of the carrying, maintenance and depreciation charges of the
  property.
    8. Real property exempt from taxation pursuant to this  section  shall
  also be exempt from special ad valorem levies and special assessments to
  the extent provided in section four hundred ninety of this chapter.
    9.  In addition to the exemption provided in this section, any stadium
  facility owned by a corporation organized  exclusively  for  educational
  purposes which is constructed in whole or in substantial part with state
  funds  shall  be  exempt  from  taxation  notwithstanding its use by the
  state, by a municipal corporation  for  a  public  use,  or  by  or  for
  not-for-profit organizations.
    10. Real property, which on the first day of January, nineteen hundred
  ninety  was  exempt from real property taxation pursuant to this section
  by reason of the ownership and use of such  property  by  a  corporation
  organized  exclusively for educational purposes, and which the fee title
  to such property is conveyed prior to June thirtieth,  nineteen  hundred
  ninety-one  to  a  governmental  entity,  shall be exempt from taxation;
  provided that (a) as a condition of such  conveyance  such  property  is
  leased,  for  a  term  or  terms  exceeding  one  hundred  years,  to an
  educational corporation whose real property, when used  for  educational
  purposes,  is exempt from taxation, and (b) such property shall continue

  to be used by such  corporation  exclusively  for  educational  purposes
  subject to the same conditions and exceptions as property owned and used
  for educational purposes by a corporation organized exclusively for such
  purposes.
    11.  An  exemption  may  be  granted  pursuant  to  this  section upon
  application by the owner on a form prescribed by the commissioner or any
  comparable form, which application may be filed with the assessor of the
  appropriate county, city, town or village on or  before  the  applicable
  taxable  status  date.  Where the assessor receives no such application,
  the assessor may nevertheless grant the exemption provided the  assessor
  personally  inspects  the  property  and  certifies  in  writing that it
  satisfies all of the  requirements  for  exemption  set  forth  in  this
  section.  Where  property  is  not granted an exemption pursuant to this
  section, the owner may seek judicial review pursuant to article seven of
  this chapter or article seventy-eight of  the  civil  practice  law  and
  rules.
    12.  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any other law to
  the contrary, real property, the fee title  to  which  was  acquired  on
  March  twenty-third, nineteen hundred ninety-four pursuant to a mortgage
  foreclosure sale conducted by the federal deposit insurance corporation,
  by a corporation or association organized  exclusively  for  educational
  purposes,  and  which  was  used  exclusively  by  such  corporation  or
  association for carrying out thereupon educational purposes  during  the
  period  beginning  on  the  date  the  fee  title  was  acquired by such
  corporation or  association  and  ending  on  June  thirtieth,  nineteen
  hundred  ninety-five,  shall  be exempt from taxation for such period as
  provided in this section. The city of New York may negotiate and execute
  with the owner of real property in the city of New York  qualifying  for
  exemption under this subdivision, an agreement for the payment of unpaid
  real  property  taxes and interest thereon that accrued on such property
  prior to the date on which the fee title to such property  was  acquired
  by  such  owner.  Notwithstanding  any  provision of this chapter or the
  administrative code of the city of New York or  any  other  law  to  the
  contrary,  such  agreement  may  require  that payment of such taxes and
  interest thereon be made in quarterly installments over a period not  to
  exceed thirty years.
    13.  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any other law to
  the contrary, real property, the fee title  to  which  was  acquired  on
  March  twenty-third, nineteen hundred ninety-four pursuant to a mortgage
  foreclosure sale conducted by the federal deposit insurance  corporation
  by  a  corporation  or association organized exclusively for educational
  purposes, and which has been used exclusively  by  such  corporation  or
  association  for  carrying  out thereupon educational purposes since the
  date on which  the  fee  title  was  acquired  by  such  corporation  or
  association,  and  is  currently  being used for such purposes, shall be
  exempt from taxation as provided in this section and  the  city  of  New
  York may cancel and annul any unpaid real property taxes that accrued on
  such  real  property  prior  to  the date on which the fee title to such
  property was acquired by such owner together with any interest  accruing
  on such unpaid real property taxes.
    14.  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any other law to
  the contrary, real property in block 1175 in the county of Kings  leased
  to  the  unified  court  system for the establishment and operation of a
  court  officer  academy  authorized  pursuant  to  section  two  hundred
  nineteen-b  of  the  judiciary law shall be exempt from taxation for the
  duration of such lease provided that such property  shall  be  used  for
  such  purpose  and  provided  that  title  to such property shall not be
  conveyed to another owner at any time during the duration of such lease.

    15. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any other law  to
  the  contrary,  real  property in block 1272 in the borough of Brooklyn,
  the fee title to which  was  acquired  in  1997  or  1998  in  order  to
  establish   a  museum  and  center  for  children  by  a  not-for-profit
  corporation   or   association   organized  exclusively  for  charitable
  purposes, and which has been used exclusively  by  such  corporation  or
  association  for  carrying  out  thereupon charitable purposes since the
  date on which  the  fee  title  was  acquired  by  such  corporation  or
  association,  shall  be exempt from taxation as provided in this section
  and the city of New York may cancel and annul any unpaid  real  property
  taxes  that accrued on such real property prior to the date on which the
  fee title to such property was acquired by such owner together with  any
  interest accruing such unpaid real property taxes.
    16.   (a)  (i)  For  the  purposes  of  this  subdivision,  "municipal
  corporation" shall mean a county, city, town, village or school district
  which,  after  public  hearing,  adopts  a  local  law,   ordinance   or
  resolution,  providing  that  this  subdivision  shall  be applicable to
  nonprofit  organizations  within  its  jurisdiction.  Such  local   law,
  ordinance  or  resolution shall apply to property transfers occurring on
  or after the effective date of such local law, ordinance or  resolution.
  A  copy  of  such local law, ordinance or resolution shall be filed with
  the commissioner.
    (ii) Where a nonprofit organization that meets the requirements for an
  exemption pursuant to this section, purchases property after the levy of
  taxes, such nonprofit organization may, if permitted  by  a  local  law,
  ordinance  or  resolution  of  the  municipal  corporation  in which the
  nonprofit organization is located, file  an  application  for  exemption
  with  the  assessor  no later than the time specified in such local law,
  ordinance or resolution. The assessor  shall  make  a  determination  of
  whether  the  parcel  would  have qualified for exempt status on the tax
  roll on which the taxes were levied, had title to the parcel been in the
  name of the applicant on the taxable status date applicable to  the  tax
  roll. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the commissioner.
  The   assessor,  no  later  than  thirty  days  after  receipt  of  such
  application, shall notify both the applicant and the board of assessment
  review, by first class mail, of the exempt amount, if any, and the right
  of the owner to a review of the exempt  amount  upon  the  filing  of  a
  written  complaint.  Such complaint shall be on a form prescribed by the
  commissioner and shall be filed with  the  board  of  assessment  review
  within  twenty  days  of  the mailing of such notice. If no complaint is
  received, the board of assessment review shall so  notify  the  assessor
  and  the exempt amount determined by the assessor shall be final. If the
  applicant files a  complaint,  the  board  of  assessment  review  shall
  schedule  a  time  and place for a hearing with respect thereto no later
  than thirty days after the mailing of the notice by  the  assessor.  The
  board  of  assessment review shall meet and determine the exempt amount,
  and shall immediately notify the assessor and the  applicant,  by  first
  class  mail,  of  its  determination. The amount of exemption determined
  pursuant to this paragraph shall be subject to  review  as  provided  in
  article  seven  of  this  chapter.  Such a proceeding shall be commenced
  within thirty days of  the  mailing  of  the  notice  of  the  board  of
  assessment review to the new owner as provided in this paragraph.
    (iii) Upon receipt of a determination of the exempt amount as provided
  in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, the assessor shall determine the
  pro  rata  exemption  to be credited toward such property by multiplying
  the tax rate or tax rates for each municipal  corporation  which  levied
  taxes,  or for which taxes were levied, on the appropriate tax roll used
  for the fiscal year or years during which the  transfer  occurred  times

  the exempt amount, as determined in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph,
  times  the fraction of each fiscal year or years remaining subsequent to
  the transfer  of  title.  The  assessor  shall  immediately  transmit  a
  statement  of  the  pro  rata  exemption  credit  due  to each municipal
  corporation which levied taxes or for which taxes were levied on the tax
  roll used for the  fiscal  year  or  years  during  which  the  transfer
  occurred and to the applicant.
    (iv)  Each  municipal  corporation  which  receives notice of pro rata
  exemption  credits  pursuant  to  this  subdivision  shall  include   an
  appropriation  in  its  budget  for  the  next  fiscal year equal to the
  aggregate amount of such credits to be  applied  in  that  fiscal  year.
  Where  a  parcel, the owner of which is entitled to a pro rata exemption
  credit, is subject to taxation in said next fiscal year, the receiver or
  collector shall apply the credit to reduce the amount of taxes owed  for
  the  parcel in such fiscal year. Pro rata exemption credits in excess of
  the amount of taxes, if any, owed for the parcel shall be  paid  by  the
  treasurer  of  a municipal corporation which levies such taxes for or on
  behalf of the municipal corporation to all owners of  property  entitled
  to  such  credits within thirty days of the expiration of the warrant to
  collect taxes in said next fiscal year. Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,
  where the municipal corporation has been reimbursed by another municipal
  corporation  for the tax credit to be paid to the owner pursuant to this
  subdivision, such credit shall be paid  to  such  municipal  corporation
  instead of such owner.
    (b)  (i)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  this  section, where a
  nonprofit organization that meets  the  requirements  for  an  exemption
  pursuant  to  this  section, purchases property after the taxable status
  date but prior to the levy of taxes, such nonprofit organization may, if
  permitted by a local law,  ordinance  or  resolution  of  the  municipal
  corporation  in  which  the  nonprofit  organization is located, file an
  application for an exemption with the assessor within thirty days of the
  transfer of title to such nonprofit  organization.  The  assessor  shall
  make   a   determination  within  thirty  days  after  receipt  of  such
  application of whether the applicant  would  qualify  for  an  exemption
  pursuant to this section on the assessment roll if title had been in the
  name  of  the  applicant  on  the taxable status date applicable to such
  assessment roll. The application shall be made on a form  prescribed  by
  the commissioner.
    (ii)  If  the  assessor's determination is made prior to the filing of
  the tentative assessment roll,  the  assessor  shall  enter  the  exempt
  amount,  if  any,  on the tentative assessment roll and, within ten days
  after filing such roll, notify the applicant of the approval  or  denial
  of  such exemption, the exempt amount, if any, and the applicant's right
  to review by the board of assessment review.
    (iii) If the assessor's determination is made after the filing of  the
  tentative  assessment  roll,  the  assessor  shall petition the board of
  assessment review to correct the tentative or final assessment  roll  in
  the manner provided in title three of article five of this chapter, with
  respect  to  unlawful entries, in the case of wholly exempt parcels, and
  with respect of  clerical  errors,  in  the  case  of  partially  exempt
  parcels,  if the assessor determines that an exemption should be granted
  and, within ten days of petitioning  the  board  of  assessment  review,
  notify  the  applicant  of the approval or denial of such exemption, the
  amount  of  such  exemption,  if  any,  and  the  applicant's  right  to
  administrative  or  judicial  review  of  such determination pursuant to
  article five or seven of this chapter, respectively.
    (c) If, for any  reason,  a  determination  to  exempt  property  from
  taxation as provided in paragraph (b) of this subdivision is not entered

  on  the  final assessment roll, the assessor shall petition the board of
  assessment review to correct the final assessment roll.
    (d)  If,  for  any  reason,  the  pro  rata  tax credit as provided in
  paragraph (a) of this subdivision is not extended against the  tax  roll
  immediately  succeeding  the  fiscal  year  during  which  the  transfer
  occurred,  the  assessor  shall   immediately   notify   the   municipal
  corporation  which  levied the tax or for which the taxes were levied of
  the amount of pro rata exemption credits for  the  year  in  which  such
  transfer  occurred. Such municipal corporation shall proceed as provided
  in subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (a) of this subdivision.
    (e) If, for any  reason,  a  determination  to  exempt  property  from
  taxation as provided in paragraph (b) of this subdivision is not entered
  on  the  tax  roll  for  the year immediately succeeding the fiscal year
  during which the transfer occurred, the assessor shall determine the pro
  rata tax exemption credit for such tax roll by multiplying the tax  rate
  or  tax  rates  for each municipal corporation which levied taxes or for
  which taxes were levied times the exempt amount  and  shall  immediately
  notify  such  municipal  corporation  or  corporations  of  the pro rata
  exemption credits for such tax roll. Such  municipal  corporation  shall
  add such pro rata exemption credits for such property to any outstanding
  pro  rata exemption amounts and proceed as provided in subparagraph (iv)
  of paragraph (a) of this subdivision.
 Nonprofit  organizations;  permissive  class.  1.  (a) Real
  property owned by  a  corporation  or  association  which  is  organized
  exclusively  for bible, tract, benevolent, missionary, infirmary, public
  playground, scientific,  literary,  bar  association,  medical  society,
  library,  patriotic  or historical purposes, for the development of good
  sportsmanship for persons under the age of eighteen  years  through  the
  conduct  of  supervised  athletic  games,  for  the  enforcement of laws
  relating to children or animals, or for two or more such  purposes,  and
  used exclusively for carrying out thereupon one or more of such purposes
  either  by  the  owning  corporation  or association, or by another such
  corporation or association as hereinafter provided, shall be exempt from
  taxation; provided, however, that such property shall be taxable by  any
  municipal  corporation within which it is located if the governing board
  of such municipal corporation, after public hearing, adopts a local law,
  ordinance or resolution so providing. None of the following subdivisions
  of this section providing that certain properties shall be exempt  under
  circumstances  or conditions set forth in such subdivisions shall exempt
  such property from taxation by a municipal corporation  whose  governing
  board  has  adopted  a local law, ordinance or resolution providing that
  such property shall be taxable pursuant to this subdivision.
    (b) No local law, ordinance or resolution  adopted  pursuant  to  this
  subdivision shall provide for the taxation of any particular property or
  owner.  Any such local law, ordinance or resolution shall apply alike to
  all property owned by any corporation or association organized  for  one
  or  more  of  the  purposes  specified  in  such local law, ordinance or
  resolution, and used for carrying out thereupon  one  or  more  of  such
  purposes.  Any  purpose  so  specified  in  the  local law, ordinance or
  resolution must be one of the purposes listed in paragraph (a)  of  this
  subdivision,  but  the purposes so specified in the local law, ordinance
  or  resolution  need  not  include  all  the  purposes  listed  in  said
  paragraph.  Any  local  law, ordinance or resolution adopted pursuant to
  this subdivision may be amended or repealed.
    (c)  Real  property  such  as  specified  in  paragraph  (a)  of  this
  subdivision  shall  not  be exempt if any officer, member or employee of
  the owning corporation or association shall receive any pecuniary profit
  from the operations thereof, except reasonable compensation for services
  in effecting one or more of such purposes, or as proper beneficiaries of
  its strictly charitable purposes; or if the organization thereof for any
  such avowed purposes be a guise or pretense for directly  or  indirectly
  making any other pecuniary profit for such corporation or association or
  for  any  of  its  members  or  employees; or if it be not in good faith
  organized exclusively for one or more of such purposes.
    2. If any portion of such real property is not so used exclusively  to
  carry  out  thereupon  one or more of the purposes listed in subdivision
  one of this section, but is (a) leased or (b) otherwise used  for  other
  purposes,  such  portion  shall be subject to taxation and the remaining
  portion only shall be exempt; provided, however, that such real property
  shall be fully exempt from taxation although it or a portion thereof  is
  used  (a)  for  purposes  which  are  exempt pursuant to this section or
  sections four hundred twenty-a, four hundred  twenty-two,  four  hundred
  twenty-four,  four  hundred  twenty-six, four hundred twenty-eight, four
  hundred thirty  or  four  hundred  fifty  of  this  article  by  another
  corporation  which  owns  real property exempt from taxation pursuant to
  such sections or whose real property if it owned  any  would  be  exempt
  from  taxation  pursuant  to  such  sections, (b) for purposes which are
  exempt pursuant to section four hundred  six  or  section  four  hundred
  eight  of  this chapter by a corporation which owns real property exempt
  from taxation pursuant to such  section,  (c)  for  purposes  which  are

  exempt  pursuant  to  section four hundred sixteen of this chapter by an
  organization which owns real property exempt from taxation  pursuant  to
  such section or whose real property if it owned any would be exempt from
  taxation  pursuant to such section or (d) for purposes relating to civil
  defense pursuant to the New York state defense emergency act,  including
  but  not  limited  to  activities in preparation for anticipated attack,
  during attack, or following attack  or  false  warning  thereof,  or  in
  connection  with  drill  or  test  ordered  or directed by civil defense
  authorities; and provided further  that  such  real  property  shall  be
  exempt  from  taxation  only  so long as it or a portion thereof, as the
  case may be, is devoted to such exempt  purposes  and  so  long  as  any
  moneys  paid  for  such  use  do  not  exceed  the  amount  of carrying,
  maintenance and depreciation charges of the property or portion thereof,
  as the case may be.
    3. Such real property from which no revenue is derived shall be exempt
  though not in actual use therefor by reason of the absence  of  suitable
  buildings  or  improvements  thereon  if  (a)  the  construction of such
  buildings  or  improvements  is  in  progress  or  is  in   good   faith
  contemplated  by  such  corporation  or  association  or  (b)  such real
  property is held by such corporation or association upon condition  that
  the  title  thereto  shall  revert in case any building not intended and
  suitable for one or more of such purposes shall  be  erected  upon  such
  premises or some part thereof.
    4.  Such  real  property  shall  be so exempt although it is used as a
  polling place upon days of registration and election.
    5. Such real property outside a city owned by a free public library or
  held in trust by an educational corporation for  free  library  purposes
  shall be so exempt from taxation although a portion thereof is leased or
  otherwise  used  for purposes of income, if such income is necessary for
  and is actually applied to the maintenance and support of such library.
    6. Real property exempt pursuant to this section from taxation by  all
  municipal  corporations  within which it is located shall also be exempt
  from special ad valorem levies and special  assessments  to  the  extent
  provided  in  section four hundred ninety of this chapter. Real property
  which is taxable  by  one  or  more,  but  not  all,  of  the  municipal
  corporations  within which it is located, pursuant to subdivision one of
  this section shall also be exempt from such levies  and  assessments  to
  the same extent except that:
    such  real  property  taxable  by  a town shall be subject to any such
  levies and  assessments  which  are  imposed  to  defray  the  costs  of
  improvements  or services furnished by the town or by a special district
  established pursuant to the town law;
    such real property taxable by a county shall be subject  to  any  such
  levies  and  assessments  which  are  imposed  to  defray  the  costs of
  improvements or services  furnished  by  the  county  or  by  a  special
  district established pursuant to the county law; and
    such  real  property  taxable  by  a city shall be subject to any such
  levies  and  assessments  which  are  imposed  to  defray  the  cost  of
  improvements or service furnished by the city.
    7.  An  exemption  may  be  granted pursuant to this section only upon
  application made by the owner of the property on a  form  prescribed  by
  the  commissioner.  The  application shall be filed with the assessor of
  the appropriate county, city, town or village on or before  the  taxable
  status date of such county, city, town or village.
    8.   (a)   (i)  For  the  purposes  of  this  subdivision,  "municipal
  corporation" shall mean a county, city, town, village or school district
  which,  after  public  hearing,  adopts  a  local  law,   ordinance   or
  resolution,  providing  that  this  subdivision  shall  be applicable to

  nonprofit  organizations  within  its  jurisdiction.  Such  local   law,
  ordinance  or  resolution shall apply to property transfers occurring on
  or after the effective date of such local law, ordinance or  resolution.
  A  copy  of  such local law, ordinance or resolution shall be filed with
  the commissioner.
    (ii) Where a nonprofit organization that meets the requirements for an
  exemption pursuant to this section, purchases property after the levy of
  taxes, such nonprofit organization may file, if  permitted  by  a  local
  law,  ordinance  or resolution of the municipal corporation in which the
  nonprofit organization is located, an application for exemption with the
  assessor no later than the time specified in such local  law,  ordinance
  or  resolution.  The  assessor shall make a determination of whether the
  parcel would have qualified for exempt status on the tax roll  on  which
  the  taxes  were levied, had title to the parcel been in the name of the
  applicant on the taxable status date applicable to  the  tax  roll.  The
  application  shall  be  on  a  form  prescribed by the commissioner. The
  assessor, no later than thirty days after receipt of  such  application,
  shall  notify  both the applicant and the board of assessment review, by
  first class mail, of the exempt amount, if any, and  the  right  of  the
  owner  to  a  review  of  the exempt amount upon the filing of a written
  complaint.  Such  complaint  shall  be  on  a  form  prescribed  by  the
  commissioner  and  shall  be  filed  with the board of assessment review
  within twenty days of the mailing of such notice.  If  no  complaint  is
  received,  the  board  of assessment review shall so notify the assessor
  and the exempt amount determined by the assessor shall be final. If  the
  applicant  files  a  complaint,  the  board  of  assessment review shall
  schedule a time and place for a hearing with respect  thereto  no  later
  than  thirty  days  after the mailing of the notice by the assessor. The
  board of assessment review shall meet and determine the  exempt  amount,
  and  shall  immediately  notify the assessor and the applicant, by first
  class mail, of its determination. The  amount  of  exemption  determined
  pursuant  to  this  paragraph  shall be subject to review as provided in
  article seven of this chapter. Such  a  proceeding  shall  be  commenced
  within  thirty  days  of  the  mailing  of  the  notice  of the board of
  assessment review to the new owner as provided in this paragraph.
    (iii) Upon receipt of a determination of the exempt amount as provided
  in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, the assessor shall determine the
  pro rata exemption to be credited toward such  property  by  multiplying
  the  tax  rate  or tax rates for each municipal corporation which levied
  taxes, or for which taxes were levied, on the appropriate tax roll  used
  for  the  fiscal  year or years during which the transfer occurred times
  the exempt amount, as determined in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph,
  times the fraction of each fiscal year or years remaining subsequent  to
  the  transfer  of  title.  The  assessor  shall  immediately  transmit a
  statement of the  pro  rata  exemption  credit  due  to  each  municipal
  corporation which levied taxes or for which taxes were levied on the tax
  roll  used  for  the  fiscal  year  or  years  during which the transfer
  occurred and to the applicant.
    (iv) Each municipal corporation which  receives  notice  of  pro  rata
  exemption   credits  pursuant  to  this  subdivision  shall  include  an
  appropriation in its budget for  the  next  fiscal  year  equal  to  the
  aggregate  amount  of  such  credits  to be applied in that fiscal year.
  Where a parcel, the owner of which is entitled to a pro  rata  exemption
  credit, is subject to taxation in said next fiscal year, the receiver or
  collector  shall apply the credit to reduce the amount of taxes owed for
  the parcel in such fiscal year. Pro rata exemption credits in excess  of
  the  amount  of  taxes, if any, owed for the parcel shall be paid by the
  treasurer of a municipal corporation which levies such taxes for  or  on

  behalf  of  the municipal corporation to all owners of property entitled
  to such credits within thirty days of the expiration of the  warrant  to
  collect  taxes  in said next fiscal year. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
  where the municipal corporation has been reimbursed by another municipal
  corporation  for the tax credit to be paid to the owner pursuant to this
  subdivision, such credit shall be paid  to  such  municipal  corporation
  instead of such owner.
    (b)  (i)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  this  section, where a
  nonprofit organization that meets  the  requirements  for  an  exemption
  pursuant  to  this  section, purchases property after the taxable status
  date but prior to the levy of taxes, such nonprofit organization may, if
  permitted by a local law,  ordinance  or  resolution  of  the  municipal
  corporation  in  which  the  nonprofit  organization is located, file an
  application for an exemption with the assessor within thirty days of the
  transfer of title to such nonprofit  organization.  The  assessor  shall
  make   a   determination  within  thirty  days  after  receipt  of  such
  application of whether the applicant  would  qualify  for  an  exemption
  pursuant to this section on the assessment roll if title had been in the
  name  of  the  applicant  on  the taxable status date applicable to such
  assessment roll. The application shall be made on a form  prescribed  by
  the commissioner.
    (ii)  If  the  assessor's determination is made prior to the filing of
  the tentative assessment roll,  the  assessor  shall  enter  the  exempt
  amount,  if  any,  on the tentative assessment roll and, within ten days
  after filing such roll, notify the applicant of the approval  or  denial
  of  such exemption, the exempt amount, if any, and the applicant's right
  to review by the board of assessment review.
    (iii) If the assessor's determination is made after the filing of  the
  tentative  assessment  roll,  the  assessor  shall petition the board of
  assessment review to correct the tentative or final assessment  roll  in
  the manner provided in title three of article five of this chapter, with
  respect  to  unlawful entries, in the case of wholly exempt parcels, and
  with respect of  clerical  errors,  in  the  case  of  partially  exempt
  parcels,  if the assessor determines that an exemption should be granted
  and, within ten days of petitioning  the  board  of  assessment  review,
  notify  the  applicant  of the approval or denial of such exemption, the
  amount  of  such  exemption,  if  any,  and  the  applicant's  right  to
  administrative  or  judicial  review  of  such determination pursuant to
  article five or seven of this chapter, respectively.
    (c) If, for any  reason,  a  determination  to  exempt  property  from
  taxation as provided in paragraph (b) of this subdivision is not entered
  on  the  final assessment roll, the assessor shall petition the board of
  assessment review to correct the final assessment roll.
    (d) If, for any reason,  the  pro  rata  tax  credit  as  provided  in
  paragraph  (a)  of this subdivision is not extended against the tax roll
  immediately  succeeding  the  fiscal  year  during  which  the  transfer
  occurred,   the   assessor   shall   immediately  notify  the  municipal
  corporation which levied the tax or for which the taxes were  levied  of
  the  amount  of  pro  rata  exemption credits for the year in which such
  transfer occurred. Such municipal corporation shall proceed as  provided
  in subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (a) of this subdivision.
    (e)  If,  for  any  reason,  a  determination  to exempt property from
  taxation as provided in paragraph (b) of this subdivision is not entered
  on the tax roll for the year  immediately  succeeding  the  fiscal  year
  during which the transfer occurred, the assessor shall determine the pro
  rata  tax exemption credit for such tax roll by multiplying the tax rate
  or tax rates for each municipal corporation which levied  taxes  or  for
  which  taxes  were  levied times the exempt amount and shall immediately

  notify such municipal  corporation  or  corporations  of  the  pro  rata
  exemption  credits  for  such tax roll. Such municipal corporation shall
  add such pro rata exemption credits for such property to any outstanding
  pro  rata exemption amounts and proceed as provided in subparagraph (iv)
  of paragraph (a) of this subdivision.
Exemption  from local real property taxation of certain low
  income housing accommodations in a  city  having  a  population  of  one
  million  or  more.  1.  In  a city having a population of one million or
  more, real property owned  by  a  corporation,  partnership  or  limited
  liability   company   formed   for  the  purpose  of  providing  housing
  accommodations for persons and families of  low  income  as  defined  in
  section  two  of  the  private  housing  finance  law  and used for such
  purpose, shall be exempt from local  real  property  taxation,  provided
  that  such corporation, partnership or limited liability company: (a) is
  organized as a non-profit housing development fund company  pursuant  to
  article  eleven  of  the private housing finance law, or is a non-profit
  housing corporation as defined in article eleven of the private  housing
  finance  law  which  is  not  incorporated as a housing development fund
  company as defined in article eleven of the private housing finance law,
  or is a wholly-owned subsidiary of such a company or is a partnership or
  limited liability company the controlling interest of which is  held  by
  such  a company or corporation or by a wholly owned subsidiary of such a
  company or by a corporation sponsored or formed by  such  a  company  or
  corporation;  and (b) has received a loan from a municipality, the state
  or the housing trust fund corporation established  pursuant  to  section
  forty-five-a  of  the  private  housing  finance  law  or  any successor
  corporation; and  (c)  enters  into  a  regulatory  agreement  with  the
  municipality,   the   state   or  the  housing  trust  fund  corporation
  established pursuant to section  forty-five-a  of  the  private  housing
  finance  law  or any successor corporation guaranteeing the provision of
  housing accommodations for persons and families of low income;  and  (d)
  is  a  participant  in the federal low income housing tax credit program
  established pursuant to section forty-two of the internal  revenue  code
  of  nineteen  hundred  eighty-six, as amended. Any exemption pursuant to
  this section shall expire upon the  expiration  or  termination  of  the
  regulatory agreement.
    2.  An  exemption  may  be  granted pursuant to this section only upon
  application by the owner on a form prescribed by the commissioner or any
  comparable form, which application shall be accepted by the assessor  of
  such  city  as  provided  in  this  subdivision  and  in  the  rules and
  regulations promulgated pursuant to this section by  the  department  of
  housing  preservation  and development in such city. No such application
  shall be accepted by the assessor unless accompanied by a certificate of
  the department of housing preservation  and  development  in  such  city
  certifying   the  applicant's  eligibility  pursuant  to  this  section.
  Notwithstanding section three hundred two of this chapter, an  exemption
  granted pursuant to this section shall commence as of the effective date
  of  the  regulatory  agreement  with  the municipality, the state or the
  housing  trust  fund  corporation  established   pursuant   to   section
  forty-five-a  of  the  private  housing  finance  law  or  any successor
  corporation regardless of when the application  for  such  exemption  is
  approved.  The  department  of  housing preservation and development may
  promulgate rules and regulations to carry out  the  provisions  of  this
  section,  and  may require a reasonable filing fee in an amount provided
  by such rules and regulations.
    3. An exemption from local real property  taxation  pursuant  to  this
  section  shall  be  governed  solely by subdivisions one and two of this
  section if the application for such exemption  is  approved  before  the
  effective  date  of  this  subdivision  and  shall be governed solely by
  subdivision four of this section if the application for  such  exemption
  is  approved on or after the effective date of this subdivision. Any tax
  exemption pursuant to subdivisions one and two of this section  that  is
  in  effect  on  the effective date of this subdivision shall continue in

  accordance with the provisions of  subdivisions  one  and  two  of  this
  section; provided, however, that any amendment to a regulatory agreement
  on  or  after the effective date of this subdivision shall require a new
  application  for  tax  exemption  pursuant  to  subdivision four of this
  section. Eligible real property that receives exemption from local  real
  property  taxation  pursuant  to  this  section  at  any  time shall not
  simultaneously  receive  exemption  from  or  abatement  of  local  real
  property taxation pursuant to any other law.
    4. (a) For the purposes of this subdivision, the following terms shall
  have the following meanings:
    (1)  The  term  "persons  and  families  of low income" shall have the
  meaning set forth in section two of the private housing finance law.
    (2) The term "tax credit program" shall mean  the  federal  low-income
  housing  tax credit program established pursuant to section forty-two of
  the internal revenue code of nineteen hundred eighty-six, as amended, or
  any successor statute.
    (3) The term "eligible real property" shall mean  real  property  that
  (i)  provides  housing  accommodations  for  persons and families of low
  income, and (ii) participates in or has participated in the  tax  credit
  program.
    (4) The term "charitable organization" shall mean (i) an entity formed
  for  purposes  that include providing housing accommodations for persons
  and families of low income and that has received written recognition  of
  exemption  pursuant  to  section  501(c)(3)  or section 501(c)(4) of the
  internal revenue code of nineteen hundred eighty-six, as amended, or any
  successor statute, from the United States Internal Revenue  Service,  or
  any  successor  agency,  or  (ii)  a corporation, partnership or limited
  liability company wholly owned and wholly controlled by an entity formed
  for purposes that include providing housing accommodations  for  persons
  and  families of low income and that has received written recognition of
  exemption pursuant to section 501(c)(3)  or  section  501(c)(4)  of  the
  internal revenue code of nineteen hundred eighty-six, as amended, or any
  successor  statute,  from the United States Internal Revenue Service, or
  any successor agency.
    (5) The term "eligible entity" shall mean a  corporation,  partnership
  or  limited  liability company at least fifty percent of the controlling
  interest of which is held by a charitable organization.
    (6) The term "eligible owner" shall mean one or more eligible entities
  that holds (i) legal and beneficial title to eligible real property,  or
  (ii)  a  legal and beneficial leasehold interest with a term of not less
  than thirty years in eligible real property.
    (7) The term "regulatory agreement" shall mean a regulatory  agreement
  with  or  approved  by  the  municipality that requires the provision of
  housing accommodations for persons and families of low income,  requires
  that  units  currently or formerly assisted under the tax credit program
  be rented in accordance with the income requirements of the  tax  credit
  program,  is  recorded against the eligible real property, and binds all
  parties in interest to the eligible real property and  their  respective
  successors  and  assigns.  A regulatory agreement may include such other
  terms and conditions as the municipality shall determine, including, but
  not limited to, provisions requiring payments in lieu of taxes.
    (b) Notwithstanding any other provision in  this  subdivision  to  the
  contrary, in a city having a population of one million or more, eligible
  real  property  of  an  eligible  owner  that is subject to a regulatory
  agreement shall be exempt from local real property  taxation  except  as
  may be otherwise provided in such regulatory agreement.
    (c)  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  any other general or special
  state or local law  or  charter,  (1)  with  respect  to  eligible  real

  property  that  is  eligible  for  exemption  from  local  real property
  taxation pursuant to this subdivision on  the  effective  date  of  this
  subdivision  and  that is receiving exemption from or abatement of local
  real  property  taxation pursuant to any other law on the effective date
  of this subdivision, an eligible owner may prospectively terminate  such
  other  exemption  or  abatement  upon  entering  into  a  new regulatory
  agreement  and  the  eligible  real   property   shall   thereafter   be
  prospectively  entitled  to  exemption from local real property taxation
  pursuant to this subdivision, and (2)  with  respect  to  eligible  real
  property  that  is  eligible  for  exemption  from  local  real property
  taxation pursuant to this subdivision on  the  effective  date  of  this
  subdivision and that is not receiving any exemption from or abatement of
  local  real  property  taxation  pursuant to subdivisions one and two of
  this section or any other law on the effective date of this subdivision,
  if an eligible  owner  enters  into  a  new  regulatory  agreement,  the
  eligible  real  property  shall  thereafter by prospectively entitled to
  exemption  from  local  real  property   taxation   pursuant   to   this
  subdivision,  and  (3)  with  respect  to eligible real property that is
  eligible for an exemption from local real property taxation pursuant  to
  this  subdivision  on the effective date of this subdivision and that is
  receiving exemption  from  local  real  property  taxation  pursuant  to
  subdivisions  one  and two of this section on the effective date of this
  subdivision,  an  eligible  owner  may  prospectively   terminate   such
  exemption upon entering into a new regulatory agreement and the eligible
  real  property  shall  thereafter be prospectively entitled to exemption
  from local real property taxation pursuant to this subdivision.
    (d)(1) An exemption may be granted pursuant to this  subdivision  only
  upon  application  by  the  eligible  owner  on a form prescribed by the
  commissioner or any comparable form, which application shall be accepted
  by the assessor of such city as provided in this subdivision and in such
  rules as  may  be  promulgated  pursuant  to  this  subdivision  by  the
  department of housing preservation and development in such city. No such
  application  shall  be  accepted by the assessor unless accompanied by a
  certificate of the department of housing preservation and development in
  such city  certifying  the  applicant's  eligibility  pursuant  to  this
  subdivision.
    (2)  Notwithstanding  section  three  hundred  two of this chapter, an
  exemption granted pursuant to this subdivision shall commence as of  the
  effective  date  of  the  regulatory  agreement,  regardless of when the
  application for such exemption is approved, and shall terminate upon the
  expiration or termination of such regulatory agreement.  Notwithstanding
  any provision of this subdivision to the contrary, if there is a default
  pursuant  to  the regulatory agreement, and such default remains uncured
  beyond any period for such cure specified in the  regulatory  agreement,
  the  municipality may terminate such exemption or suspend such exemption
  until such default is cured.
    (3) The department of housing preservation  and  development  in  such
  city   may  promulgate  rules  to  carry  out  the  provisions  of  this
  subdivision, and may require  a  reasonable  filing  fee  in  an  amount
  provided by such rules.

Affordable New York Housing Program. 1. The following terms,
  whenever used or referred to in this section, shall have  the  following
  meaning, unless a different meaning clearly appears in the context.
    a.  "Adjusted Monthly Rent." The rent payable per month as provided in
  the first effective lease or occupancy agreement upon initial  occupancy
  of  a  rental  dwelling  unit  of a multiple dwelling after construction
  aided by exemption under this section less the cost of providing parking
  facilities and electricity, gas, cooking fuel and other utilities  other
  than heat and hot water to occupants of such dwelling units.
    b.  "Floor  area."  The  horizontal areas of the several floors or any
  portion thereof of a dwelling or dwellings and accessory structures on a
  lot measured from the exterior faces  of  exterior  walls  or  from  the
  center line of party walls.
    c.  "Multiple  Dwelling."  A  dwelling  which  is to be occupied or is
  occupied as the residence or home  of  three  or  more  families  living
  independently  of  one another, whether such dwelling is rented or owned
  as a cooperative or condominium. A new multiple dwelling  shall  include
  new  residential  construction and the concurrent conversion, alteration
  or improvement of a pre-existing building or structure provided that (i)
  for all tax lots  now  existing  or  hereafter  created,  no  more  than
  forty-nine  percent of the floor area (as defined in paragraph b of this
  subdivision) of the  multiple  dwelling  consists  of  the  pre-existing
  building  or structure that was converted, altered or improved, and (ii)
  for tax lots in the city of New York now existing or  hereafter  created
  within  the  following  area  in  the  borough  of  Manhattan,  the  new
  residential construction and/or the concurrent conversion, alteration or
  improvement of the pre-existing building or  structure  is  aided  by  a
  grant,  loan  or  subsidy  from  any  federal,  state or local agency or
  instrumentality: beginning at the  intersection  of  the  United  States
  pierhead line in the Hudson river and the center line of Chambers street
  extended,  thence  easterly  to  the  center line of Chambers street and
  continuing along the center line of Chambers street to the  center  line
  of  Centre  street,  thence  southerly  along  the center line of Centre
  street to the center line of the Brooklyn Bridge to the intersection  of
  the  Brooklyn  Bridge  and  the  United States pierhead line in the East
  river, thence northerly along the United States  pierhead  line  in  the
  East  river  and  the  center line of one hundred tenth street extended,
  thence westerly to the center line  of  one  hundred  tenth  street  and
  continuing  along  the  center  line  of one hundred tenth street to its
  westerly terminus, thence westerly to the  intersection  of  the  center
  line of one hundred tenth street extended and the United States pierhead
  line  in  the  Hudson  river,  thence  southerly along the United States
  pierhead line in the Hudson river to the point of beginning.
    d. "Room Count." Two and one-half rooms for each  dwelling  unit  plus
  one  room  for  each  bedroom  plus  one  room  for each additional room
  separated by either walls or doors plus one-half  room  for  a  balcony,
  provided  that  kitchens, bathrooms or corridors shall not count as such
  additional rooms.
    2. (a) (i) Within a city having a population of one million  or  more,
  new multiple dwellings, except hotels, shall be exempt from taxation for
  local  purposes,  other than assessments for local improvements, for the
  tax year or years immediately following taxable status  dates  occurring
  subsequent   to   the  commencement  and  prior  to  the  completion  of
  construction, but not to exceed three such tax years, and shall continue
  to be exempt from such taxation in tax years immediately  following  the
  taxable  status  date  first  occurring  after  the  expiration  of  the
  exemption herein conferred during construction so long as  used  at  the
  completion  of  construction  for  dwelling purposes for a period not to

  exceed ten  years  in  the  aggregate  after  the  taxable  status  date
  immediately following the completion thereof, as follows:
    (A)  except as otherwise provided herein there shall be full exemption
  from taxation during the period of construction or the period  of  three
  years  immediately  following  commencement  of  construction, whichever
  expires sooner, and for two years following such period;
    (B) followed by two years of exemption from eighty per  cent  of  such
  taxation;
    (C)  followed  by  two  years of exemption from sixty per cent of such
  taxation;
    (D) followed by two years of exemption from forty  per  cent  of  such
  taxation;
    (E)  followed  by  two years of exemption from twenty per cent of such
  taxation;
    The following table  shall  illustrate  the  computation  of  the  tax
  exemption:
 
                 CONSTRUCTION OF CERTAIN MULTIPLE DWELLINGS
 
                                                    Exemption
  During Construction (maximum three years)         100%
  Following completion of work
  Year:
 
   1                                                100%
   2                                                100
   3                                                 80
   4                                                 80
   5                                                 60
   6                                                 60
   7                                                 40
   8                                                 40
   9                                                 20
  10                                                 20
 
    (ii)  (A) Within a city having a population of one million or more the
  local housing agency may adopt  rules  and  regulations  providing  that
  except  in  areas  excluded  by local law new multiple dwellings, except
  hotels, shall be exempt from taxation for  local  purposes,  other  than
  assessments   for   local  improvements,  for  the  tax  year  or  years
  immediately following taxable status dates occurring subsequent  to  the
  commencement  and  prior  to  the completion of construction, but not to
  exceed three such tax years, and shall continue to be exempt  from  such
  taxation  in  tax  years  immediately  following the taxable status date
  first occurring after the expiration of the exemption  herein  conferred
  during   such  construction  so  long  as  used  at  the  completion  of
  construction for dwelling purposes for a period not  to  exceed  fifteen
  years in the aggregate, as follows:
    a.  except  as otherwise provided herein there shall be full exemption
  from taxation during the period of construction or the period  of  three
  years  immediately  following  commencement  of  construction, whichever
  expires sooner, and for eleven years following such period;
    b. followed by one year of  exemption  from  eighty  percent  of  such
  taxation;
    c.  followed  by  one  year  of  exemption  from sixty percent of such
  taxation;
    d. followed by one year  of  exemption  from  forty  percent  of  such
  taxation;

    e.  followed  by  one  year  of  exemption from twenty percent of such
  taxation.
    (B)  The benefits of this subparagraph shall not be available in areas
  made ineligible for the benefits of this section by a local law  enacted
  pursuant   to   paragraph  (i)  of  subdivision  two  of  this  section,
  notwithstanding any exceptions to ineligibility contained in such  local
  law for certain types of projects in such areas.
    (C) Unless excluded by local law, in the city of New York the benefits
  of  this subparagraph shall be available in the borough of Manhattan for
  tax lots now existing or hereafter  created  south  of  or  adjacent  to
  either side of one hundred tenth street only if:
    a.  the construction is carried out with the substantial assistance of
  grants, loans or subsidies from any federal, state or  local  agency  or
  instrumentality, or
    b. the local housing agency has imposed a requirement or has certified
  that  twenty  percent  of the units be affordable to families of low and
  moderate income.
    The following table shall illustrate the computation of the exemption:
 
                 CONSTRUCTION OF CERTAIN MULTIPLE DWELLINGS
 
                                                    Exemption
  During Construction (maximum three years)         100%
  Following completion of work
  Year:
   1 through 11                                     100%
  12                                                 80
  13                                                 60
  14                                                 40
  15                                                 20
 
    (iii) (A) Within a city having a population of one million or more the
  local housing agency may adopt rules and regulations providing that  new
  multiple  dwellings,  except  hotels,  shall be exempt from taxation for
  local purposes, other than assessments for local improvements,  for  the
  tax  year  or years immediately following taxable status dates occurring
  subsequent  to  the  commencement  and  prior  to  the   completion   of
  construction, but not to exceed three such tax years, and shall continue
  to  be  exempt from such taxation in tax years immediately following the
  taxable  status  date  first  occurring  after  the  expiration  of  the
  exemption  herein  conferred during such construction so long as used at
  the completion of construction for dwelling purposes for a period not to
  exceed twenty-five years in the aggregate, provided  that  the  area  in
  which  the  project  is  situated is a neighborhood preservation program
  area as determined by  the  local  housing  agency  as  of  June  first,
  nineteen  hundred eighty-five, or is a neighborhood preservation area as
  determined by the New York city planning commission as  of  June  first,
  nineteen  hundred  eighty-five,  or  is  an  area  that was eligible for
  mortgage insurance provided by  the  rehabilitation  mortgage  insurance
  corporation  as  of May first, nineteen hundred ninety-two or is an area
  receiving funding for a neighborhood preservation  project  pursuant  to
  the  neighborhood reinvestment corporation act (42 U.S.C. §§180 et seq.)
  as of June first, nineteen hundred eighty-five, as follows:
    a. except as otherwise provided herein there shall be  full  exemption
  from  taxation  during the period of construction or the period of three
  years immediately  following  commencement  of  construction,  whichever
  expires sooner, and for twenty-one years following such period;

    b.  followed  by  one  year  of  exemption from eighty percent of such
  taxation;
    c.  followed  by  one  year  of  exemption  from sixty percent of such
  taxation;
    d. followed by one year  of  exemption  from  forty  percent  of  such
  taxation;
    e.  followed  by  one  year  of  exemption from twenty percent of such
  taxation.
    (B) The benefits of this subparagraph shall not be available in  areas
  made  ineligible for the benefits of this section by a local law enacted
  pursuant  to  paragraph  (i)  of  subdivision  two  of   this   section,
  notwithstanding  any exceptions to ineligibility contained in such local
  law for certain types of projects.
    (C) Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  item  (A)  or  (D)  of  this
  subparagraph,  in the city of New York the benefits of this subparagraph
  shall not be available in the borough of  Manhattan  for  tax  lots  now
  existing or hereafter created south of or adjacent to either side of one
  hundred tenth street.
    (D)  In addition to being available in the areas described in item (A)
  of this subparagraph, the  benefits  made  available  pursuant  to  this
  subparagraph shall be available where:
    a.  the construction is carried out with the substantial assistance of
  grants, loans or subsidies from any federal, state or  local  agency  or
  instrumentality, or
    b. the local housing agency has imposed a requirement or has certified
  that  twenty  percent  of the units be affordable to families of low and
  moderate income.
    The following table shall illustrate the computation of the exemption:
 
                 CONSTRUCTION OF CERTAIN MULTIPLE DWELLINGS
 
                                                    Exemption
  During Construction (maximum three years)         100%
  Following completion of work
  Year:
   1 through 21                                     100%
  22                                                 80
  23                                                 60
  24                                                 40
  25                                                 20
 
    (E) A new multiple dwelling that is situated  in  (1)  a  neighborhood
  preservation  program  area  as  determined by the department of housing
  preservation  and  development  as  of  June  first,  nineteen   hundred
  eighty-five,  (2)  a neighborhood preservation area as determined by the
  New York city planning commission as of  June  first,  nineteen  hundred
  eighty-five,  (3)  an  area  that  was  eligible  for mortgage insurance
  provided by the rehabilitation mortgage insurance corporation as of  May
  first, nineteen hundred ninety-two, or (4) an area receiving funding for
  a   neighborhood  preservation  project  pursuant  to  the  neighborhood
  reinvestment corporation act (42 U.S.C. §§ 8101  et  seq.)  as  of  June
  first,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-five,  shall  not  be eligible for the
  benefits available pursuant to this subparagraph unless it complies with
  the provisions of subdivision seven of this section.
    (iv) (A) Unless excluded by local law, in the city of  New  York,  the
  benefits  of  this  subparagraph  shall  be  available in the borough of
  Manhattan for new  multiple  dwellings  on  tax  lots  now  existing  or
  hereafter  created  south  of  or adjacent to either side of one hundred

  tenth street that  commence  construction  after  July  first,  nineteen
  hundred  ninety-two and on or before December thirty-first, two thousand
  fifteen provided, however, that such a multiple  dwelling  receives  its
  first  temporary  or  permanent  certificate  of  occupancy covering all
  residential areas on  or  before  December  thirty-first,  two  thousand
  nineteen,  and  solely  for  purposes of determining whether this clause
  applies and notwithstanding any local law to  the  contrary,  "commence"
  shall  mean  the  date upon which excavation and construction of initial
  footings and foundations lawfully  begins  in  good  faith  or,  for  an
  eligible  conversion, the date upon which the actual construction of the
  conversion, alteration or improvement of the  pre-existing  building  or
  structure lawfully begins in good faith, only if:
    a.  the construction is carried out with the substantial assistance of
  grants, loans or subsidies from any federal, state or  local  agency  or
  instrumentality, or
    b. the local housing agency has imposed a requirement or has certified
  that  twenty  percent of the units are affordable to families of low and
  moderate income.
    (B) Such new multiple dwellings, except hotels, shall be  exempt  from
  taxation   for   local   purposes,  other  than  assessments  for  local
  improvements for the tax year or  years  immediately  following  taxable
  status  dates  occurring subsequent to the commencement and prior to the
  completion of construction, but not to exceed three such tax years,  and
  shall  continue to be exempt from such taxation in tax years immediately
  following the taxable status dates first occurring after the  expiration
  of  the  exemption  herein conferred during such construction so long as
  used at the completion of  construction  for  dwelling  purposes  for  a
  period not to exceed twenty years in the aggregate, as follows:
    a.  except as otherwise provided herein, there shall be full exemption
  from taxation during the period of construction or the period  of  three
  years  immediately  following  commencement  of  construction, whichever
  expires sooner, and for twelve years following such period;
    b. followed by two years of exemption  from  eighty  percent  of  such
  taxation;
    c.  followed  by  two  years  of  exemption from sixty percent of such
  taxation;
    d. followed by two years of  exemption  from  forty  percent  of  such
  taxation;
    e.  followed  by  two  years  of exemption from twenty percent of such
  taxation.
    The following table shall illustrate the computation of the exemption:
 
                 CONSTRUCTION OF CERTAIN MULTIPLE DWELLINGS
 
  During construction (maximum three years)              Exemption 100%
  Following completion of work year:
                    1 through 12                         100%
                      13-14                               80%
                      15-16                               60%
                      17-18                               40%
                      19-20                               20%
 
    (b) In addition to the taxes payable pursuant to the table above,  the
  owner shall pay in each tax year in which such full or partial exemption
  is in effect, real property taxes and assessments as follows:
    (i) real property taxes on the assessed valuation of such land and any
  improvements  thereon  in  effect  during  the  tax  year  preceding the
  commencement of such construction without regard  to  any  exemption  or

  abatement   from   real  property  taxation  in  effect  prior  to  such
  construction which real property taxes shall be calculated  on  the  tax
  rate in effect at the time such taxes are due; and
    (ii) all assessments for local improvements.
    (c)  Such  multiple  dwellings  shall  be  eligible for exemption from
  taxation pursuant to this section only if:
    (i) exemption from taxes is not  availed  of  concurrently  under  any
  other  law and that on or after July first, nineteen hundred seventy-six
  no preliminary certificate of eligibility or certificate of  eligibility
  issued  under  this section may be rescinded by the local housing agency
  to avail the property of the benefits of tax exemption or tax  abatement
  for rehabilitation or new construction under the provisions of any other
  law,  but  that  prior  to  July first, nineteen hundred seventy-six the
  local housing agency may rescind such certificates to avail the property
  of the benefits of tax exemption or tax abatement under  the  provisions
  of any other law;
    (ii)  construction  is commenced after January first, nineteen hundred
  seventy-five and  on  or  before  December  thirty-first,  two  thousand
  fifteen  provided,  however,  that (A) such a multiple dwelling receives
  its first temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy  covering  all
  residential  areas  on  or  before  December  thirty-first, two thousand
  nineteen,  (B)  solely  for  purposes  of   determining   whether   this
  subparagraph  applies and notwithstanding any local law to the contrary,
  "commence" shall mean the date upon which excavation and construction of
  initial footings and foundations lawfully begins in good faith  or,  for
  an  eligible  conversion, the date upon which the actual construction of
  the conversion, alteration or improvement of the  pre-existing  building
  or  structure  lawfully  begins in good faith, and (C) such commencement
  period shall not apply to multiple dwellings eligible for benefits under
  subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (a) of this subdivision;
    (iii) in the event that, immediately  prior  to  commencement  of  new
  construction,  such  land  was  improved  with a residential building or
  buildings that have since been substantially  demolished,  and  the  new
  building or buildings contain more than twenty dwelling units, then such
  new  construction  shall  contain  at least five dwelling units for each
  class A dwelling unit in existence immediately prior to  the  demolition
  preceding construction; and
    (iv)  in  the  event  that  a  project contains more than 100 dwelling
  units, at least 15 per cent of the dwelling units contain at least three
  and one-half rooms and at least  10  per  cent  of  the  dwelling  units
  contain  at  least  four  and  one-half rooms, unless a waiver from such
  requirements is granted by the local housing agency based on hardship.
    (d) As of July first, nineteen hundred seventy-five, if the  aggregate
  floor  area  of  commercial,  community facility and accessory use space
  exceeds twelve per cent of the aggregate floor area, as defined  herein,
  of  any  building  granted  tax exemption pursuant to this section on or
  subsequent to July first, nineteen hundred  seventy-one,  tax  exemption
  shall  be  reduced  by  an amount equal to the per cent of the aggregate
  floor area by which the aggregate floor area  of  commercial,  community
  facility  and  accessory  use  space  exceeds  twelve  per  cent  of the
  aggregate floor area of the building provided, however,  that  accessory
  use  space  shall  not  include  accessory parking located not more than
  twenty-three feet above the  curb  level  and  provided,  further,  that
  whenever  a  building containing two or more separately assessed parcels
  of real property has commercial, community facility  and  accessory  use
  space  in  excess  of  such  twelve  percent, the tax arising out of the
  reduction in exemption for such excess space shall  not  be  apportioned
  pro  rata  among  all of the separately assessed parcels in the building

  but shall be applied first to those separately  assessed  parcels  which
  are  unrelated  to  the  residential use of the building; and only after
  such unrelated parcels are fully taxable shall the remainder of such tax
  be  apportioned pro rata among the remaining separately assessed parcels
  and provided further, that no such exemption for  commercial,  community
  facility  and  accessory  use  space  shall  be applicable prior to July
  first, nineteen hundred seventy-five. To be eligible for exemption under
  this  section  such  construction  shall  take  place  on  land   which,
  thirty-six  months  prior  to the commencement of such construction, was
  vacant,  predominantly  vacant,  under-utilized,  or  improved  with   a
  non-conforming   use,  provided  that  if  such  new  multiple  dwelling
  displaces or replaces a  building  or  buildings  containing  more  than
  twenty-five   occupied   dwelling   units   in   existence  on  December
  thirty-first, nineteen hundred seventy-four and administered  under  the
  local  emergency housing rent control act, the rent stabilization law of
  nineteen hundred sixty-nine, or the emergency tenant protection  act  of
  nineteen  seventy-four, such new multiple dwelling shall not be eligible
  in the city of New York unless a certificate of eviction has been issued
  for any of the displaced  or  replaced  units  pursuant  to  the  powers
  granted  by  the  city  rent  and rehabilitation law, and that the sale,
  transfer or utilization of air rights over  residential  buildings  that
  were  not  demolished  shall  not  be  construed  as  a  displacement or
  replacement of the  dwelling  units  contained  within  those  buildings
  within the meaning of this subdivision.
    (e) Any provision of this section to the contrary notwithstanding, the
  following properties shall not be eligible for exemption:
    (i)  any  multiple dwelling located in any geographical area where the
  exemption is eliminated by regulations promulgated by the local  housing
  agency, pursuant to subdivision three of this section, upon a finding by
  the  local  housing  agency  that the need for the tax incentive in such
  area has been significantly reduced, or that an area should be preserved
  for mainly non-residential purposes in accordance with  local  municipal
  policy;  unless  construction actually commenced prior to January first,
  nineteen hundred eighty-two; provided  that  the  local  housing  agency
  shall  not  reduce  or eliminate such exemption with respect to multiple
  dwellings of less than four stories in height, as stories are defined in
  the multiple dwelling law, except in areas to be  preserved  for  mainly
  non-residential  purposes  provided further that no regulation regarding
  such geographical limitation shall eliminate benefits available pursuant
  to this section for construction which is  commenced  within  two  years
  from  the  effective  date  of  such  regulation,  except in areas to be
  preserved for mainly non-residential purposes;
    (ii) any land which is mapped as a  public  park,  provided,  however,
  that  this  exclusion  from eligibility for exemption shall not apply to
  any land which has been mapped as a public park but which, for a  period
  of  ten  years  or  more  after  the  date of such mapping, has not been
  acquired by the state or the city in which such land is located and with
  respect to which land the local department of parks and  recreation  has
  determined  that such land is not required for public park purposes, and
  that such department has no intention of acquiring such land and that no
  funds have been allocated for such purpose;
    (iii) any land which has been utilized for  ten  or  more  consecutive
  years prior to October first, nineteen hundred seventy-one as a "private
  park" as hereinafter defined. A private park is a privately owned zoning
  lot  in  a densely developed area having a minimum size of four thousand
  square feet, free of all developments and containing only trees,  grass,
  benches,   walkways   and   passive  recreational  facilities  including
  structures incidental thereto which has been used and maintained  during

  said period for such passive recreational activity by the general public
  without  charge with the consent and participation of the owner thereof;
  where construction is commenced after  December  thirty-first,  nineteen
  hundred seventy-two, eligibility shall be determined on the basis of the
  condition  of  the  land  on  the first day of October, nineteen hundred
  seventy-one.
    (f)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  any  local  law   for   the
  stabilization  of  rents  in  multiple dwellings or the emergency tenant
  protection act of nineteen seventy-four, the rents of a  unit  shall  be
  fully subject to control under such local law or such act, unless exempt
  under  such  local  law  or  such  act  from  control  by  reason of the
  cooperative or condominium status of the unit,  for  the  entire  period
  during  which  the  property  is receiving tax benefits pursuant to this
  section for the period any such applicable law  or  act  is  in  effect,
  whichever  is  shorter.  Thereafter,  such  rents  shall  continue to be
  subject to such control to the same extent and in the same manner as  if
  this  section had never applied thereto, except that such rents shall be
  decontrolled if:
    (i) with respect to units subject to the provisions of this section on
  the effective date of this subparagraph such a unit becomes vacant after
  the expiration of such  ten  year  period  or  applicable  law  or  act;
  provided,  however,  that such units may be decontrolled pursuant to the
  rent regulation reform act of 1993 and provided further  that  the  rent
  shall  not  be decontrolled for a unit which the commissioner of housing
  and community renewal or a court of competent jurisdiction finds  became
  vacant  because  the landlord or any person acting on his behalf engaged
  in any course of conduct, including but not limited to, interruption  or
  discontinuance  of essential services which interfered with or disturbed
  or was intended to interfere with or disturb the comfort, repose,  peace
  or  quiet  of the tenant in his use or occupancy of such unit, and, that
  upon such finding in addition to being subject to any other penalties or
  remedies permitted by law, the landlord of such  unit  shall  be  barred
  from  collecting  rent  for  such  unit in excess of that charged to the
  tenant who vacated such unit until restoration  of  possession  of  such
  tenant,  if the tenant so desires, in which case the rent of such tenant
  shall be established as if such tenant had not  vacated  such  unit,  or
  compliance  with  such  other remedy, including, but not limited to, all
  remedies provided for by the emergency tenant protection act of nineteen
  seventy-four for rent overcharge or failure to comply with any order  of
  the   commissioner  of  housing  and  community  renewal,  as  shall  be
  determined by the commissioner of housing and community  renewal  to  be
  appropriate;  provided,  however,  that  if a tenant fails to accept any
  such offer of restoration of possession, such unit shall return to  rent
  stabilization at the previously regulated rent; or
    (ii)  with  respect to units which become subject to the provisions of
  this section after the effective date of  this  subparagraph,  such  tax
  benefit period as provided in the opening paragraph of this paragraph or
  applicable  law  or  act  shall  have  expired and either each lease and
  renewal thereof for such unit for the tenant in residence at the time of
  such decontrol has included a notice  in  at  least  twelve  point  type
  informing  such  tenant  that  the  unit  shall  become  subject to such
  decontrol upon the expiration of such tax benefit period as provided  in
  the  opening  paragraph  of  this paragraph or applicable law or act and
  states the approximate date on which such tax benefit period as provided
  in the opening paragraph of this paragraph is scheduled  to  expire;  or
  such  unit  becomes  vacant  as  provided under subparagraph (i) of this
  paragraph.

    (g)  For  purposes  of  this  section  construction  shall  be  deemed
  "commenced" when excavation or alteration has begun in good faith on the
  basis of approved construction plans.
    (h)  Anything  in  this  section to the contrary notwithstanding, with
  regard to a  project  consisting  of  two  or  more  multiple  dwellings
  constructed on a contiguous site and containing an aggregate of not less
  than  one thousand dwelling units, each of such multiple dwellings shall
  be entitled to the exemption set forth herein provided  construction  of
  such  project  be  commenced  before  January  first,  nineteen  hundred
  seventy-eight and completed no later than a date certain  fixed  by  the
  local  housing  agency  not  to  exceed  four  years  from  the  date of
  commencement of construction of such project.
    (i) Authority  of  city  to  enact  local  law.  Except  as  otherwise
  specified  in  this  section, a city to which this section is applicable
  may enact a local law to restrict, limit or condition  the  eligibility,
  scope  or  amount  of  the  benefits  under  this  section in any manner
  provided that such  local  law  may  not  grant  benefits  beyond  those
  provided  in  this  section and provided further that in the city of New
  York such local law shall not take effect sooner than one year after  it
  is  enacted.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of any local
  law shall  not  alter  the  effect  of  subdivisions  twelve,  thirteen,
  fourteen,  and  fifteen  of  this section as they apply on the effective
  date of such subdivisions, notwithstanding any subsequent amendments  to
  the provisions of law referred to in such subdivisions.
    (j)   Voluntary   renunciation  or  termination.  Notwithstanding  the
  provisions of any general, special or local  law  to  the  contrary,  an
  owner shall not be entitled to voluntarily renounce or terminate any tax
  exemption  granted pursuant to this subdivision unless the local housing
  agency authorizes such renunciation or termination  in  connection  with
  the  commencement  of a new tax exemption pursuant to either the private
  housing finance law or section four hundred twenty-c of this title.
    3. a. Application forms for exemption  under  this  section  shall  be
  filed with the assessors between February first and March fifteenth and,
  based  on  the  certification  of  the  local  housing  agency as herein
  provided, the assessors shall certify  to  the  collecting  officer  the
  amount  of  taxes  to  be  abated.  If there be in a city of one million
  population or more a department of housing preservation and development,
  the term "housing agency" shall mean only  such  department  of  housing
  preservation  and  development. No such application shall be accepted by
  the assessors unless accompanied by a certificate of the  local  housing
  agency  certifying  the applicant's eligibility pursuant to subdivisions
  two and four of this section. No such certification of eligibility shall
  be issued by the local housing agency until such agency  determines  the
  initial  adjusted  monthly rent to be paid by tenants residing in rental
  dwelling  units  contained  within  the  multiple   dwelling   and   the
  comparative  adjusted  monthly  rent  that would have to be paid by such
  tenants if no tax exemption were applicable as provided by this section.
  The initial adjusted monthly rent will be certified by the local housing
  agency as the first rent for the subject dwelling units. A copy of  such
  certification  with  respect  to  such  units  shall  be attached by the
  applicant to the first  effective  lease  or  occupancy  agreement.  The
  initial  adjusted  monthly  rent  shall  reflect  the full tax exemption
  benefits as approved by the agency.
    The agency shall determine the amount of the initial adjusted  monthly
  rent as follows:
    (i) The total project cost shall be determined by adding the following
  items:

    (a)  Land  acquisition cost or purchase price, if purchased within two
  years  prior  to  the  date  on  which  construction  or  alteration  is
  commenced;  or  land  acquisition cost or purchase price or an appraisal
  prepared by a qualified  independent  appraiser,  in  such  form  as  is
  acceptable to the agency, if purchased more than two years prior to such
  date.  Land  acquisition  cost  or  purchase price, where used, shall be
  certified to by an independent certified public accountant;
    (b)  Costs  incurred  in  the  process  of  preparing  the  site   for
  construction,  including but not limited to operating losses, relocation
  expenses, demolition expenses and carrying charges,  such  costs  to  be
  certified  by  an  independent certified public accountant to a date not
  more than ninety  days  prior  to  the  filing  of  an  application  for
  certification  of  eligibility  and  the  balance  of  such  costs to be
  estimated;
    (c) Construction costs for constructing or rehabilitating the multiple
  dwelling as determined by the agency in accordance with subdivision four
  of this section, plus such  amount,  if  any,  representing  unique  and
  special  costs as may be allowed by the agency for a particular multiple
  dwelling;
    (d) An allowance for  estimated  off-site  costs,  including  but  not
  limited  to  architects,  engineers  and  legal fees, interest and taxes
  during construction, insurance, title and mortgage fees,  as  determined
  by the agency in accordance with subdivision four of this section, and
    (e)  such  other amounts as are ordinarily and customarily incurred in
  connection  with  the  construction  or  rehabilitation  of  a  multiple
  dwelling,  as  determined  by  the agency in accordance with subdivision
  four of this section.
    (ii) The total expenses of the multiple dwelling shall  be  determined
  by adding the following items:
    (a)  The amount that the agency determines to be the reasonable annual
  costs for the continuing  maintenance  and  operation  of  the  multiple
  dwelling in accordance with subdivision four of this section;
    (b)  The amount that the agency determines to be an appropriate annual
  provision for vacancies, contingency reserves  and  management  fees  in
  accordance with subdivision four of this section.
    (c)  The  projected  real  property taxes to be levied on the multiple
  dwelling and the land on which it is situated at the time  of  estimated
  initial occupancy;
    (d)  Fourteen  (14) per cent of the total project cost, as hereinabove
  defined, which amount will include all expenses for debt service; and
    (e) Deducting from said  total  the  estimated  annual  income  to  be
  derived  from  any commercial, community facility or accessory use space
  in the building.
    (iii) The total expenses shall be divided by the room count to provide
  the adjusted monthly rent per room per month.
    (iv) The adjusted monthly rent per room per month shall be  multiplied
  by  the  room  count of each rental dwelling unit to provide the initial
  adjusted monthly rent for such  dwelling  unit.  The  agency  may  allow
  adjustments  in  the  initial  adjusted  monthly rent for any particular
  dwelling units provided that the total of the initial  adjusted  monthly
  rents  for all of the rental dwelling units in a multiple dwelling shall
  not exceed the total expenses of such multiple dwelling.
    The agency shall determine the estimated comparative adjusted  monthly
  rent  that  would have to be paid if no tax exemption were applicable as
  provided by this section by adding to the adjusted monthly rent for each
  dwelling unit as  hereinabove  computed  an  amount  equal  to  (a)  the
  difference  between  the  projected  real  property taxes which would be
  levied on the multiple dwelling and the land on which it is situated  at

  the time estimated initial occupancy if no tax abatement were applicable
  as  provided  by  this  section  and  the  projected real property taxes
  hereinabove  utilized  in  connection  with  the  computation  of  total
  expenses;  (b)  divided  by  the  room count of the building as per this
  section; and (c) multiplied by the applicants  approved  room  count  of
  each such dwelling unit.
    The local housing agency may promulgate rules and regulations to carry
  out the provisions of this section, not inconsistent with the provisions
  hereof, and may require a reasonable filing fee in an amount provided by
  such rules and regulations.
    b. Notwithstanding the provisions of any general, special or local law
  to  the  contrary,  the  local  housing  agency may require by rule that
  applications be filed electronically.
    4. a. After a public  hearing  the  housing  agency  shall  promulgate
  annually  to  take  effect  as of January first of each year the amounts
  that it determines to be the reasonable amounts in such  categories  and
  classifications  as  may  be established by the housing agency, for such
  items as are generally applicable to all developments and  are  required
  to  be  determined  pursuant to subdivision three of this section, which
  amounts  shall  be  filed  with  the  city  clerk  and  published  in  a
  publication  of  general  circulation in the city or the city record, if
  any, upon adoption by the housing agency.
    b. The local housing agency may require a filing fee not to exceed the
  greater of (i) four-tenths of one percent of the total project cost,  or
  (ii)  if  the  building  will  be owned as a cooperative or condominium,
  four-tenths of one percent of the total project cost or  four-tenths  of
  one  percent  of  the  total  project  sell-out price stated in the last
  amendment to the offering plan  accepted  for  filing  by  the  attorney
  general of the state, at the option of the applicant. Such total project
  cost  or  total  project  sell-out price shall be determined pursuant to
  rules promulgated by  the  local  housing  agency.  Notwithstanding  the
  foregoing,  the  local  housing  agency may promulgate rules imposing an
  additional fee if an application, or any part thereof, or submission  in
  connection therewith, is defective and such defect delays the processing
  of  such  application  or  causes  the  local  housing  agency to expend
  additional resources in the processing of such application.
    c. The local housing agency may rely on certification by an  architect
  or  engineer  submitted by an applicant in connection with the filing of
  an  application  for  benefits  pursuant  to  this  section.   A   false
  certification  by  such  architect  or  engineer  shall  be deemed to be
  professional misconduct pursuant to section sixty-five hundred  nine  of
  the  education  law.  Any licensee found guilty of such misconduct under
  the procedures prescribed in  section  sixty-five  hundred  ten  of  the
  education  law  shall  be subject to the penalties prescribed in section
  sixty-five  hundred  eleven  of  such  law,  and  shall  thereafter   be
  ineligible to submit a certification pursuant to this section.
    5.  An  applicant  for  tax exemption under this section whose project
  contains  more  than  twenty  dwelling  units  shall  notify  the  local
  community  planning  board  for  the  area  which  is the subject of the
  application within ten days of submission  of  the  application  to  the
  local  housing  agency.  The local community planning board shall have a
  forty-five day period to file objections to the applicant's  eligibility
  under  subdivision two of this section, or to the applicant's failure to
  comply with the standards adopted  by  the  agency  in  accordance  with
  subdivision  four  of this section. The local community board may within
  such time in its own discretion  hold  a  public  hearing  to  determine
  whether  or not any objections as to eligibility should be filed. In the
  event the local community board files such objections, the local housing

  agency  shall  make  a  determination  and  notify  such  board   within
  forty-five  days.  When  an  applicant's  project contains more than one
  hundred fifty dwelling units the local community board may within thirty
  days of receipt of an applicant's notification request the local housing
  agency  to  and  the  local  housing  agency shall hold a public hearing
  solely on the questions of the applicant's eligibility under subdivision
  two of this section or  the  applicant's  failure  to  comply  with  the
  standards  adopted  by  the  agency pursuant to subdivision four of this
  section. The local housing agency shall hold this hearing and  make  its
  determination and notify such board within forty-five days.
    6.  (a)  When  used  in  this  subdivision  unless a different meaning
  clearly appears from the context, the following  terms  shall  mean  and
  include:
    (i)   "Covered  project."  (A)  A  new  building  located  within  the
  Greenpoint - Williamsburg waterfront exclusion area,  (B)  two  or  more
  buildings  which are part of one contiguous development entirely located
  within the Greenpoint - Williamsburg waterfront exclusion area, (C)  two
  or more buildings which are located within the Greenpoint - Williamsburg
  waterfront  exclusion  area  and are part of a single development parcel
  specifically  identified  in  section  62-831  of   the   local   zoning
  resolution,  or  (D) where so authorized in writing by the local housing
  agency,  one  or  more  buildings  located  within  the   Greenpoint   -
  Williamsburg waterfront exclusion area and one or more buildings located
  outside  the  Greenpoint  -  Williamsburg  waterfront exclusion area but
  within Community District Number One in the  borough  of  Brooklyn.  The
  cumulative  number  of affordable units located outside the Greenpoint -
  Williamsburg waterfront exclusion area in all covered projects described
  in clause (D) of this subparagraph  shall  not  exceed  two  hundred.  A
  building  located  outside  the  Greenpoint  -  Williamsburg  waterfront
  exclusion area which is part of a covered project  described  in  clause
  (D)  of  this  subparagraph  shall not contain any affordable units with
  respect to which an application pending before a governmental entity  on
  the  effective date of this subdivision or a written agreement in effect
  on the effective date of this subdivision provided for  the  development
  of such affordable units.
    (ii)  "Greenpoint  -  Williamsburg waterfront exclusion area." Any tax
  lots now existing or hereafter created which are located entirely within
  the geographic area in the borough of Brooklyn bounded and described  as
  follows:
    BEGINNING  at  the intersection of the bulkhead line in the East River
  and South Fifth Street extended; thence easterly to South  Fifth  Street
  and  continuing  along  South  Fifth  Street to the intersection of Kent
  Avenue; thence northerly along Kent Avenue to the intersection of  South
  Fourth  Street, thence easterly along South Fourth Street to a point 320
  feet from Kent Avenue; thence northerly to a point on South Third Street
  320 feet from Kent Avenue; thence westerly on South Third Street to  the
  intersection  of  Kent Avenue; thence northerly along Kent Avenue to the
  intersection of Grand Street; thence westerly along Grand Street to  the
  intersection of River Street; thence northerly along River Street to the
  intersection  of  North  Third Street; thence easterly along North Third
  Street to the intersection of Kent Avenue; thence northerly  along  Kent
  Avenue  to  the  intersection of Franklin Street; thence northerly along
  Franklin Street to the intersection  of  Quay  Street;  thence  westerly
  along  Quay  Street to the intersection of West Street; thence northerly
  along West Street to the intersection of Eagle Street;  thence  easterly
  along  Eagle  Street  to  the  intersection  of  Franklin Street; thence
  northerly along Franklin Street to the intersection  of  Dupont  Street;
  thence  westerly  along  Dupont Street to the intersection of Commercial

  Street; thence northerly along Commercial Street to the intersection  of
  Manhattan  Avenue;  thence  northerly  along  Manhattan  Avenue  to  its
  northerly terminus; thence northerly to the  intersection  of  Manhattan
  Avenue  extended and the bulkhead line in Newtown Creek, thence westerly
  along the bulkhead line in Newtown Creek and continuing southerly  along
  the  United  States  pierhead  line  in  the  East River to the place of
  beginning; included in said area are all  piers  and  other  projections
  from the bulkhead line into the East River or Newtown Creek.
    (iii)  "Commencement date" shall mean, with respect to any building in
  a covered project and notwithstanding any local law to the contrary, the
  date upon which excavation and  construction  of  initial  footings  and
  foundations   lawfully   begins  in  good  faith  or,  for  an  eligible
  conversion,  the  date  upon  which  the  actual  construction  of   the
  conversion,  alteration  or  improvement of the pre-existing building or
  structure lawfully begins in good faith.
    (iv) "Completion date" shall  mean  the  date  upon  which  the  local
  department   of  buildings  issues  the  first  temporary  or  permanent
  certificate of occupancy covering all residential areas of a building in
  a covered project.
    (v) "Covered project agreement" shall mean an agreement  executed  and
  recorded  on  or before December thirty-first, two thousand fifteen, and
  not thereafter amended to  include  additional  real  property,  by  and
  between the owners of the real property containing all of the affordable
  units  and  the  market  units  which  will  constitute a single covered
  project as defined pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.
    (b) No  benefits  under  the  provisions  of  this  section  shall  be
  conferred on any building in a covered project located in the Greenpoint
  -  Williamsburg  waterfront  exclusion  area  unless  the  real property
  containing such building is identified in a covered  project  agreement,
  and  the  covered  project  that  includes  such  building shall provide
  affordable housing for persons and families of low and  moderate  income
  that meets one of the following conditions:
    (i)  not  less than twenty percent of the units in the covered project
  are affordable to and occupied or available for occupancy by individuals
  or families whose incomes at the time of initial occupancy do not exceed
  eighty percent of the area median incomes adjusted for family size,  and
  at  least  one  building  in such covered project that contains not less
  than twenty percent  of  its  dwelling  units  meeting  this  affordable
  housing  requirement  has  a  commencement  date  on  or before December
  thirty-first, two thousand fifteen and all  of  the  buildings  in  such
  covered  project that receive benefits pursuant to paragraph (f) of this
  subdivision have a completion date on  or  before  June  fifteenth,  two
  thousand twenty-five; or
    (ii) not less than ten percent of the units in the covered project are
  affordable  to and occupied or available for occupancy by individuals or
  families whose incomes at the time of initial occupancy  do  not  exceed
  eighty  percent  of the area median incomes adjusted for family size and
  not less than an additional fifteen percent of the units in the  covered
  project  are  affordable  to  and occupied or available for occupancy by
  individuals or families whose incomes at the time of  initial  occupancy
  do not exceed one hundred twenty-five percent of the area median incomes
  adjusted  for  family  size,  and  at least one building in such covered
  project that contains not less than twenty-five percent of its  dwelling
  units  meeting  this  affordable  housing requirement has a commencement
  date on or before December thirty-first, two thousand fifteen and all of
  the buildings in such covered project that receive benefits pursuant  to
  paragraph  (f)  of  this subdivision have a completion date on or before
  June fifteenth, two thousand twenty-five.

    (c) Unless affordable units are developed under a  federal,  state  or
  city program having contrary requirements, (i) all affordable units must
  have a comparable number of bedrooms as market rate units and a unit mix
  proportional to the market rate units, or (ii) at least fifty percent of
  the  affordable  units  must  have two or more bedrooms and no more than
  fifty percent of the remaining units can be smaller than one bedroom.
    (d) Unless affordable units are developed under  a  federal  or  state
  program  having  contrary requirements, residents of the local community
  shall have priority for the purchase or rental of fifty percent  of  the
  affordable units.
    (e)  In order to ensure that affordable units created pursuant to this
  subdivision will continue to be affordable for the life of  the  covered
  project,  the  local  housing agency shall employ mechanisms, including,
  but not limited to, regulatory  agreements,  deed  restrictions,  resale
  restrictions,  occupancy  requirements,  and  such  other instruments or
  requirements as  it  may  deem  necessary,  and  shall  establish  legal
  remedies to enforce such mechanisms.
    (f)  With  respect  to any covered project located entirely within the
  Greenpoint - Williamsburg waterfront exclusion area, the period  of  tax
  benefits  awarded  to  any building in such covered project shall be the
  same as  the  period  of  tax  benefits  awarded  under  clause  (D)  of
  subparagraph  (iii) of paragraph (a) of subdivision two of this section.
  With respect to any covered project which includes one or more buildings
  located outside the Greenpoint - Williamsburg waterfront exclusion area,
  the period of tax benefits awarded  to  any  building  in  such  covered
  project  that is located within the Greenpoint - Williamsburg waterfront
  exclusion area shall be the same as the period of tax  benefits  awarded
  under  clause  (A)  of subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (a) of subdivision
  two of this section.
    7. (a) For the purposes of this subdivision:
    (i) "affordable units" shall mean units which meet  the  affordability
  requirements set forth in paragraph (c) of this subdivision.
    (ii) "geographic exclusion areas" shall mean:
    (A) areas described in subdivision eleven of this section,
    (B)  in  the  borough  of Manhattan tax lots now existing or hereafter
  created south of or adjacent to either side of one hundred tenth street,
  and
    (C) areas made ineligible for the benefits of this section:
    (1) as set forth in section 11-245 of the administrative code  of  the
  city   of   New   York  on  the  effective  date  of  this  subdivision,
  notwithstanding any exceptions to ineligibility contained in such  local
  law for certain types of projects in such areas,
    (2)  as  set  forth in local law number fifty-eight of the city of New
  York for the year two thousand six, notwithstanding  any  exceptions  to
  ineligibility  contained in such local law for certain types of projects
  in such areas and notwithstanding the effective date of such law, and
    (3) by local law after the effective date of this subdivision.
    (b) Notwithstanding any provision of this section or any local law  to
  the  contrary,  the  benefits of this section shall not be available for
  new multiple dwellings located in  a  geographic  exclusion  area  which
  commence  construction  after December twenty-eighth, two thousand seven
  unless  they  comply  with  the  provisions  of  this  subdivision   for
  thirty-five  years  from  completion  of  construction  of  the building
  receiving benefits pursuant to this section.
    (c)(i) Not less than twenty percent  of  the  units  in  the  multiple
  dwelling must, upon the initial rental or sale of the units and upon all
  subsequent  rentals  of  the units after a vacancy, be affordable to and
  occupied or available for occupancy by  individuals  or  families  whose

  incomes  at the time of initial occupancy do not exceed sixty percent of
  the area median  incomes  adjusted  for  family  size  or  (ii)  if  the
  construction of such building is carried out with substantial assistance
  of grants, loans or subsidies from any federal, state or local agency or
  instrumentality  and  such  assistance is provided pursuant to a program
  for the development of affordable housing, not less than twenty  percent
  of  the units in the multiple dwelling must, either (A) upon the initial
  rental of the units and upon all subsequent rentals of the units after a
  vacancy, be affordable to and occupied or  available  for  occupancy  by
  individuals  or  families whose incomes at the time of initial occupancy
  do not exceed one hundred twenty percent  of  the  area  median  incomes
  adjusted  for family size and, where the multiple dwelling contains more
  than twenty-five units, do not exceed an average of  ninety  percent  of
  the  area  median  incomes  adjusted  for  family  size, or (B) upon the
  initial sale of the units, be affordable to and  occupied  or  available
  for  occupancy  by  individuals or families whose incomes at the time of
  initial occupancy do not exceed one hundred twenty-five percent  of  the
  area median incomes adjusted for family size.
    (d) Unless preempted by federal requirements:
    (i)  all affordable units must have a comparable number of bedrooms as
  market rate units and a unit mix proportional to the market rate  units,
  or  at least fifty percent of the affordable units must have two or more
  bedrooms and no more than fifty percent of the remaining  units  can  be
  smaller than one bedroom or in addition to the requirements of paragraph
  (c)  of  this subdivision, the floor area of affordable units is no less
  than twenty percent of the total floor area of all dwelling units;
    (ii) affordable units shall share the same common entrances and common
  areas as market rate units, and shall not  be  isolated  to  a  specific
  floor  or  area  of  a  building.  Common  entrances shall mean any area
  regularly used by any resident for ingress and egress  from  a  multiple
  dwelling; and
    (iii)  residents  of  the  community board where the multiple dwelling
  which receives the benefits provided in this section is  located  shall,
  upon  initial  occupancy,  have  priority  for the purchase or rental of
  fifty percent of the affordable units.
    (e) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the  contrary,  affordable
  rental  units must remain as rent stabilized units for thirty-five years
  from completion of construction provided that tenants  holding  a  lease
  and  in  occupancy  at  the  expiration of the rent stabilization period
  shall have the right to  remain  as  rent  stabilized  tenants  for  the
  duration of their occupancy.
    (f)  All affordable units must be situated onsite. For the purposes of
  this section,  "onsite"  shall  mean  that  affordable  units  shall  be
  situated within the building or buildings for which benefits pursuant to
  this section are being granted.
    (g)  The  limitations  on  eligibility  for benefits contained in this
  subdivision shall be in addition to those contained in this section  and
  in any other law or regulation.
    8. (a) As used in this subdivision, the following terms shall have the
  following meanings:
    (i)  "Applicant"  means  an  applicant  for  benefits pursuant to this
  section, any successor to such applicant, or any  employer  of  building
  service  employees  for such applicant, including, but not limited to, a
  property management company or contractor.
    (ii) "Building service employee" means any  person  who  is  regularly
  employed  at a building who performs work in connection with the care or
  maintenance of such building. "Building service employee" includes,  but
  is  not  limited to, watchman, guard, doorman, building cleaner, porter,

  handyman,  janitor,  gardener,  groundskeeper,  elevator  operator   and
  starter,  and  window  cleaner,  but shall not include persons regularly
  scheduled to work fewer than eight hours per week in the building.
    (iii)  "Fiscal  officer"  means  the  comptroller  or  other analogous
  officer in a city having a population of one million or more.
    (b) All building service employees employed  by  the  applicant  in  a
  building   whose   construction   commenced   on   or   after   December
  twenty-eighth,  two  thousand  seven  shall   receive   the   applicable
  prevailing wage for the duration of benefits pursuant to this section.
    (c)  The fiscal officer shall have the power to enforce the provisions
  of this subdivision. In enforcing such provisions,  the  fiscal  officer
  shall have the power:
    (i)  to  investigate or cause an investigation to be made to determine
  the prevailing wages for building  service  employees;  in  making  such
  investigation,  the  fiscal  officer may utilize wage and fringe benefit
  data from various sources, including,  but  not  limited  to,  data  and
  determinations of federal, state or other governmental agencies;
    (ii)  to  institute and conduct inspections at the site of the work or
  elsewhere;
    (iii) to examine the books, documents and records  pertaining  to  the
  wages  paid  to,  and  the  hours of work performed by, building service
  employees;
    (iv)  to  hold  hearings  and,  in  connection  therewith,  to   issue
  subpoenas,  administer oaths and examine witnesses; the enforcement of a
  subpoena issued under this subdivision shall be regulated by  the  civil
  practice law and rules;
    (v)  to  make  a  classification  by  craft,  trade or other generally
  recognized occupational category of the building service  employees  and
  to  determine  whether  such  work  has  been  performed by the building
  service employees in such classification;
    (vi) to require the applicant to file with the fiscal officer a record
  of the wages actually paid by such applicant  to  the  building  service
  employees and of their hours of work;
    (vii)  to delegate any of the foregoing powers to his or her deputy or
  other authorized representative; and
    (viii) to promulgate rules as he or she shall consider  necessary  for
  the   proper  execution  of  the  duties,  responsibilities  and  powers
  conferred upon him or her by the provisions of this paragraph.
    (d) If the fiscal officer finds  that  the  applicant  has  failed  to
  comply  with the provisions of this subdivision, he or she shall present
  evidence of such noncompliance to the local housing agency.
    (e) Paragraph (b) of this subdivision shall not be applicable to:
    (i) projects containing less than fifty dwelling units; or
    (ii) buildings where  the  local  housing  agency  certifies  that  at
  initial  occupancy  at  least  fifty  percent  of the dwelling units are
  affordable to individuals or families with a gross household  income  at
  or  below  one hundred twenty-five percent of the area median income and
  that any such units which  are  located  in  rental  buildings  will  be
  subject  to  restrictions to insure that they will remain affordable for
  the entire period during which they receive benefits under this section.
    (f) The local housing agency shall prescribe appropriate sanctions for
  failure to comply with the provisions of this subdivision.
    (g)  Solely  for  purposes  of  paragraph  (b)  of  this  subdivision,
  construction  shall  be  deemed  to  have  commenced  when excavation or
  alteration has begun in good faith on the basis of approved construction
  plans.

    (h)  The  eligibility  criteria  for  benefits   contained   in   this
  subdivision  shall be in addition to those contained in any other law or
  regulation.
    9. (a) As used in this subdivision, the following terms shall have the
  following meanings:
    (i)  "Residential tax lot" shall mean a tax lot that contains dwelling
  units.
    (ii) "Non-residential tax lot" shall mean a  tax  lot  that  does  not
  contain any dwelling units.
    (iii)  "Annual  limit"  shall  mean sixty-five thousand dollars, which
  amount shall be increased by three percent, compounded annually, on each
  taxable status date following the first  anniversary  of  the  effective
  date of this subdivision.
    (iv)  "Certificate  of  occupancy" shall mean the first certificate of
  occupancy  covering  all  residential  areas  of  the  building  on   or
  containing a tax lot.
    (v) "Unit count" shall mean:
    (A)  in  the  case  of a residential tax lot that does not contain any
  commercial, community facility or accessory use  space,  the  number  of
  dwelling units in such tax lot, and
    (B)  in  the  case  of a residential tax lot that contains commercial,
  community facility or accessory use space, the number of dwelling  units
  in such tax lot plus one.
    (vi)  "Exemption  cap"  shall  mean  the  unit count multiplied by the
  annual limit.
    (b) The provisions of this subdivision shall apply  only  to  projects
  that  commence  construction  on  or  after  December twenty-eighth, two
  thousand seven.
    (c) The portion of the assessed valuation of any residential  tax  lot
  exempted  from  real  property  taxation  in  any  year pursuant to this
  section shall not exceed the exemption cap on or after the first taxable
  status date after the building on or containing such  tax  lot  receives
  its  certificate of occupancy, unless, it complies with the requirements
  of item a or b of clause (D) of subparagraph (iii) of paragraph  (a)  of
  subdivision  two  of  this section or the requirements of item a or b of
  clause (A) of subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (a) of subdivision  two  of
  this   section.   The   portion   of   the  assessed  valuation  of  all
  non-residential  tax  lots  in  the  building  on  or  containing   such
  non-residential  tax  lots  exempted  from real property taxation in any
  year pursuant to this section shall not exceed a cumulative total  equal
  to  the annual limit on or after the first taxable status date after the
  building on or containing such non-residential  tax  lots  receives  its
  certificate of occupancy. A dwelling unit that is located in two or more
  tax lots shall be ineligible to receive any benefits under this section.
    10.  (a) The local housing agency shall implement procedures to insure
  that affordable units created pursuant to this section, or  units  which
  are  required  to  be occupied by persons or families who meet specified
  income limits pursuant to the provisions of a local law enacted pursuant
  to this section, continue to be affordable as required by the provisions
  of this section or such local law, and that units made subject  to  rent
  stabilization  remain  subject  thereto as required by the provisions of
  this section. Such procedures shall include but shall not be limited  to
  the following:
    (i)  all  rent  stabilization registrations required to be filed on or
  after January first, two thousand  eight  shall  contain  a  designation
  which  identifies  all  units that are subject to the provisions of this
  section as "Affordable New York Housing Program units" and  specifically
  identifies  affordable  units created pursuant to this section and units

  which are required to be  occupied  by  persons  or  families  who  meet
  specified  income  limits  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of a local law
  enacted pursuant to this section as "Affordable New York Housing Program
  affordable  units"  and shall contain an explanation of the requirements
  that apply to all such units. The owner of a unit that is subject to the
  provisions of this section shall, in  addition  to  complying  with  the
  requirements  of  section  26-517  of the rent stabilization law, file a
  copy of the rent registration for each such unit with the local  housing
  agency;
    (ii)  the  local  housing  agency  with cooperation of the division of
  housing and community renewal shall monitor and enforce compliance  with
  the filing requirements of this section;
    (iii)  the  local  housing  agency  shall  create a report which, at a
  minimum, contains the following information  for  every  building  which
  receives  benefits  pursuant  to this section: address, commencement and
  termination date of the benefits, total  number  of  residential  units,
  number  of  "Affordable  New  York  Housing Program units" and number of
  "Affordable New York Housing Program affordable units", apartment number
  or other designation of such units and the rent for each of such  units.
  The local housing agency with the cooperation of the division of housing
  and  community  renewal  shall  maintain, and update such report no less
  than annually, with information secured from annual registrations.  Such
  reports  shall be available for public inspection in a form that assigns
  a unique designation to each unit other than its actual apartment number
  to maintain the privacy of such information; and
    (iv) the local  housing  agency  shall  monitor  any  change  in  such
  information, shall investigate any such changes which indicate a failure
  to   comply  with  the  provisions  of  this  section,  and  shall  take
  appropriate action based on its findings.
    (b) Failure to comply  with  the  provisions  of  this  section  which
  require  the  creation  and  maintenance of affordable units pursuant to
  this section, or units which are required to be occupied by  persons  or
  families  who meet specified income limits pursuant to the provisions of
  a local law enacted pursuant to this section, at  any  time  during  the
  duration  of  the building's tax exemption shall result in revocation of
  any benefits under this section for the period of  such  non-compliance.
  If  an  on-going  pattern  of  non-compliance  is  found  to exist, such
  benefits may  be  revoked  from  their  inception.  Notwithstanding  the
  revocation of benefits for a building pursuant to the provisions of this
  subdivision, all units in such building shall continue to remain subject
  to  the provisions of the rent stabilization law for the entire intended
  period as if the benefits had not been revoked.
    (c) The provisions of this subdivision relating to enforcement of  the
  provisions  of this section shall be in addition to any other provisions
  contained in this section or any other law.
    (d) The revocation of benefits for  noncompliance  with  this  section
  shall   not   exempt   any  unit  from  continued  compliance  with  the
  requirements of this section.
    11. Additional geographic exclusion areas:
    (a) Any tax lots now existing or hereafter created which  are  located
  entirely  within  the geographic area in the borough of Brooklyn bounded
  and described as follows:
    (i) In the County of Kings, Beginning at a point where Warwick  Street
  meets  Belmont  Avenue,  thence  westerly  along  said  avenue to Jerome
  Street, thence southerly along said  street  to  Sutter  Avenue,  thence
  westerly  on  said  avenue to Barbey Street, thence northerly along said
  street to Belmont Avenue, thence westerly on said avenue to  New  Jersey
  Avenue,  thence  southerly  on  said  avenue  to  Sutter  Avenue, thence

  westerly on said avenue to Pennsylvania Avenue, thence northerly on said
  avenue to Belmont Avenue, thence westerly on said  avenue  to  Sheffield
  Avenue,  thence  southerly  on  said  avenue  to  Sutter  Avenue, thence
  westerly  on  said  avenue  to Snediker Avenue, thence northerly on said
  avenue to William's Place, thence northerly  on  said  place  to  Fulton
  Street,  thence  easterly  on  said  street  to  Jamaica  Avenue, thence
  easterly on said avenue to Van Siclen Avenue, thence southerly  on  said
  avenue  to  Arlington  Avenue, thence easterly on said avenue to Warwick
  Street, thence southerly on  said  street  to  Atlantic  Avenue,  thence
  westerly  on  said  avenue  to  Jerome  Street, thence southerly on said
  street to Liberty Avenue, thence easterly  on  said  avenue  to  Warwick
  Street,  thence  southerly  along  said  street to its intersection with
  Belmont Avenue, the point of beginning.
    (ii) In the County of Kings,  Beginning  at  a  point  where  Bushwick
  Avenue meets with Stewart Street, thence southwesterly on said street to
  Broadway,  thence  southeasterly  on  Broadway  to Conway Street, thence
  southwesterly on said street to Truxton Street, thence westerly on  said
  street  to  Sackman  Street, thence southerly on said street to Atlantic
  Avenue,  thence  westerly  on  said  avenue  to  Howard  Avenue,  thence
  northerly  on  said  avenue to MacDougal Street, thence westerly on said
  street to Fulton Street, thence  westerly  on  said  street  to  Patchen
  Avenue,  thence  northerly  on  said  avenue  to  Hancock Street, thence
  easterly on said street to Saratoga Avenue,  thence  northerly  on  said
  avenue  to  a  point midway between Hancock Street and Jefferson Avenue,
  thence easterly along the line extended to the northern intersection  of
  Broadway  and  Hancock  Street, thence northerly along Hancock Street to
  Bushwick Avenue, thence easterly along said avenue to  its  intersection
  with Stewart Street, the point of beginning.
    (iii)  In  the  County  of  Kings, Beginning at a point where Prospect
  Place meets Ralph Avenue, thence southerly along said avenue  to  Sutter
  Avenue,  thence  westerly  along said avenue to east 98th Street, thence
  southeasterly along said street to Rutland  Road,  thence  southwesterly
  along  said  road  to  East 92nd Street, thence northwesterly along said
  street to East New York Avenue, thence southerly along  said  avenue  to
  Lefferts  Avenue,  thence  westerly  along  said avenue to Utica Avenue,
  thence northerly along said avenue to Lincoln Place, thence easterly  on
  said  place  to Rochester Avenue, thence northerly on said avenue to St.
  Mark's Avenue thence easterly on St. Mark's Avenue  to  Buffalo  Avenue,
  thence southerly on said avenue to Prospect Place, thence westerly along
  said  place  towards  intersection  with  Ralph  Avenue,  the  point  of
  beginning.
    (iv) In the County of Kings,  Beginning  at  a  point  where  Nostrand
  Avenue  meets  Dean  Street, thence westerly along said street to Rogers
  Avenue, thence southerly along said  avenue  to  Bergen  Street,  thence
  westerly  along  said  street  to Bedford Avenue, thence southerly along
  said avenue to St. Mark's Avenue, thence easterly along said  avenue  to
  Rogers  Avenue,  thence  southerly  along  said  avenue to Crown Street,
  thence easterly along said street to Nostrand Avenue,  thence  southerly
  along  said avenue to Sterling Street, thence westerly along said street
  to Bedford Avenue,  thence  southerly  along  said  avenue  to  Lefferts
  Avenue,  thence  westerly along said avenue to Washington Avenue, thence
  southerly along said avenue to Flatbush Avenue, thence along said avenue
  to Parkside Avenue, thence westerly along said avenue to  Ocean  Avenue,
  thence northerly along said avenue to Flatbush Avenue, thence along said
  avenue  to  Plaza  Street  East,  thence along said street to St. John's
  Place, thence easterly along said  place  to  Underhill  Avenue,  thence
  northerly  along  said  avenue  to Prospect Place, thence westerly along
  said place to Carlton Avenue, thence  southerly  along  said  avenue  to

  Flatbush  Avenue,  thence  northerly  along  said  avenue to Park Place,
  thence westerly along said place to 6th Avenue, thence  northerly  along
  said  avenue  to Bergen Street, thence westerly along said street to 5th
  Avenue,  thence  southerly  along  said  avenue to Warren Street, thence
  westerly along said street to 4th Avenue, thence  northerly  along  said
  avenue  to  Bergen  Street,  thence  westerly  along  said street to 3rd
  Avenue, thence northerly  along  said  avenue  to  Dean  Street,  thence
  easterly  along  said  street to 4th Avenue, thence northerly along said
  avenue to Atlantic Avenue, thence easterly along said avenue to Flatbush
  Avenue, thence northerly along said  avenue  to  Fulton  Street,  thence
  westerly along said street to Hanover Place, thence southerly along said
  place  to  Livingston  Street, thence westerly along said street to Bond
  Street, thence northerly along said  street  to  Fulton  Street,  thence
  westerly along said street to Bridge Street, thence northerly along said
  street  to  Willoughby  Street,  thence  westerly  along  said street to
  Lawrence Street, thence southerly along said street  to  Fulton  Street,
  thence  westerly along said street to Jay Street, thence northerly along
  said street to Prospect Street, thence easterly  along  said  street  to
  Bridge Street, thence northerly along said street to York Street, thence
  easterly  along  said street to Navy Street, thence southerly along said
  street to Ashland Place, thence  along  said  place  to  Dekalb  Avenue,
  thence  easterly  along  said avenue to Adelphi Street, thence southerly
  along said street to Lafayette Avenue, thence easterly along said avenue
  to Clermont Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue to Dekalb Avenue,
  thence easterly along said avenue to Clinton  Avenue,  thence  northerly
  along  said  avenue  to  Willoughby  Avenue,  thence easterly along said
  avenue to Hall Street, thence northerly  along  said  street  to  Myrtle
  Avenue,  thence  easterly  along  said  avenue  to Emerson Place, thence
  southerly along said place to southern border of Pratt Institute parking
  lot, thence westerly along said border to a line extended southerly from
  Grand Avenue, thence southerly  along  said  avenue  to  Dekalb  Avenue,
  thence  easterly  along  said avenue to Classon Avenue, thence northerly
  along said avenue to  Willoughby  Avenue,  thence  easterly  along  said
  avenue  to  Taaffe  Place,  thence  southerly along said place to Dekalb
  Avenue, thence  easterly  along  said  avenue  to  Kent  Avenue,  thence
  northerly  along said avenue to Willoughby Avenue, thence easterly along
  said avenue to Franklin Avenue, thence southerly along  said  avenue  to
  Lafayette  Avenue, thence easterly along said avenue to Nostrand Avenue,
  thence southerly along said avenue to its intersection with Dean Street,
  the point of beginning.
    (v) In the County of Kings, Beginning at a  point  where  Ruby  Street
  (Kings/Queens  county  line)  meets Pitkin Avenue, thence westerly along
  said avenue to North Conduit Boulevard, thence northwesterly along  said
  boulevard  to  Autumn  Avenue,  thence  northerly  along  said avenue to
  Glenmore Avenue, thence westerly along  said  avenue  to  South  Conduit
  Boulevard,  thence  easterly  along  said  boulevard  to Hemlock Street,
  thence southerly along said street to  Pitkin  Avenue,  thence  westerly
  along  said avenue to Crystal Street, thence southerly along said street
  to Belmont Avenue, thence westerly along said avenue to Milford  Street,
  thence  southerly  along  said  street to Sutter Avenue, thence westerly
  along said avenue to Montauk Avenue, thence northerly along said  avenue
  to Belmont Avenue, thence westerly along said avenue to Shepherd Avenue,
  thence  northerly  along  said  avenue to Pitkin Avenue, thence westerly
  along said avenue to Essex Street, thence southerly along said street to
  Belmont Avenue, thence westerly along said  avenue  to  Warwick  Street,
  thence  northerly  along  said street to Liberty Avenue, thence westerly
  along said avenue to Jerome Street, thence northerly along  said  street
  to Atlantic Avenue, thence easterly along said avenue to Warwick Street,

  thence  northerly along said street to Arlington Avenue, thence westerly
  along said avenue to Van Siclen  Avenue,  thence  northerly  along  said
  avenue to Jamaica Avenue, thence westerly along said avenue to Broadway,
  thence  westerly  along Broadway to Fulton Street, thence westerly along
  said street to Sackman Street, thence northerly  along  said  street  to
  Truxton  Street,  thence  easterly  along  said street to Conway Street,
  thence northerly along said street to Broadway,  thence  westerly  along
  Broadway  to  Stewart  Street,  thence  northerly  along  said street to
  Bushwick Avenue, thence westerly along said avenue to Kosciusko  Street,
  thence westerly along said street to Stuyvesant Avenue, thence northerly
  along said avenue to Dekalb Avenue, thence westerly along said avenue to
  Marcy  Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue to Park Avenue, thence
  easterly along said avenue to Broadway, thence southerly along  Broadway
  to  Lewis Avenue, thence southerly along said avenue to Stockton Street,
  thence easterly along said street to Broadway,  thence  southerly  along
  Broadway  to  Melrose  Street,  thence  northerly  along  said street to
  Stanwix Street, thence southerly along said street to Jefferson  Street,
  thence  westerly  along said street to Bushwick Avenue, thence southerly
  along said avenue to Dekalb Avenue, thence northerly along  said  avenue
  to  Evergreen  Avenue,  thence  easterly  along said avenue to Stockholm
  Street, thence northerly along said street  to  Central  Avenue,  thence
  easterly  along  said  avenue to Woodbine Street, thence northerly along
  said street to Ridgewood Place, thence  westerly  along  said  place  to
  Palmetto  Street,  thence  northerly along said street to Wyckoff Avenue
  (Kings/Queens county line), thence following Kings/Queens county line to
  Ruby Street (Kings/Queens county  line),  thence  southerly  along  said
  street to its intersection with Pitkin Avenue, the point of beginning.
    (vi)  In  the  County of Kings, Beginning at a point where St. Nichols
  Avenue (Kings/Queens  county  line)  meets  Gates  Avenue  (Kings/Queens
  county  line),  thence  southerly  along  said  avenue  to Wykoff Avenue
  (Kings/Queens  county  line),  thence  easterly  along  said  avenue  to
  Palmetto  Street, thence southerly along said street to Ridgewood Place,
  thence easterly along said place to Woodbine  Street,  thence  southerly
  along  said  street to Central Avenue, thence westerly along said avenue
  to Stockholm Street, thence southerly along  said  street  to  Evergreen
  Avenue,  thence  westerly  along  said  avenue  to Dekalb Avenue, thence
  southerly along said avenue to Bushwick Avenue,  thence  westerly  along
  said  avenue  to  Jefferson Street, thence easterly along said street to
  Stanwix Street, thence northerly along said street  to  Melrose  Street,
  thence  westerly along said street to Broadway, thence along Broadway to
  Stockton Street, thence  along  said  street  to  Lewis  Avenue,  thence
  northerly  along said avenue to Broadway, thence westerly along Broadway
  to Park Avenue,  thence  along  said  avenue  to  Marcy  Avenue,  thence
  northerly  along  said  avenue  to Hopkins Street, thence easterly along
  said street to Tompkins Avenue, thence northerly along  said  avenue  to
  Harrison  Avenue, thence westerly along said Avenue to Middleton Street,
  thence easterly along said street to  Broadway,  thence  westerly  along
  Broadway  to Boerum Street, thence easterly along said street to Lorimer
  Street, thence northerly along said street to  Montrose  Avenue,  thence
  westerly along said avenue to Broadway, thence along said road to I-278,
  thence  northerly  along  said  interstate  to  South 5th Street, thence
  westerly along said street to Bedford  Avenue,  thence  southerly  along
  said  avenue  to  South 6th Street, thence westerly along said street to
  Berry Street, thence northerly along said street to  North  1st  Street,
  thence  easterly  along  said  street to Driggs Avenue, thence northerly
  along said avenue to Fillmore Place, thence easterly along said place to
  Roebling Street, thence northerly along  said  street  to  Hope  Street,
  thence  easterly along said street to Havemeyer Street, thence northerly

  along said street to Metropolitan Avenue,  thence  easterly  along  said
  avenue  to Havemeyer Street, thence northerly along said street to North
  6th Street, thence easterly along said street to Meeker  Avenue,  thence
  westerly along said avenue to Metropolitan Avenue, thence easterly along
  said  avenue  to  Rodney  Street,  thence southerly along said street to
  Ainslie Street, thence easterly  along  said  street  to  Union  Avenue,
  thence  northerly along said avenue to Conselyea Street, thence easterly
  along said street to  Manhattan  Avenue,  thence  southerly  along  said
  street  to  Metropolitan  Avenue,  thence  easterly along said avenue to
  Maspeth Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue  to  Woodpoint  Road,
  thence  along  said road to Conselyea Street, thence westerly along said
  street to Humbolt Street, thence northerly along said street to Skillman
  Avenue, then easterly  along  said  avenue  to  Woodpoint  Road,  thence
  northerly  along said road to Jackson Street, thence easterly along said
  street to Kingsland  Avenue,  thence  northerly  along  said  avenue  to
  Withers  Street,  thence  westerly  along said street to Woodpoint Road,
  thence northerly along said road to Kingsland Avenue, thence along  said
  avenue  to Division Place, thence easterly along said place to Debevoise
  Avenue, thence northerly along said  avenue  to  Beadel  Street,  thence
  westerly  along  said street to Kingsland Avenue, thence northerly along
  said avenue to I-278, thence easterly along said  interstate  to  Sutton
  Street,  thence  northerly  along  said  street to Driggs Avenue, thence
  easterly along said avenue to Meeker Avenue, thence along said avenue to
  Hausman Street, thence northerly along said  street  to  Nassau  Avenue,
  thence  easterly  along  said  avenue to Vandam Street, thence southerly
  along said street to Meeker Avenue, thence easterly along said avenue to
  Kings/Queens county line, thence southeasterly along said line to  where
  St. Nichols Avenue meets Gates Avenue, the point of beginning.
    (vii)  In  the  County  of  Kings,  Beginning at a point where Bedford
  Avenue meets Bergen Street, thence easterly along  said  street  to  New
  York  Avenue,  thence  northerly  along  said  avenue to Pacific Street,
  thence easterly along said street to Brooklyn Avenue,  thence  southerly
  along  said  avenue to Dean Street, thence easterly along said street to
  Kingston Avenue, thence southerly along said avenue to  Sterling  Place,
  thence  easterly  along  said  place  to Hampton Place, thence southerly
  along said place to St. John's Place, thence westerly along  said  place
  to Kingston Avenue, thence southerly along said avenue to Lincoln Place,
  thence  easterly  along  said  place  to Albany Avenue, thence southerly
  along said avenue to Eastern Parkway, thence easterly along said parkway
  to Schenectady Avenue, thence  southerly  along  said  avenue  to  Union
  Street,  thence  easterly  along  said  street  to  Utica Avenue, thence
  southerly along said avenue to Empire Boulevard, thence  westerly  along
  said boulevard to Nostrand Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue to
  Crown Street, thence westerly along said street to Rogers Avenue, thence
  northerly  along said avenue to St. Mark's Avenue, thence westerly along
  said avenue to Bedford Avenue, thence northerly  along  said  avenue  to
  Bergen Street, the point of beginning.
    (viii)  In  the  County  of Kings, Beginning at a point where Prospect
  Place meets Underhill Avenue, thence southerly along said avenue to  St.
  John's  Place,  thence  westerly  along said place to Plaza Street East,
  thence southerly along said street to Plaza Street West, thence westerly
  along said street to Parade Place, thence along said place  to  Prospect
  Park  West,  thence southerly along said Part West to 4th Street, thence
  westerly along said street to 8th Avenue, thence  northerly  along  said
  avenue  to  2nd Street, thence westerly along said street to 7th Avenue,
  thence southerly along said avenue to 4th Street, thence westerly  along
  said  street  to  6th  Avenue, thence southerly along said avenue to 5th
  Street,  thence  westerly  along  said  street  to  5th  Avenue,  thence

  southerly  along  said  avenue to 8th Street, thence easterly along said
  street to 6th Avenue, thence southerly along said avenue to 9th  Street,
  thence  westerly along said street to 5th Avenue, thence southerly along
  said  avenue  to  11th  Street, thence easterly along said street to 6th
  Avenue, thence southerly  along  said  avenue  to  14th  Street,  thence
  easterly  along  said  street to 7th Avenue, thence southerly along said
  avenue to 17th Street, thence  westerly  along  said  street  to  Calder
  Place,  thence  northerly  along  said  place to Prospect Avenue, thence
  westerly along said avenue to Webster Place, thence northerly along said
  place to 16th Street, thence westerly along said street to  6th  Avenue,
  thence  southerly  along  said  avenue  to  Prospect  Expressway, thence
  westerly along said expressway to 5th  Avenue,  thence  southerly  along
  said  avenue  to  17th  Street, thence westerly along said street to 4th
  Avenue, thence northerly  along  said  avenue  to  16th  Street,  thence
  westerly  along said street to Hamilton Avenue, thence along said avenue
  to 15th Street, thence easterly along said street to 2nd Avenue,  thence
  northerly  along  said avenue to 14th Street, thence westerly along said
  street to Hamilton Place, thence northerly  along  said  place  to  12th
  Street,  thence  westerly along said street to a line extended from 12th
  Street to the banks of the Gowanus Canal, thence  southerly  along  said
  canal  to  Hamilton  Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue to Smith
  Street, thence along said street to West  9th  Street,  thence  westerly
  along  said  street  to I-278, thence northerly along said interstate to
  Huntington Street, thence westerly along said street to Hamilton Avenue,
  thence northerly along said avenue to  Luquer  Street,  thence  westerly
  along said street to Columbia Street, thence southerly along said street
  to  Commerce  Street,  thence  westerly  along  said  street to Richards
  Street, thence northerly along said street to  Hamilton  Avenue,  thence
  westerly  along said avenue to Bowne Street, thence along said street to
  Van Brunt Street, thence southerly along said street to  Verona  Street,
  thence  northerly  along  said  street to Imlay Street, thence southerly
  along said street to Pioneer Street, thence westerly along  said  street
  to  the  East River (Kings/New York county line), thence northerly along
  said county line to the western border of  the  U.S.  Navy  Yard  Basin,
  thence  southerly  along  said  border  to  a  line  extended  from  the
  eastern-most end  of  York  Street,  thence  westerly  along  said  line
  extended  to  York  Street,  thence westerly along said street to Bridge
  Street, thence southerly along said street to  Prospect  Street,  thence
  westerly  along  said  street to Jay Street, thence southerly along said
  street to Fulton Street, thence easterly along said street  to  Lawrence
  Street,  thence northerly along said street to Willoughby Street, thence
  easterly along said street to Bridge Street, thence southerly along said
  street to Fulton Street, thence  easterly  along  said  street  to  Bond
  Street,  thence southerly along said street to Livingston Street, thence
  easterly along said street to Hanover Place, thence northerly along said
  place to Fulton Street, thence easterly along said  street  to  Flatbush
  Avenue,  thence  southerly  along said avenue to Atlantic Avenue, thence
  westerly along said avenue to 4th Avenue, thence  southerly  along  said
  avenue  to Dean Street, thence westerly along said street to 3rd Avenue,
  thence southerly along said avenue to  Bergen  Street,  thence  easterly
  along  said  street to 4th Avenue, thence southerly along said avenue to
  Warren Street, thence easterly along said street to 5th  Avenue,  thence
  northerly along said avenue to Bergen Street, thence easterly along said
  street  to 6th Avenue, thence southerly along said avenue to Park Place,
  thence easterly along said place to Flatbush  Avenue,  thence  southerly
  along  said avenue to Carlton Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue
  to Prospect Place, thence easterly along said place to its  intersection
  with Underhill Avenue, the point of beginning.

    (ix)  In  the  County of Kings, Beginning at a point where 65th Street
  meets 2nd Avenue, thence southerly along said avenue to Long Island Rail
  Road (Bay Ridge Station), thence westerly along  said  railroad  to  Bay
  Ridge  Channel,  thence  along  said  channel to the Upper New York Bay,
  thence  along  said  bay  to  Kings/Hudson/New Jersey county/state line,
  thence along said county/state  line  to  Kings/New  York  county  line,
  thence  easterly  along  said  county  line  to  Pioneer  Street, thence
  southerly along said street to Imlay Street, thence northerly along said
  street to Verona Street, thence southerly along said street to Van Brunt
  Street, thence northerly along  said  street  to  Bowne  Street,  thence
  easterly  along said street to Hamilton Avenue, thence along said avenue
  to Richards Street, thence  southerly  along  said  street  to  Commerce
  Street,  thence  easterly  along  said street to Columbia Street, thence
  northerly along said street to Luquer Street, thence easterly along said
  street to  Hamilton  Avenue,  thence  southerly  along  said  avenue  to
  Huntington  Street,  thence  easterly along said street to I-278, thence
  southerly along said interstate to West 9th Street,  thence  along  said
  street  to  Smith Street, thence southerly along said street to Hamilton
  Avenue, thence along said avenue  to  Gowanus  Canal,  thence  northerly
  along  said  canal  to a line extended westerly from 12th Street, thence
  easterly along said line extended to  12th  Street,  thence  along  said
  street  to  Hamilton  Place,  thence  southerly along said place to 14th
  Street,  thence  easterly  along  said  street  to  2nd  Avenue,  thence
  southerly  along  said avenue to 15th Street, thence westerly along said
  street to Hamilton Avenue, thence southerly along  said  avenue  to  3rd
  Avenue,  thence  southerly  along  said  avenue  to  65th Street, thence
  northerly along said street to its intersection  with  2nd  Avenue,  the
  point of beginning.
    (b)  Any  tax lots now existing or hereafter created which are located
  entirely within the geographic area in the borough of Manhattan  bounded
  and described as follows:
    (i)  In  the  county  of New York, Beginning at a point where extended
  West 202nd Street intersects the  New  York/Bronx  county  line,  thence
  westerly  along  said  extension to West 202nd Street, thence along said
  street to 9th Avenue, thence southerly along said avenue to  west  201st
  Street,  thence  westerly  along  said  street to Academy Street, thence
  northerly along said street to 10th Avenue, thence southerly along  said
  avenue  to  Dyckman  Street, thence northerly along said street to Nagle
  Avenue, thence westerly along said avenue to Fort  George  Hill,  thence
  southerly  along  said  hill  to  the southwestern border of High Bridge
  Park, thence easterly along said border to Fort  George  Avenue,  thence
  southerly  along said avenue to Audubon Avenue, thence along said avenue
  to West 190th Street, thence easterly along  said  street  to  Amsterdam
  Avenue,  thence southerly along said avenue to West 186th Street, thence
  westerly along said street to Audubon  Avenue,  thence  southerly  along
  said  avenue  to West 184th Street, thence easterly along said street to
  Amsterdam Avenue, thence southerly  along  said  avenue  to  West  183rd
  Street,  thence  westerly  along  said  street to Audubon Avenue, thence
  southerly along said avenue to West 182nd Street, thence easterly  along
  said  street  to Amsterdam Avenue, thence southerly along said avenue to
  West 166th Street, thence westerly along said  street  to  St.  Nicholas
  Avenue,  thence southerly along said avenue to West 162nd Street, thence
  westerly along said street to Broadway, thence northerly along  Broadway
  to  west  165th  Street,  thence  westerly  along  said  street  to Fort
  Washington Avenue, thence northerly along  said  avenue  to  West  168th
  Street,  thence easterly along said street to Broadway, thence northerly
  along Broadway to West 172nd Street, thence westerly along  said  street
  to  Fort  Washington  Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue to West

  173rd Street, thence easterly along  said  street  to  Broadway,  thence
  northerly  along  Broadway  to  West 174th Street, thence easterly along
  said street to Wadsworth Avenue, thence northerly along said  avenue  to
  West  175th Street, thence westerly along said street to Fort Washington
  Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue to West 177th Street,  thence
  easterly  along said street to Broadway, thence northerly along Broadway
  to Cumming Street, thence along said street  to  Seaman  Avenue,  thence
  easterly  along  said  avenue  to Academy Street, thence southerly along
  said street to Cooper Street, thence easterly along said street to  West
  204th  Street,  thence  southerly  along said street to Broadway, thence
  easterly along Broadway to West 207th  Street,  thence  southerly  along
  said  street  to  Vermilyea Avenue, thence easterly along said avenue to
  Isham Street, thence northerly along said  street  to  Broadway,  thence
  easterly  along  Broadway  to  West 215th Street, thence northerly along
  said street to Seaman Avenue, thence westerly along said avenue to  West
  207th  Street,  thence  northerly  along said street to where it meets a
  line extended from  Payson  Avenue,  thence  westerly  along  said  line
  extended  to  Payson Avenue, thence along said avenue to Dyckman Street,
  thence northerly along said street to  Staff  Street,  thence  southerly
  along  said  street to Riverside Drive, thence westerly along said drive
  to the  exit  ramp  of  the  Henry  Hudson  Parkway  Northbound,  thence
  southerly along said ramp to the Henry Hudson Parkway Northbound, thence
  northerly  along said parkway to the on-ramp of the Henry Hudson Parkway
  Southbound, thence southerly along said ramp to the Henry Hudson Parkway
  Southbound, thence northerly along  said  parkway  to  Exit  17,  thence
  southwesterly  on  a  line  extended  from said exit to a point where it
  meets a line extended from Dyckman Street, thence  westerly  along  said
  line  extended  to  the New York state line, thence northerly along said
  state line to the New York/Bronx county line, thence easterly along said
  county line, thence southerly along said line to its  intersection  with
  extended West 202nd Street, the point of beginning.
    (ii)  In the county of New York, Beginning at a point where West 215th
  Street meets Broadway, thence westerly along Broadway to  Isham  Street,
  thence  southeasterly  along  said  street  to  Vermilyea Avenue, thence
  westerly along said avenue to West 207th Street, thence northerly  along
  said  street  to  Broadway, thence westerly along Broadway to West 204th
  Street, thence northerly along said  street  to  Cooper  Street,  thence
  westerly  along  said  street  to Academy Street, thence northerly along
  said street to Seaman Avenue,  thence  westerly  along  said  avenue  to
  Cumming  Street,  thence southerly along said street to Broadway, thence
  southerly along Broadway to West 177th  Street,  thence  westerly  along
  said  street  to  Fort  Washington  Avenue,  thence southerly along said
  avenue to West 175th  Street,  thence  easterly  along  said  street  to
  Wadsworth  Avenue,  thence  southerly  along  said  avenue to West 174th
  Street, thence westerly along said street to Broadway, thence  southerly
  along  Broadway  to West 173rd Street, thence westerly along said street
  to Fort Washington Avenue, thence southerly along said  avenue  to  West
  172nd  Street,  thence  easterly  along  said street to Broadway, thence
  southerly along Broadway to West 168th  Street,  thence  westerly  along
  said  street  to  Fort  Washington  Avenue,  thence southerly along said
  avenue to West 165th  Street,  thence  easterly  along  said  street  to
  Broadway,  thence  southerly along Broadway to West 162nd Street, thence
  easterly along said street to  St.  Nicholas  Avenue,  thence  northerly
  along  said  avenue  to  West  166th  Street, thence easterly along said
  street to Amsterdam Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue  to  West
  182nd  Street,  thence  westerly  along  said  street to Audubon Avenue,
  thence northerly along said avenue to West 183rd Street, thence easterly
  along said street to  Amsterdam  Avenue,  thence  northerly  along  said

  avenue  to  West  184th  Street,  thence  westerly  along said street to
  Audubon Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue to West 186th Street,
  thence easterly along said street to Amsterdam Avenue, thence  northerly
  along  said  avenue  to  West  190th  Street, thence westerly along said
  street to Audubon Avenue, thence northerly along  said  avenue  to  Fort
  George  Avenue,  thence  along said avenue to the southwestern border of
  High Bridge Park, thence westerly along said border to Fort George Hill,
  thence northerly along said hill to Nagle Avenue, thence easterly  along
  said  avenue  to  Dyckman  Street, thence southerly along said street to
  10th Avenue, thence northerly  along  said  avenue  to  Academy  Street,
  thence southerly along said street to West 201st Street, thence easterly
  along  said  street to 9th Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue to
  West 202nd Street, thence easterly along said street to a line extending
  to the New York/Bronx county line, thence southerly  along  said  county
  line  to  the  point  where  the  145th Street Bridge intersects the New
  York/Bronx county line, thence westerly along said bridge to West  145th
  Street,  thence along said street to Lenox Avenue (Malcolm X Boulevard),
  thence northerly along said avenue to West 146th Street, thence westerly
  along said street to 7th Avenue (Adam  Clayton  Powell  Jr.  Boulevard),
  thence southerly along said avenue to West 144th Street, thence westerly
  along  said  street to 8th Avenue (Frederick Douglass Boulevard), thence
  northerly along said avenue to West 145th Street, thence westerly  along
  said  street  to St. Nicholas Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue
  to West 149th Street, thence  westerly  along  said  street  to  Convent
  Avenue,  thence southerly along said avenue to West 148th Street, thence
  westerly along said street to Amsterdam Avenue, thence  northerly  along
  said  avenue  to West 151st Street, thence westerly along said street to
  Broadway, thence southerly along Broadway to West 145th  Street,  thence
  westerly  along  said  street  to Henry Hudson Parkway, thence southerly
  along said parkway to St. Clair Place, thence westerly along said  place
  to  extended  St.  Clair  Place,  thence along said extension to the New
  York/New Jersey state line, thence northerly along said  state  line  to
  its  intersection  with  extended  Dyckman Street, thence easterly along
  said  extension  to  the  shoreline  of   the   Hudson   River,   thence
  northeasterly  to Exit 17 of the Henry Hudson Parkway Southbound, thence
  southerly along said parkway to the onramp from Riverside Drive,  thence
  northerly along said ramp to the Henry Hudson Parkway Northbound, thence
  southerly along said parkway to the exit ramp to Riverside Drive, thence
  easterly  along said ramp to Riverside Drive, thence along said drive to
  Staff Street, thence northerly along  said  street  to  Dyckman  Street,
  thence  southerly  along  said  street to Payson Avenue, thence easterly
  along said avenue to a point where extended Payson  Avenue  meets  207th
  Street,  thence  southerly  along  said  street to Seaman Avenue, thence
  easterly along said avenue to West 215th Street, thence southerly  along
  said street to its intersection with Broadway, the point of beginning.
    (iii)  In the county of New York, Beginning at a point where the 145th
  Street Bridge meets the New York/Bronx  county  line,  thence  southerly
  along  said  county line to the CSX Railroad, thence westerly along said
  railroad to Park Avenue, thence southerly  along  said  avenue  to  East
  132nd  Street,  thence  westerly along said street to 5th Avenue, thence
  southerly along said avenue to West 124th Street, thence westerly  along
  said  street to Mount Morris Park West, thence southerly along said park
  to West 121st Street, thence westerly along said street to Lenox Avenue,
  thence southerly along said avenue to West 120th Street, thence easterly
  along said street to 5th Avenue, thence southerly along said  avenue  to
  East  118th  Street,  thence  easterly along said street to Park Avenue,
  thence southerly along said avenue to East 117th Street, thence westerly
  along said street to 5th Avenue, thence southerly along said  avenue  to

  West  115th  Street,  thence westerly along said street to Lenox Avenue,
  thence northerly along said avenue to West 116th Street, thence westerly
  along said street to Morningside Avenue,  thence  northerly  along  said
  avenue  to  West  121st  Street,  thence  easterly  along said street to
  Manhattan Avenue, thence northerly  along  said  avenue  to  West  123rd
  Street,  thence westerly along said street to Morningside Avenue, thence
  northerly along said avenue to West 124th Street, thence easterly  along
  said street to Frederick Douglass Boulevard, thence northerly along said
  boulevard  to  West  125th  Street, thence westerly along said street to
  Morningside Avenue, thence northerly along said  avenue  to  West  126th
  Street,  thence  westerly  along said street to Amsterdam Avenue, thence
  along said avenue to West  129th  Street,  thence  westerly  along  said
  street  to  Broadway,  thence southerly along Broadway to Tiemann Place,
  thence westerly along said place to Riverside  Drive,  thence  northerly
  along  said  drive  to  Riverside Drive West, thence along said drive to
  West 125th Street, thence along said street  to  Henry  Hudson  Parkway,
  thence  along  said  parkway to West 145th Street, thence easterly along
  said street to Broadway, thence northerly along Broadway to  West  151st
  Street,  thence  easterly  along said street to Amsterdam Avenue, thence
  southerly along said avenue to West 148th Street, thence easterly  along
  said  street  to  Convent  Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue to
  West 149th Street, thence easterly along said  street  to  St.  Nicholas
  Avenue,  thence southerly along said avenue to West 145th Street, thence
  easterly along said  street  to  Frederick  Douglass  Boulevard,  thence
  southerly  along  said  boulevard  to West 144th Street, thence easterly
  along said street to Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard, thence northerly
  along said boulevard to West 146th Street, thence  easterly  along  said
  street  to  Lenox  Avenue  (Malcolm X Boulevard), thence southerly along
  said avenue to West 145th Street, thence easterly along said  street  to
  the  145th  Street  Bridge, thence along said bridge to its intersection
  with the New York/Bronx county line, the point of beginning.
    (iv) In the county of New York, Beginning at a  point  where  the  New
  York/Queens  county  border  meets  the  East  River at East 96th Street
  Extended, thence westerly along a line connecting to East  96th  Street,
  excluding  Mill Rock Park, thence westerly along East 96th Street to 2nd
  Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue to East 97th  Street,  thence
  westerly  along  said  street to 3rd Avenue, thence southerly along said
  avenue to East 95th Street, thence westerly along said street to Madison
  Avenue, thence southerly along said avenue to East 92nd  Street,  thence
  westerly  along  said  street to 5th Avenue, thence northerly along said
  avenue to Central Park North, thence westerly along said  park  to  Adam
  Clayton  Powell  Jr. Boulevard, thence northerly along said boulevard to
  West 113th Street, thence westerly along  said  street  to  8th  Avenue,
  thence northerly along said avenue to West 116th Street, thence easterly
  along said street to Lenox Avenue, thence southerly along said avenue to
  West  115th  Street,  thence  easterly  along said street to 5th Avenue,
  thence northerly along said avenue to East 117th Street, thence easterly
  along said street to Park Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue  to
  East  118th  Street,  thence  westerly  along said street to 5th Avenue,
  thence northerly along said avenue to West 120th Street, thence westerly
  along said street to Lenox Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue to
  West 121st Street, thence easterly along said  street  to  Mount  Morris
  Park West, thence northerly along said park to West 124th Street, thence
  easterly  along  said  street to 5th Avenue, thence northerly along said
  avenue to East 132nd Street, thence easterly along said street  to  Park
  Avenue,  thence  westerly  along  said  avenue  to  CSX Railroad, thence
  easterly along said railroad over the Harlem River to the New York/Bronx
  county line,  thence  southerly  along  said  county  line  to  the  New

  York/Queens county line, thence southerly along said county line to East
  96th Street Extended, the point of beginning.
    (c)  Any  tax lots now existing or hereafter created which are located
  entirely within the geographic area in the borough of The Bronx  bounded
  and described as follows:
    (i)  In  the  county of Bronx, Beginning at a point where Rodman Place
  meets West Farms Road, thence southerly along said road  to  East  172nd
  Street,  thence  westerly  along  said  street  to  Boone Avenue, thence
  southerly along said avenue to Jennings Street,  thence  westerly  along
  said  street  to  Vyse  Avenue,  thence  southerly  along said avenue to
  Freeman Street, thence westerly along said street to  Intervale  Avenue,
  thence  southerly  along  said  avenue  to Fox Street, thence along said
  street to Home Street, thence westerly along said street to  East  169th
  Street,  thence  westerly  along  said street to Prospect Avenue, thence
  southerly along said avenue to East 168th, thence  westerly  along  said
  street  to Washington Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue to East
  Tremont Avenue, thence easterly along said avenue  to  Crotona  Parkway,
  thence  along  said  parkway  to Cross Bronx Expressway, thence easterly
  along said expressway to Longfellow Avenue, thence northerly along  said
  avenue  to  Rodman  Place,  thence  easterly  along  said  place  to its
  intersection with West Farms Road, the point of beginning.
    (ii) In the county of Bronx, Beginning at a point where Belmont Street
  meets Webster Avenue, thence southerly along Webster avenue to Claremont
  Parkway, thence easterly along said  parkway  to  Brook  Avenue,  thence
  southerly  along said avenue to East 171st Street, thence westerly along
  said street to Webster Avenue, thence southerly  along  said  avenue  to
  Park  Avenue,  thence  westerly  along said avenue to East 164th Street,
  thence westerly along said street to  Teller  Avenue,  thence  northerly
  along  said  avenue  to  East  165th  Street, thence westerly along said
  street to Grand Concourse, thence northerly  along  Grand  concourse  to
  Mount  Eden  Parkway, thence easterly along said parkway to Clay Avenue,
  thence southerly along said avenue to Belmont  Street,  thence  easterly
  along said street to Webster Avenue, the point of beginning.
    (d)  Any  tax lots now existing or hereafter created which are located
  entirely within the geographic area in the borough of Queens bounded and
  described as follows:
    (i) In the county of Queens, Beginning at a point  where  54th  Street
  meets  Broadway,  thence  southeasterly  along  Broadway to 64th Street,
  thence southerly along said Street to 39th Avenue, thence westerly along
  said avenue to 54th Street, thence northerly along said  street  to  its
  intersection with Broadway, the point of beginning.
    (ii)  In the County of Queens, Beginning at a point where 131st Street
  meets Fowler Avenue, thence easterly  along  Fowler  Avenue  to  College
  Point  Boulevard,  thence northerly on said Boulevard to Interstate 678,
  thence southerly along said Interstate to its intersection  with  Fowler
  Avenue, the point of beginning.
    (iii)  In  the  County of Queens, Beginning at a point where 94 Street
  meets 52nd Avenue, thence westerly along said  avenue  to  92nd  Street,
  thence northerly along said street to 50th Avenue, thence westerly along
  said  avenue  to 91st Street, thence northerly along said street to 48th
  Avenue, thence  westerly  along  said  avenue  to  90th  Street,  thence
  northerly along said street to Corona Avenue, thence westerly along said
  avenue to 88th Street, thence northerly along said street to Long Island
  Rail  Road,  thence  westerly  along  said  railroad to Broadway, thence
  northerly along Broadway to Whitney Avenue, thence easterly  along  said
  avenue  to  Ketcham  Place, thence westerly along said place to Elmhurst
  Avenue, thence northerly along  said  avenue  to  Judge  Street,  thence
  westerly  along  said  street  to Britton Avenue, thence southerly along

  said avenue to Broadway, thence westerly along Broadway to 41st  Avenue,
  thence westerly along said avenue to 75th Street, thence northerly along
  said  street to Broadway, thence westerly along Broadway to 74th Street,
  thence southerly along said street to 41st Avenue, thence westerly along
  said  avenue  to  73rd  Street,  thence  southerly  along said street to
  Woodside Avenue, thence westerly along  said  avenue  to  CSX  Railroad,
  thence  northerly  along  said  railroad to 41st Avenue, thence westerly
  along said Avenue to 69th Street, thence northerly along said street  to
  Roosevelt  Avenue,  thence  easterly  along said avenue to CSX Railroad,
  thence along said railroad to Broadway, thence easterly  along  Broadway
  to  69th  Street,  thence  northerly  along  said street to 70th Street,
  thence along said street to 69th Street, thence  along  said  street  to
  35th  Avenue,  thence  easterly along said avenue to 73rd Street, thence
  southerly along said street to 37th Road,  thence  easterly  along  said
  road  to 75th Street, thence northerly along said street to 37th Avenue,
  thence westerly along said avenue to 74th Street, thence northerly along
  said street to 35th Avenue, thence easterly along said  avenue  to  81st
  Street,  thence  northerly  along  said  street  to  34th Avenue, thence
  easterly along said avenue to 82nd Street, thence southerly  along  said
  street to 35th Avenue, thence easterly along said avenue to 84th Street,
  thence southerly along said street to 37th Avenue, thence easterly along
  said  avenue  to  85th  Street,  thence  southerly  along said street to
  Roosevelt Avenue, thence easterly along  said  avenue  to  88th  Street,
  thence northerly along said street to 37th Avenue, thence easterly along
  said  avenue  to  90th  Street,  thence  southerly  along said street to
  Roosevelt Avenue, thence easterly along said avenue to Elmhurst  Avenue,
  thence  northerly  along  said  avenue  to 93rd Street, thence southerly
  along said street to Roosevelt Avenue, thence easterly along said avenue
  to 94th Street, thence southerly  along  said  street  to  43rd  Avenue,
  thence easterly along said avenue to 94th Street, thence southerly along
  said  street  to  Alstyne  Avenue,  thence westerly along said avenue to
  Corona Avenue, thence easterly along said avenue to 94th Street,  thence
  southerly on said street to its intersection with 52nd Avenue, the point
  of beginning.
    (iv)  In  the county of Queens, Beginning at a point where 26th Avenue
  meets 14th Street, thence southerly along said street  to  34th  Avenue,
  thence westerly along said avenue to 12th Street, thence southerly along
  said  street  to  40th Avenue, thence westerly along said avenue to 10th
  Street, thence southerly along 10th Street to 41st Road,  to  the  point
  where  a line extended from 11th Street meets Queens Plaza South, thence
  southerly along 11th Street to 43rd Avenue, thence easterly  along  said
  avenue  to  Jackson  Avenue, thence westerly along said avenue to Purves
  Street, thence southerly along said street to  Thompson  Avenue,  thence
  easterly  along  said  avenue  to Skillman Avenue, thence westerly along
  said avenue to 49th Avenue, thence westerly along said  avenue  to  11th
  Street,  thence  southerly  along said street to the Queens/Kings county
  border, thence westerly along said border to the New York/ Queens county
  border, thence northerly to 26th  Avenue,  thence  easterly  along  said
  avenue to the point of beginning.
    (e)  Any  tax lots now existing or hereafter created which are located
  entirely within the geographic area in  the  borough  of  Staten  Island
  bounded and described as follows:
    In  the  County of Richmond, Beginning at a point where Clifton Avenue
  intersects Edgewater Street,  thence  northerly  along  said  street  to
  Lynhurst  Avenue,  thence  westerly  along said avenue to Langere Place,
  thence northerly along said place  to  Willow  Avenue,  thence  westerly
  along  said  avenue  to  Staten  Island  Rapid  Transit Railroad, thence
  northerly along said railroad to Staten Island  Rapid  Transit  Railroad

  east/west,  thence  westerly  along  said  railroad  to Chestnut Avenue,
  thence northerly along said avenue to  Mosel  Avenue,  thence  southerly
  along  said  avenue to Manton Place, thence westerly along said place to
  Hanover  Avenue,  thence  northerly  along  said  avenue to Palma Drive,
  thence westerly along said drive  to  Targee  Street,  thence  northerly
  along  said street to Metcalfe Street, thence westerly along said street
  to Van Duzer Street, thence southerly  along  said  street  to  Hillside
  Avenue,  thence  westerly  along  said  avenue  to Howard Avenue, thence
  southerly along said avenue to Highland Avenue, thence  northerly  along
  said  avenue  to  Arlo  Road,  thence easterly along said road to Howard
  Avenue, thence northerly  along  said  avenue  to  Greta  Place,  thence
  westerly  along  said  place to Duncan Road, thence northerly along said
  road to Theresa Place, thence  westerly  along  said  place  to  Victory
  Boulevard,  thence  northerly  along  said  boulevard  to Forest Avenue,
  thence  westerly  along  said  avenue   to   Brighton   Avenue,   thence
  northeasterly  along  said  avenue to Lafayette Avenue, thence northerly
  along said avenue to Arnold street, thence westerly along said street to
  Ellicott Place, thence northerly along said place  to  Prospect  Avenue,
  thence  westerly  along  said avenue to Clinton Avenue, thence northerly
  along said avenue to Henderson Avenue, thence westerly along said avenue
  to Tysen Street, thence northerly along said street to Richmond Terrace,
  thence westerly along said terrace to Jewett  Avenue,  thence  southerly
  along said avenue to Forest Avenue, thence westerly along said avenue to
  Morningstar  Road,  thence  southerly  along  said road to Monsey Place,
  thence westerly along said place to  Sanders  Street,  thence  southerly
  along said street to Wilcox Street, thence westerly along said street to
  Eunice Place, thence northerly along said place to Forest Avenue, thence
  westerly along said avenue to Heaney Avenue, thence southerly along said
  avenue  to  Wilcox  Street,  thence  westerly along said street to Amity
  Place, thence northerly  along  said  place  to  Wemple  Street,  thence
  westerly  along said street to South Avenue, thence northerly along said
  avenue to Forest Avenue, thence westerly along said avenue  to  Goethals
  Road  North,  thence along said road to Western Avenue, thence northerly
  along said avenue to the Staten Island Rapid  Transit  Railroad,  thence
  easterly  along  said  railroad  to  a  line extended south from Holland
  Avenue, thence northerly along said line  extended  to  Holland  Avenue,
  thence  along  said avenue to Benjamin Place, thence easterly along said
  place to  Arlington  Avenue,  thence  southerly  along  said  avenue  to
  Arlington  Place,  thence easterly along said place to Grandview Avenue,
  thence southerly along said avenue to Davidson Street,  thence  easterly
  along  said  street to Andros Avenue, thence southerly along said avenue
  to a line extended to the Staten Island Rapid Transit  Railroad,  thence
  easterly  along said railroad to Van Name Avenue, thence northerly along
  said avenue to Richmond Terrace, thence easterly along said  terrace  to
  Wright  Avenue, thence northerly along said avenue to a line extended to
  the  northern  shore  of  Staten  Island,  thence  easterly  along  said
  shoreline  to  Bayonne Bridge, thence northerly along said bridge to the
  New York/New Jersey state line, thence easterly along said state line to
  the Kings/Richmond county line, thence southerly along said county  line
  to  a  point  where it meets a line extended from Clifton Avenue, thence
  westerly along said line extended to  the  point  where  Clifton  Avenue
  intersects Edgewater Street, the point of beginning.
    12.   An  agreement  with  the  local  housing  agency  to  create  or
  substantially  rehabilitate  offsite   housing   units   affordable   to
  households  of  low  and moderate income, shall remain in full force and
  effect. The housing units developed pursuant  to  such  agreement  shall
  continue to make a building or buildings located in geographic exclusion
  areas  as  defined  in  this  subdivision  eligible  to receive benefits

  pursuant to this section notwithstanding the provisions  of  subdivision
  seven or nine of this section or any exemption cap provided in local law
  provided  that  the  agreement with the local housing agency was entered
  into  prior to December twenty-eighth, two thousand six and construction
  of the building receiving benefits pursuant to this section is commenced
  on or before June thirtieth, two thousand nine.
    13. (a) As used in this subdivision, "UDC Large Scale  Project"  shall
  mean a multi-phase project that (i) includes the development of at least
  twenty-five  hundred  new  dwelling  units,  (ii)  is  being implemented
  pursuant to a General Project Plan adopted by the New York  State  Urban
  Development Corporation and approved by Public Authorities Control Board
  or  is  otherwise  set forth in agreements with the New York State Urban
  Development Corporation, (iii) includes a development over a single area
  containing a number of contiguous city blocks, and  (iv)  the  units  in
  which, in the aggregate for each successive fifteen hundred units of the
  project  rather  than for each multiple dwelling containing such fifteen
  hundred units and in the aggregate for the entire  project  rather  than
  for  each  multiple  dwelling  in  the project, meet the requirements of
  paragraph (c) of subdivision seven of this section.
    (b) Except as otherwise provided in subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (a)
  of this subdivision, no portion of a UDC Large Scale  Project  shall  be
  subject  to  the  requirements  of paragraph (c) of subdivision seven of
  this section.
    (c) With respect to any multiple dwelling in a UDC Large Scale Project
  that meets the requirements of paragraph (c)  of  subdivision  seven  of
  this  section,  the  period  of  tax  benefits  awarded to such multiple
  dwelling shall be the same as the period of tax benefits  awarded  under
  clause  (A) of subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (a) of subdivision two of
  this section. With respect to any multiple dwelling in a UDC Large Scale
  Project that  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  (c)  of
  subdivision seven of this section, the period of tax benefits awarded to
  such  multiple  dwelling shall be the same as the period of tax benefits
  awarded under clause (A)  of  subparagraph  (ii)  of  paragraph  (a)  of
  subdivision  two  of  this  section.  The  tax  benefits  awarded to any
  multiple dwelling in a UDC Large Scale Project shall commence  upon  the
  commencement  of  construction  of  such  multiple  dwelling,  provided,
  however, that such multiple dwelling meets all of the  requirements  for
  tax  benefits  pursuant  to  this  section.  For each successive fifteen
  hundred units of a UDC Large Scale Project,  the  local  housing  agency
  must  certify  the  completion  of  any  affordable units, as defined in
  subparagraph (i) of paragraph (a) of subdivision seven of this  section,
  required   to  qualify  any  multiple  dwelling  or  multiple  dwellings
  comprising such fifteen hundred  units  for  any  tax  benefits  awarded
  pursuant  to this paragraph. The existence of such special certification
  requirement and its financial impact upon all units, including, but  not
  limited  to,  revocation  of  tax  benefits  awarded  pursuant  to  this
  paragraph if such special certification requirement is not met, shall be
  disclosed as a special risk in any offering plan for any units in a  UDC
  Large Scale Project.
    (d) With respect to any UDC Large Scale Project located in whole or in
  part  within  community district number eight in the borough of Brooklyn
  in the city of New York, notwithstanding the provisions of  subparagraph
  (ii) of paragraph (d) of subdivision seven of this section, the priority
  specified  in  such  subparagraph  shall  be granted to the residents of
  community districts two, three, six and eight of such borough.
    14. The provisions of subdivisions seven  and  nine  of  this  section
  shall  not  apply  to (1) multiple dwellings which commence construction
  prior to July first, two thousand eight; or (2)  where  commencement  of

  construction is delayed as a result of litigation relating to a contract
  for  the  purchase  of  real  property  entered  into  prior to December
  twenty-eight, two thousand six and in which a judgment was entered prior
  to  the  effective  date  of this subdivision provided that construction
  commences within  a  reasonable  time  after  final  resolution  of  the
  litigation;  or  (3)  where benefits pursuant to this section are sought
  for a building located on a  site  requiring  environmental  remediation
  construction and a certificate of completion pursuant to section 27-1419
  of  the  environmental  conservation  law  has been issued prior to July
  first, two thousand  eight,  provided  that  construction  is  completed
  without  undue  delay;  or (4) a project which (i) on or before December
  thirty-first, two thousand six, such project  receives  special  permits
  pursuant  to  the  New  York  city zoning resolution with respect to all
  buildings to be  constructed  on  the  development  site,  and  (ii)  on
  December  thirty-first,  two thousand six, a portion of such development
  site was owned by the state of New York and contained a New  York  power
  authority   temporary   generating  facility,  and  (iii)  such  project
  commenced  construction  before  the  later  of  three  years  from  the
  effective  date  of local law number fifty-eight of the city of New York
  for the year two thousand six or eighteen months from the removal of all
  such temporary generating facilities.
    15. Paragraphs two through four of subdivision (a) of  section  11-245
  of  the  administrative  code  of  the city of New York and subdivisions
  (b-1) and (b-2) of section 11-245 of the administrative code of the city
  of New York, as added by local law number fifty-eight of the city of New
  York for the year two thousand six  shall  not  apply  to  (1)  multiple
  dwellings  which commence construction prior to July first, two thousand
  eight; or (2) where commencement of construction is delayed as a  result
  of  litigation  relating to a contract for the purchase of real property
  entered into prior to December twenty-eighth, two thousand  six  and  in
  which  a  judgment  was  entered  prior  to  the  effective date of this
  subdivision provided that construction  commences  within  a  reasonable
  time  after  final  resolution  of the litigation; or (3) where benefits
  pursuant to this section are sought for a building  located  on  a  site
  requiring  environmental  remediation  construction and a certificate of
  completion pursuant to section 27-1419 of the environmental conservation
  law has been issued prior to July first, two  thousand  eight,  provided
  that  construction  is  completed  without undue delay; or (4) a project
  which (i) on or before December thirty-first,  two  thousand  six,  such
  project  receives  special  permits pursuant to the New York city zoning
  resolution with respect to  all  buildings  to  be  constructed  on  the
  development site, and (ii) on December thirty-first, two thousand six, a
  portion  of such development site was owned by the state of New York and
  contained a New York power authority temporary generating facility,  and
  (iii)  such  project  commenced  construction  before the later of three
  years from the effective date of local law  number  fifty-eight  of  the
  city  of  New York for the year two thousand six or eighteen months from
  the removal of all such temporary generating facilities.
    16. (a) Definitions. For the purposes of this subdivision:
    (i)  "Affordable  New  York  Housing  Program  benefits"  shall   mean
  exemption from real property taxation pursuant to this subdivision.
    (ii)  "Affordability  option  A"  shall mean that, within any eligible
  site:   (A) not  less  than  ten  percent  of  the  dwelling  units  are
  affordable  housing forty percent units; (B) not less than an additional
  ten percent of the dwelling units are affordable housing  sixty  percent
  units;  (C)  not  less  than  an additional five percent of the dwelling
  units are affordable housing one hundred thirty percent units;  and  (D)
  such  eligible  site  is developed without the substantial assistance of

  grants, loans or  subsidies  provided  by  a  federal,  state  or  local
  governmental  agency  or  instrumentality  pursuant to a program for the
  development of affordable housing, except that such  eligible  site  may
  receive tax exempt bond proceeds and four percent tax credits.
    (iii)  "Affordability  option  B" shall mean that, within any eligible
  site, (A) not less than ten percent of the dwelling units are affordable
  housing seventy percent units, and  (B)  not  less  than  an  additional
  twenty  percent of the dwelling units are affordable housing one hundred
  thirty percent units.
    (iv) "Affordability option C" shall mean  that,  within  any  eligible
  site  excluding  the geographic area south of ninety-sixth street in the
  borough of Manhattan, and all other geographic areas in the city of  New
  York excluded pursuant to local law, (A) not less than thirty percent of
  the  dwelling  units  are  affordable housing one hundred thirty percent
  units, and (B) such eligible site is developed without  the  substantial
  assistance of grants, loans or subsidies provided by a federal, state or
  local  governmental  agency or instrumentality pursuant to a program for
  the development of affordable housing.
    (v) "Affordability option D"  shall  only  apply  to  a  homeownership
  project, of which one hundred percent of the units shall have an average
  assessed  value not to exceed sixty-five thousand dollars upon the first
  assessment following the completion date and where  each  owner  of  any
  such  unit  shall  agree,  in  writing,  to  maintain such unit as their
  primary residence for no less than five years from  the  acquisition  of
  such unit.
    (vi)  "Affordability  option  E"  shall mean that, within any eligible
  site within the enhanced affordability area, such site must  consist  of
  no  less  than three hundred rental dwelling units of which (A) not less
  than ten percent of the rental dwelling  units  are  affordable  housing
  forty  percent units; (B) not less than an additional ten percent of the
  rental dwelling units are affordable housing sixty  percent  units;  (C)
  not  less  than  an additional five percent of the rental dwelling units
  are affordable housing one hundred twenty percent units;  and  (D)  such
  eligible site is developed without the substantial assistance of grants,
  loans  or  subsidies  provided by a federal, state or local governmental
  agency or instrumentality pursuant to a program for the  development  of
  affordable  housing,  except  that  such  eligible  site may receive tax
  exempt bond proceeds and four percent tax credits.
    (vii) "Affordability option F" shall mean that,  within  any  eligible
  site  within  the enhanced affordability area, such site must consist of
  no less than three hundred rental dwelling units of which (A)  not  less
  than  ten  percent  of  the rental dwelling units are affordable housing
  seventy percent units; and  (B)  not  less  than  an  additional  twenty
  percent  of the rental dwelling units are affordable housing one hundred
  thirty percent units.
    (viii) "Affordability option G" shall mean that, within  any  eligible
  site  located  within  the  Brooklyn  enhanced affordability area or the
  Queens enhanced affordability area, such site must consist  of  no  less
  than  three  hundred  rental  dwelling  units of which (A) not less than
  thirty percent of the  rental  dwelling  units  are  affordable  housing
  one-hundred  thirty  percent  units;  and  (B)  such  eligible  site  is
  developed  without  the  substantial  assistance  of  grants,  loans  or
  subsidies  provided  by a federal, state or local governmental agency or
  instrumentality pursuant to a program for the development of  affordable
  housing.
    (ix)  "Affordability  percentage" shall mean a fraction, the numerator
  of which is the number of affordable housing units in an  eligible  site

  and  the  denominator  of which is the total number of dwelling units in
  such eligible site.
    (x) "Affordable housing forty percent unit" shall mean a dwelling unit
  that:  (A) is situated within the eligible site for which Affordable New
  York Housing Program benefits are granted; and (B) upon  initial  rental
  and   upon  each  subsequent  rental  following  a  vacancy  during  the
  restriction period or extended restriction  period,  as  applicable,  is
  affordable  to  and  restricted  to occupancy by individuals or families
  whose household income does not exceed forty percent of the area  median
  income,  adjusted  for  family  size,  at  the  time that such household
  initially occupies such dwelling unit.
    (xi) "Affordable housing sixty percent unit"  shall  mean  a  dwelling
  unit that: (A) is situated within the eligible site for which Affordable
  New  York  Housing  Program  benefits  are granted; and (B) upon initial
  rental and upon each subsequent rental following a  vacancy  during  the
  restriction  period  or  extended  restriction period, as applicable, is
  affordable to and restricted to occupancy  by  individuals  or  families
  whose  household income does not exceed sixty percent of the area median
  income, adjusted for family  size,  at  the  time  that  such  household
  initially occupies such dwelling unit.
    (xii)  "Affordable housing seventy percent unit" shall mean a dwelling
  unit that: (A) is situated within the eligible site for which Affordable
  New York Housing Program benefits are  granted;  and  (B)  upon  initial
  rental  and  upon  each subsequent rental following a vacancy during the
  restriction period or extended restriction  period,  as  applicable,  is
  affordable  to  and  restricted  to occupancy by individuals or families
  whose household income does not  exceed  seventy  percent  of  the  area
  median income, adjusted for family size, at the time that such household
  initially occupies such dwelling unit.
    (xiii) "Affordable housing one hundred twenty percent unit" shall mean
  a dwelling unit that: (A) is situated within the eligible site for which
  Affordable  New  York Housing Program benefits are granted; and (B) upon
  initial rental and upon  each  subsequent  rental  following  a  vacancy
  during  the extended restriction period, is affordable to and restricted
  to occupancy by individuals or families whose household income does  not
  exceed  one  hundred  twenty percent of the area median income, adjusted
  for family size, at the time that such household initially occupies such
  dwelling unit.
    (xiv) "Affordable housing one hundred thirty percent unit" shall  mean
  a dwelling unit that: (A) is situated within the eligible site for which
  Affordable  New  York Housing Program benefits are granted; and (B) upon
  initial rental and upon  each  subsequent  rental  following  a  vacancy
  during  the  restriction  period  or  extended  restriction  period,  as
  applicable, is affordable to and restricted to occupancy by  individuals
  or  families  whose  household income does not exceed one hundred thirty
  percent of the area median income, adjusted for family size, at the time
  that such household initially occupies such dwelling unit.
    (xv)  "Affordable  housing  unit"   shall   mean,   collectively   and
  individually, affordable housing forty percent units, affordable housing
  sixty   percent   units,   affordable  housing  seventy  percent  units,
  affordable housing one  hundred  twenty  percent  units  and  affordable
  housing one hundred thirty percent units.
    (xvi)  "Agency"  shall mean the department of housing preservation and
  development.
    (xvii) "Application" shall mean an application for Affordable New York
  Housing Program benefits.
    (xviii) "Average hourly wage" shall  mean  the  amount  equal  to  the
  aggregate  amount  of all wages and all employee benefits paid to, or on

  behalf of, construction workers for construction  work  divided  by  the
  aggregate number of hours of construction work.
    (xix)  "Brooklyn  enhanced affordability area" shall mean any tax lots
  now existing or hereafter created  which  are  located  entirely  within
  community  boards  one  or  two  of  the borough of Brooklyn bounded and
  described as follows: All that piece or parcel of land situate and being
  in the boroughs of Queens and Brooklyn, New York. Beginning at the point
  of intersection of the centerline of  Newtown  Creek  and  the  westerly
  bounds  of  the East River; Thence southeasterly along the centerline of
  Newtown Creek, said centerline also being the  boundary  between  Queens
  County  to the northeast and Kings County to the southwest, to the point
  of intersection  with  Greenpoint  Avenue;  Thence  southwesterly  along
  Greenpoint  Avenue,  to  the intersection with Kings Land Avenue; Thence
  southerly along Kingsland Avenue to the intersection with Meeker Avenue;
  Thence southwesterly  along  Meeker  Avenue  to  the  intersection  with
  Leonard   Street;   Thence   southerly   along  Leonard  Street  to  the
  intersection   with   Metropolitan   Avenue;   Thence   westerly   along
  Metropolitan  Avenue  to  the  intersection  with Lorimer Street; Thence
  southerly along Lorimer Street to the intersection with Montrose Avenue;
  Thence westerly along Montrose Avenue to  the  intersection  with  Union
  Avenue;  Thence  southerly  along  Union Avenue to the intersection with
  Johnson Avenue; Thence westerly along Johnson Avenue to the intersection
  with Broadway; Thence northwesterly along Broadway to  the  intersection
  with  Rutledge Street; Thence southwesterly along Rutledge Street to the
  intersection with Kent Avenue and Classon Avenue;  Thence  southwesterly
  and  southerly  along  Classon  Avenue  to  the intersection with Dekalb
  Avenue; Thence westerly along Dekalb Avenue  to  the  intersection  with
  Bond  Street; Thence southwesterly along Bond Street to the intersection
  with Wyckoff Street; Thence northwesterly along Wyckoff  Street  to  the
  intersection with Hoyt Street; Thence southwesterly along Hoyt Street to
  the  intersection  with Warren Street; Thence northwesterly along Warren
  Street to the intersection with Court Street; Thence northeasterly along
  Court  Street  to  the  intersection  with   Atlantic   Avenue;   Thence
  northwesterly  along Atlantic Avenue, crossing under The Brooklyn Queens
  Expressway (aka Interstate 278), to the terminus of Atlantic  Avenue  at
  the  Brooklyn  Bridge  Park/Pier 6; Thence northwesterly passing through
  the Brooklyn Bridge Park to the bulkhead of the East River  at  Pier  6;
  Thence  in a general northeasterly direction along the easterly bulkhead
  or shoreline of the East River to the intersection with  the  centerline
  of Newtown Creek, and the point or place of Beginning.
    (xx)  "Building  service  employee"  shall  mean  any  person  who  is
  regularly employed at, and performs work in connection with the care  or
  maintenance  of,  an  eligible  site,  including,  but not limited to, a
  watchman, guard, doorman, building cleaner, porter,  handyman,  janitor,
  gardener,  groundskeeper,  elevator  operator  and  starter,  and window
  cleaner, but not including persons regularly  scheduled  to  work  fewer
  than eight hours per week at the eligible site.
    (xxi)  "Commencement  date"  shall  mean, with respect to any eligible
  multiple dwelling, the date upon which excavation  and  construction  of
  initial  footings  and foundations lawfully begins in good faith or, for
  an eligible conversion, the date upon which the actual  construction  of
  the  conversion,  alteration or improvement of the pre-existing building
  or structure lawfully begins in good faith.
    (xxii) "Completion date" shall mean,  with  respect  to  any  eligible
  multiple dwelling, the date upon which the local department of buildings
  issues  the  first  temporary  or  permanent  certificate  of  occupancy
  covering all residential areas of an eligible multiple dwelling.

    (xxiii) "Construction period" shall mean, with respect to any eligible
  multiple  dwelling,  a  period:  (A)  beginning  on  the  later  of  the
  commencement  date  of  such  eligible  multiple dwelling or three years
  before the completion date of such eligible multiple dwelling;  and  (B)
  ending  on  the  day  preceding  the  completion  date  of such eligible
  multiple dwelling.
    (xxiv) "Construction work" shall mean the provision of labor performed
  on an eligible site between the commencement  date  and  the  completion
  date,  whereby materials and constituent parts are combined to initially
  form, make or build an eligible  multiple  dwelling,  including  without
  limitation,  painting,  or  providing of material, articles, supplies or
  equipment in the eligible  multiple  dwelling,  but  excluding  security
  personnel and work related to the fit-out of commercial spaces.
    (xxv)   "Construction  workers"  shall  mean  all  persons  performing
  construction work who (A) are paid on an hourly basis and (B) are not in
  a management or executive role or position.
    (xxvi) "Contractor certified payroll report" shall  mean  an  original
  payroll  report  submitted  by  a  contractor  or  sub-contractor to the
  independent monitor setting forth to the best  of  the  contractor's  or
  sub-contractor's  knowledge,  the  total number of hours of construction
  work performed by construction workers, the amount of wages and employee
  benefits paid to construction workers for construction work.
    (xxvii) "Eligible conversion" shall mean the conversion, alteration or
  improvement of a pre-existing  building  or  structure  resulting  in  a
  multiple  dwelling in which no more than forty-nine percent of the floor
  area consists of such pre-existing building or structure.
    (xxviii) "Eligible multiple dwelling" shall mean a  multiple  dwelling
  or  homeownership  project containing six or more dwelling units created
  through  new  construction  or  eligible  conversion   for   which   the
  commencement  date  is after December thirty-first, two thousand fifteen
  and on or before June fifteenth, two thousand twenty-two, and for  which
  the  completion  date  is  on  or  before  June  fifteenth, two thousand
  twenty-six.
    (xxix) "Eligible site" shall mean either: (A) a tax lot containing  an
  eligible  multiple  dwelling; or (B) a zoning lot containing two or more
  eligible multiple dwellings that are part of a single application.
    (xxx) "Employee benefits" shall  mean  all  supplemental  compensation
  paid  by  the  employer,  on  behalf of construction workers, other than
  wages, including, without limitation, any premiums or contributions made
  into plans or  funds  that  provide  health,  welfare,  non-occupational
  disability  coverage,  retirement,  vacation benefits, holiday pay, life
  insurance  and  apprenticeship  training.  The  value  of  any  employee
  benefits  received shall be determined based on the prorated hourly cost
  to the employer  of  the  employee  benefits  received  by  construction
  workers.
    (xxxi) "Enhanced affordability area" shall mean the Manhattan enhanced
  affordability  area,  the  Brooklyn  enhanced affordability area and the
  Queens enhanced affordability area.
    (xxxii) "Enhanced thirty-five year benefit" shall mean:  (A)  for  the
  construction  period, a one hundred percent exemption from real property
  taxation, other than assessments for local improvements; and (B) for the
  next thirty-five years of the extended restriction period, a one hundred
  percent exemption from real property taxation,  other  than  assessments
  for local improvements.
    (xxxiii)  "Extended restriction period" shall mean a period commencing
  on the completion date and expiring on the fortieth anniversary  of  the
  completion  date,  notwithstanding any earlier termination or revocation
  of Affordable New York Housing Program benefits.

    (xxxiv) "Fiscal officer" shall mean the comptroller or other analogous
  officer in a city having a population of one million or more.
    (xxxv)  "Floor  area"  shall  mean the horizontal areas of the several
  floors, or  any  portion  thereof,  of  a  dwelling  or  dwellings,  and
  accessory  structures  on  a  lot  measured  from  the exterior faces of
  exterior walls, or from the center line of party walls.
    (xxxvi) "Four percent tax  credits"  shall  mean  federal  low  income
  housing   tax  credits  computed  in  accordance  with  clause  (ii)  of
  subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of section forty-two
  of the internal revenue code of nineteen hundred eighty-six, as amended.
    (xxxvii) "Homeownership project" shall mean  a  multiple  dwelling  or
  portion thereof operated as condominium or cooperative housing, however,
  it  shall not include a multiple dwelling or portion thereof operated as
  cooperative  or  condominium  housing  located  within  the  borough  of
  Manhattan,  and shall not include a multiple dwelling that contains more
  than thirty-five units.
    (xxxviii) "Independent monitor" shall mean an accountant licensed  and
  in  good  standing  pursuant  to  article  one hundred forty-nine of the
  education law.
    (xxxix)  "Job  action"  shall  mean   any   delay,   interruption   or
  interference  with  the  construction  work caused by the actions of any
  labor organization or concerted action of any employees at the  eligible
  site,  including  without  limitation,  strikes,  sympathy strikes, work
  stoppages, walk outs, slowdowns,  picketing,  bannering,  hand  billing,
  demonstrations,  sickouts,  refusals to cross a picket line, refusals to
  handle struck business, and use of the rat or other inflatable  balloons
  or similar displays.
    (xl)  "Market unit" shall mean a dwelling unit in an eligible multiple
  dwelling other than an affordable housing unit.
    (xli) "Multiple dwelling" shall have the  meaning  set  forth  in  the
  multiple dwelling law.
    (xlii)  "Non-residential  tax  lot" shall mean a tax lot that does not
  contain any dwelling units.
    (xliii) "Manhattan enhanced affordability area"  shall  mean  any  tax
  lots  now  existing  or hereafter created located entirely south of 96th
  street in the borough of Manhattan.
    (xliv) "Project labor agreement"  shall  mean  a  pre-hire  collective
  bargaining   agreement   setting  forth  the  terms  and  conditions  of
  employment for the construction workers on an eligible site.
    (xlv) "Project-wide certified payroll report" shall mean  a  certified
  payroll  report  submitted  by  the  independent  monitor  to the fiscal
  officer based on each contractor certified  payroll  report  which  sets
  forth  the  total  number  of  hours  of  construction work performed by
  construction  workers,  the  aggregate  amount  of  wages  and  employee
  benefits  paid  to  construction  workers  for construction work and the
  average hourly wage.
    (xlvi) "Queens enhanced affordability area" shall mean  any  tax  lots
  now  existing  or  hereafter  created  which are located entirely within
  community boards one or  two  of  the  borough  of  Queens  bounded  and
  described as follows: All that piece or parcel of land situate and being
  in the boroughs of Queens and Brooklyn, New York. Beginning at the point
  being  the  intersection  of the easterly shore of the East River with a
  line of prolongation of  20th  Avenue  projected  northwesterly;  Thence
  southeasterly  on the line of prolongation of 20th Avenue and along 20th
  Avenue to the intersection with 31st Street; Thence southwesterly  along
  31st   Street  to  the  intersection  with  Northern  Boulevard;  Thence
  southwesterly along Northern Boulevard to the intersection  with  Queens
  Boulevard (aka Route 25); Thence southeasterly along Queens Boulevard to

  the  intersection  with  Van  Dam Street; Thence southerly along Van Dam
  Street to the intersection  with  Borden  Avenue;  Thence  southwesterly
  along  Van  Dam  Street  to  the intersection with Greenpoint Avenue and
  Review Avenue; Thence southwesterly along Greenpoint Avenue to the point
  of intersection with the centerline of Newtown Creek, said centerline of
  Newtown Creek also being the boundary between Queens County to the north
  and Kings County to the south; Thence northwesterly along the centerline
  of  Newtown  Creek,  also  being  the boundary between Queens County and
  Kings County to its intersection with the easterly bounds  of  the  East
  River;  Thence  in  a general northeasterly direction along the easterly
  bulkhead or shoreline of the  East  River  to  the  point  or  place  of
  Beginning.
    (xlvii)  "Rent  stabilization"  shall  mean,  collectively,  the  rent
  stabilization law of nineteen hundred sixty-nine, the rent stabilization
  code, and the emergency tenant protection act of nineteen  seventy-four,
  all  as in effect as of the effective date of the chapter of the laws of
  two  thousand  fifteen  that  added  this  subdivision  or  as   amended
  thereafter,   together   with  any  successor  statutes  or  regulations
  addressing substantially the same subject matter.
    (xlviii) "Rental project" shall mean an eligible  site  in  which  all
  dwelling  units  included  in  any  application  are  operated as rental
  housing.
    (xlix) "Residential tax lot"  shall  mean  a  tax  lot  that  contains
  dwelling units.
    (l)  "Restriction  period"  shall  mean  a  period  commencing  on the
  completion date and expiring on  the  thirty-fifth  anniversary  of  the
  completion  date,  notwithstanding any earlier termination or revocation
  of Affordable New York Housing Program benefits.
    (li) "Tax exempt bond proceeds" shall mean the proceeds of  an  exempt
  facility  bond, as defined in paragraph (7) of subsection (a) of section
  one hundred forty-two of the internal revenue code of  nineteen  hundred
  eighty-six,  as amended, the interest upon which is exempt from taxation
  under section one hundred three of the internal revenue code of nineteen
  hundred eighty-six, as amended.
    (lii) "Third party fund administrator" shall be  a  person  or  entity
  that  receives  funds  pursuant to paragraph (c) of this subdivision and
  oversees and  manages  the  disbursal  of  such  funds  to  construction
  workers.  The third party fund administrator shall be a person or entity
  approved by  the  fiscal  officer  and  recommended  by  one,  or  more,
  representative  or  representatives  of the largest trade association of
  residential real estate developers, either for profit or not-for-profit,
  in New York city and one, or more, representative or representatives  of
  the   largest   trade   labor   association  representing  building  and
  construction workers, with membership in New York city. The third  party
  fund  administrator  shall  be  appointed  for  a  term  of three years,
  provided, however, that the administrator in place at the end of a three
  year term shall continue to serve beyond the end of  the  term  until  a
  replacement   administrator  is  appointed.  The  fiscal  officer  after
  providing  notice  and  after  meeting  with  the   third   party   fund
  administrator,  may  remove  such  administrator for cause upon a fiscal
  officer determination that the administrator  has  been  ineffective  at
  overseeing  or  managing  the  disbursal  of  funds  to the construction
  workers. The third party fund administrator shall, at the request of the
  fiscal officer, submit reports to the fiscal officer.
    (liii) "Thirty-five year benefit" shall mean: (A) for the construction
  period, a one hundred percent exemption  from  real  property  taxation,
  other  than  assessments  for  local  improvements;  (B)  for  the first
  twenty-five years of the  restriction  period,  a  one  hundred  percent

  exemption  from real property taxation, other than assessments for local
  improvements; and (C) for the final ten years of the restriction period,
  an exemption from real property taxation,  other  than  assessments  for
  local improvements, equal to the affordability percentage.
    (liv)  "Twenty  year  benefit"  shall  mean:  (A) for the construction
  period, a one hundred percent exemption  from  real  property  taxation,
  other  than  assessments  for  local  improvements;  (B)  for  the first
  fourteen  years  of  the  restriction  period,  a  one  hundred  percent
  exemption  from real property taxation, other than assessments for local
  improvements, provided, however, that no exemption shall  be  given  for
  any portion of a unit's assessed value that exceeds $65,000; and (C) for
  the  next  six  years  of  the restriction period, a twenty-five percent
  exemption from real property taxation, other than assessments for  local
  improvements,  provided,  however,  that no exemption shall be given for
  any portion of a unit's assessed value that exceeds $65,000.
    (lv) "Wages" shall mean all compensation, remuneration or payments  of
  any  kind  paid  to,  or  on behalf of, construction workers, including,
  without  limitation,  any  hourly  compensation  paid  directly  to  the
  construction  worker,  together  with employee benefits, such as health,
  welfare,  non-occupational  disability  coverage,  retirement,  vacation
  benefits,  holiday  pay, life insurance and apprenticeship training, and
  payroll taxes, including, to the extent permissible by law, all  amounts
  paid   for  New  York  state  unemployment  insurance,  New  York  state
  disability insurance, metropolitan commuter transportation mobility tax,
  federal unemployment insurance and pursuant  to  the  federal  insurance
  contributions act or any other payroll tax that is paid by the employer.
    (b)  Benefit.  In  cities  having a population of one million or more,
  notwithstanding the provisions of any other subdivision of this  section
  or  of  any  general, special or local law to the contrary, new eligible
  sites,  except  hotels,  that  comply  with  the  provisions   of   this
  subdivision  shall  be  exempt  from  real property taxation, other than
  assessments for local improvements, in the amounts and for  the  periods
  specified  in  this  paragraph.  A  rental project that meets all of the
  requirements of  this  subdivision  shall  receive  a  thirty-five  year
  benefit  and  a homeownership project that meets all of the requirements
  of this subdivision shall  receive  a  twenty  year  benefit.  A  rental
  project that also meets all of the requirements of paragraph (c) of this
  subdivision shall receive an enhanced thirty-five year benefit.
    (c)   In  addition  to  all  other  requirements  set  forth  in  this
  subdivision, rental projects containing three  hundred  or  more  rental
  dwelling  units  located  within  the  enhanced affordability area shall
  comply with the requirements set forth in this paragraph.  For  purposes
  of this paragraph, "contractor" shall mean any entity which by agreement
  with  another  party  (including  subcontractors)  undertakes to perform
  construction work at an eligible site  and  "applicant"  shall  mean  an
  applicant  for  Affordable  New  York  Housing  Program benefits and any
  successor thereto.
    (i) Such rental project shall comply with either affordability  option
  E, affordability option F or affordability option G.
    (ii)  The  minimum average hourly wage paid to construction workers on
  an eligible site within the Manhattan enhanced affordability area  shall
  be  no  less than sixty dollars per hour. Three years from the effective
  date of the chapter of the laws of two  thousand  seventeen  that  added
  this  paragraph  and  every  three years thereafter, the minimum average
  hourly wage shall be increased by five percent; provided, however,  that
  any building with a commencement date prior to the date of such increase
  shall  be required to pay the minimum average hourly wage as required on
  its commencement date.

    (iii) The minimum average hourly wage paid to construction workers  on
  an  eligible site within the Brooklyn enhanced affordability area or the
  Queens enhanced affordability area shall  be  no  less  than  forty-five
  dollars  per hour. Three years from the effective date of the chapter of
  the  laws  of two thousand seventeen that added this paragraph and every
  three years  thereafter,  the  minimum  average  hourly  wage  shall  be
  increased  by  five percent; provided, however, that any building with a
  commencement date prior to the date of such increase shall  be  required
  to  pay  the minimum average hourly wage as required on its commencement
  date.
    (iv)  The  requirements  of  subparagraphs  (ii)  and  (iii)  of  this
  paragraph shall not be applicable to:
    (A)  an  eligible multiple dwelling in which at least fifty percent of
  the dwelling units upon initial rental and upon each  subsequent  rental
  following   a  vacancy  during  the  extended  restriction  period,  are
  affordable to and restricted to occupancy  by  individuals  or  families
  whose  household  income does not exceed one hundred twenty-five percent
  of the area median income, adjusted for family size, at  the  time  that
  such household initially occupies such dwelling unit;
    (B)  any  portion  of an eligible multiple dwelling which is owned and
  operated as a condominium or cooperative; or
    (C) at the option of the applicant, to an eligible site subject  to  a
  project labor agreement.
    (v)  The  applicant  shall  contract with an independent monitor. Such
  independent monitor shall submit to the fiscal officer within  one  year
  of  the  completion date a project-wide certified payroll report. In the
  event such project-wide certified payroll report is not submitted to the
  fiscal officer within the requisite time, the applicant shall be subject
  to a fine of one thousand dollars per  week,  or  any  portion  thereof;
  provided  that  the maximum fine shall be seventy-five thousand dollars.
  In the event that the average hourly  wage  is  less  than  the  minimum
  average  hourly  wage  set  forth  in subparagraph (ii) or (iii) of this
  paragraph as applicable, the project-wide certified payroll report shall
  also set forth the aggregate amount of such deficiency.
    (vi) The contractor certified payroll report  shall  be  submitted  by
  each  contractor  and sub-contractor no later than ninety days after the
  completion of construction work by such contractor or sub-contractor. In
  the event that a contractor or sub-contractor fails or refuses to submit
  the contractor certified payroll report within the  time  prescribed  in
  this  subparagraph,  the  independent  monitor  shall  notify the fiscal
  officer and  the  fiscal  officer  shall  be  authorized  to  fine  such
  contractor  or  sub-contractor in the amount of one thousand dollars per
  week, or any portion thereof, provided that the maximum  fine  shall  be
  seventy-five thousand dollars.
    (vii)  In  the  event  that  the project-wide certified payroll report
  shows that the average hourly wage as required by subparagraph  (ii)  or
  (iii) of this paragraph, as applicable, was not paid, (A) if the average
  hourly  wage  is  within  fifteen  percent  of  the  average hourly wage
  required by subparagraph (i) or (ii) of this paragraph,  as  applicable,
  then  no  later than one hundred twenty days from the date of submission
  of such project-wide certified payroll report, the applicant  shall  pay
  to  the  third party fund administrator an amount equal to the amount of
  the deficiency set forth in the project-wide certified  payroll  report.
  The  third party fund administrator shall distribute such payment to the
  construction workers who performed construction work  on  such  eligible
  site. Prior to making such repayment, the third party fund administrator
  shall  submit  to  the  fiscal  officer  a  plan  subject  to the fiscal
  officer's approval setting forth the manner in  which  the  third  party

  fund  administrator  will  reach  the  required  average wage within one
  hundred fifty days of receiving the payment from the applicant  and  how
  any  remaining funds will be disbursed in the event that the third party
  fund  administrator  cannot  distribute  the  funds  to the construction
  workers within one year of receiving fiscal  officer  approval.  In  the
  event  that  the  applicant  fails  to make such payment within the time
  period prescribed in this subparagraph, the applicant shall  be  subject
  to  a  fine  of  one thousand dollars per week provided that the maximum
  fine shall be seventy-five thousand  dollars;  or  (B)  if  the  average
  hourly  wage  is  more  than  fifteen  percent below the minimum average
  hourly wage required by subparagraph (i) or (ii) of this  paragraph,  as
  applicable,  then no later than one hundred twenty days from the date of
  submission of such project-wide certified payroll report, the  applicant
  shall  pay  to the third party fund administrator an amount equal to the
  amount of the deficiency set forth in the project-wide  payroll  report.
  The  third party fund administrator shall distribute such payment to the
  construction workers who performed construction work  on  such  eligible
  site. Prior to making such repayment, the third party fund administrator
  shall  submit  to  the  fiscal  officer  a  plan  subject  to the fiscal
  officer's approval setting forth the manner in  which  the  third  party
  fund  administrator  will  reach  the  required  average wage within one
  hundred fifty days of receiving the payment from the applicant  and  how
  any  remaining funds will be disbursed in the event that the third party
  fund administrator cannot  distribute  the  funds  to  the  construction
  workers  within  one  year  of  receiving  fiscal  officer  approval. In
  addition, the fiscal officer shall impose a penalty on the applicant  in
  an  amount equal to twenty-five percent of the amount of the deficiency,
  provided, however, that the fiscal officer shall not impose such penalty
  where the eligible multiple dwelling has  been  the  subject  of  a  job
  action  which  results  in a work delay. In the event that the applicant
  fails to make such payment within the time  period  prescribed  in  this
  subparagraph,  the  applicant shall be subject to a fine of one thousand
  dollars per week, provided that the maximum fine shall  be  seventy-five
  thousand  dollars.  Notwithstanding any provision of this paragraph, the
  applicant shall  not  be  liable  in  any  respect  whatsoever  for  any
  payments,  fines  or  penalties  related to or resulting from contractor
  fraud, mistake, or negligence or for fraudulent or inaccurate contractor
  certified payroll reports or for fraudulent or  inaccurate  project-wide
  certified  payroll reports, provided, however, that payment to the third
  party fund administrator in the amount set  forth  in  the  project-wide
  certified  payroll  report as described in this subparagraph shall still
  be made by the contractor or sub-contractor in the event of underpayment
  resulting from or caused by the contractor or sub-contractor,  and  that
  the  applicant  will  be liable for underpayment to the third party fund
  administrator  unless  the  fiscal  officer  determines,  in  its   sole
  discretion,  that  the  underpayment  was  the  result of, or caused by,
  contractor  fraud,  mistake  or  negligence  and/or  for  fraudulent  or
  inaccurate  contractor  certified  payroll  reports  and/or project-wide
  certified payroll reports. The applicant shall otherwise not  be  liable
  in  any  way  whatsoever  once  the  payment  to  the  third  party fund
  administrator has been made in the amount set forth in the  project-wide
  certified  payroll  report.  Other  than the underpayment, which must be
  paid to the third party fund administrator, all fines and penalties  set
  forth  in  this paragraph imposed by the fiscal officer shall be paid to
  the agency and used by the agency to provide affordable housing.
    (viii) Nothing in this  paragraph  shall  be  construed  to  confer  a
  private  right  of  action  to enforce the provisions of this paragraph,
  provided, however, that this sentence shall not be construed as a waiver

  of any existing rights of construction workers or their  representatives
  related  to  wage  and  benefit  collection,  wage  theft or other labor
  protections or rights  and  provided,  further,  that  nothing  in  this
  paragraph  relieves  any obligations pursuant to a collective bargaining
  agreement.
    (ix) A rental project containing three  hundred  or  more  residential
  dwelling  units  not  located within the enhanced affordability area may
  elect to comply with the requirements of this paragraph and be  eligible
  to  receive an enhanced thirty-five year benefit. Such election shall be
  made in the application and shall not thereafter be changed. Such rental
  project shall comply with all of the requirements of this paragraph  and
  shall be deemed to be located within the Brooklyn enhanced affordability
  area  or the Queens enhanced affordability area for the purposes of this
  paragraph.
    (x) The fiscal officer shall have the sole authority to determine  and
  enforce  any  liability  for  underpayment owing to the third party fund
  administrator from the applicant and/or the contractor (as a  result  of
  contractor  fraud,  mistake  or  negligence  and/or  for  fraudulent  or
  inaccurate contractor  certified  payroll  reports  and/or  project-wide
  certified  payroll  reports), as set forth in subparagraph (vii) of this
  paragraph.  The  fiscal   officer   shall   expeditiously   conduct   an
  investigation  and hearing at the New York City office of administrative
  trials and hearings, shall determine the issues raised thereon and shall
  make and file an order in his or her office stating  such  determination
  and  forthwith serve a copy of such order, either personally or by mail,
  together with notice of filing, upon the parties  to  such  proceedings.
  The fiscal officer in such an investigation shall be deemed to be acting
  in  a  judicial  capacity  and shall have the rights to issue subpoenas,
  administer oaths and examine witnesses. The enforcement  of  a  subpoena
  issued  under this subparagraph shall be regulated by the civil practice
  law and rules. The filing of such order shall have the  full  force  and
  effect  of  a  judgment duly docketed in the office of the county clerk.
  The order may be enforced by and in the name of the  fiscal  officer  in
  the  same  manner, and with like effect, as that prescribed by the civil
  practice law and rules for the enforcement of a money judgment.
    (d) Tax payments. In addition to any other amounts payable pursuant to
  this subdivision, the owner of any eligible  site  receiving  Affordable
  New  York  Housing Program benefits shall pay, in each tax year in which
  such Affordable New York Housing Program benefits are  in  effect,  real
  property taxes and assessments as follows:
    (i)  with  respect  to  each eligible multiple dwelling constructed on
  such eligible site, real property taxes on  the  assessed  valuation  of
  such  land  and  any  improvements thereon in effect during the tax year
  prior to the commencement  date  of  such  eligible  multiple  dwelling,
  without  regard  to  any  exemption  from  or abatement of real property
  taxation in effect during such tax year, which real property taxes shall
  be calculated using the tax rate in effect at the time  such  taxes  are
  due; and
    (ii) all assessments for local improvements.
    (e) Limitation on benefits for non-residential space. If the aggregate
  floor  area of commercial, community facility and accessory use space in
  an eligible site, other than parking which  is  located  not  more  than
  twenty-three  feet  above  the curb level, exceeds twelve percent of the
  aggregate floor area in such eligible  site,  any  Affordable  New  York
  Housing  Program benefits shall be reduced by a percentage equal to such
  excess. If an eligible site contains multiple tax lots, the tax  arising
  out  of  such  reduction in Affordable New York Housing Program benefits
  shall first be apportioned pro rata among any non-residential tax  lots.

  After any such non-residential tax lots are fully taxable, the remainder
  of  the tax arising out of such reduction in Affordable New York Housing
  Program benefits, if any,  shall  be  apportioned  pro  rata  among  the
  remaining residential tax lots.
    (f)  Calculation  of benefit. Based on the certification of the agency
  certifying the applicant's eligibility for Affordable New  York  Housing
  Program  benefits, the assessors shall certify to the collecting officer
  the amount of taxes to be exempted.
    (g) Affordability  requirements.  During  the  restriction  period,  a
  rental   project  shall  comply  with  either  affordability  option  A,
  affordability option B, or affordability option C or for purposes  of  a
  homeownership  project,  such  project  shall  comply with affordability
  option D. Such election shall be made in the application and  shall  not
  thereafter  be  changed.  The  rental project shall also comply with all
  provisions of this paragraph during  the  restriction  period  and  with
  subparagraph   (iii)  of  this  paragraph  both  during  and  after  the
  restriction period to the extent provided in such subparagraph. A rental
  project containing three hundred or more rental dwelling  units  located
  in  the enhanced affordability area or a rental project containing three
  hundred or more rental dwelling units not located  within  the  enhanced
  affordability  area  which  elects  to  comply  with the requirements of
  paragraph (c) of this subdivision shall comply with either affordability
  option E, affordability  option  F,  or  affordability  option  G.  Such
  election  shall  be  made in the application and shall not thereafter be
  changed. Such rental project shall also comply with  all  provisions  of
  this   paragraph   during  the  extended  restriction  period  and  with
  subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph both during and after the  extended
  restriction period to the extent provided in such paragraph.
    (i)  All  rental dwelling units in an eligible multiple dwelling shall
  share the same common entrances and common areas as market rate units in
  such eligible multiple dwelling, and shall not be isolated to a specific
  floor or area of an eligible multiple dwelling. Common  entrances  shall
  mean  any  area regularly used by any resident of a rental dwelling unit
  in the eligible multiple dwelling  for  ingress  and  egress  from  such
  eligible multiple dwelling; and
    (ii) Unless preempted by the requirements of a federal, state or local
  housing  program, either (A) the affordable housing units in an eligible
  site shall have a unit mix proportional to the market units, or  (B)  at
  least  fifty percent of the affordable housing units in an eligible site
  shall have two or more bedrooms and no more than twenty-five percent  of
  the affordable housing units shall have less than one bedroom.
    (iii)  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  rent  stabilization to the
  contrary, all affordable housing units shall be fully  subject  to  rent
  stabilization  during  the  restriction  period  or extended restriction
  period, as applicable, provided that tenants  holding  a  lease  and  in
  occupancy  of  such  affordable  housing  units at the expiration of the
  restriction period or extended restriction period, as applicable,  shall
  have  the right to remain as rent stabilized tenants for the duration of
  their occupancy.
    (iv)  All  rent  stabilization  registrations  required  to  be  filed
  pursuant  to  subparagraph  (iii)  of  this  paragraph  shall  contain a
  designation  that  specifically  identifies  affordable  housing   units
  created  pursuant  to  this  subdivision as "Affordable New York Housing
  Program affordable housing units" and shall contain  an  explanation  of
  the requirements that apply to all such affordable housing units.
    (v)  Failure  to  comply  with  the  provisions of this paragraph that
  require the creation, maintenance,  rent  stabilization  compliance  and
  occupancy of affordable housing units or for purposes of a homeownership

  project  the  failure to comply with affordability option D shall result
  in revocation of any Affordable New York Housing  Program  benefits  for
  the period of such non-compliance.
    (vi)  Nothing  in this subdivision shall (A) prohibit the occupancy of
  an affordable housing unit by individuals or families  whose  income  at
  any  time is less than the maximum percentage of the area median income,
  adjusted for family size, specified for  such  affordable  housing  unit
  pursuant  to  this subdivision, or (B) prohibit the owner of an eligible
  site from requiring, upon initial rental or upon any rental following  a
  vacancy,  the  occupancy  of  any  affordable housing unit by such lower
  income individuals or families.
    (vii) Following issuance of a temporary certificate of  occupancy  and
  upon  each vacancy thereafter, an affordable housing unit shall promptly
  be offered for rental by individuals or families whose income  does  not
  exceed  the  maximum  percentage of the area median income, adjusted for
  family size, specified for such affordable housing unit pursuant to this
  subdivision and who intend to occupy such  affordable  housing  unit  as
  their  primary  residence.  An  affordable housing unit shall not be (A)
  rented to a corporation, partnership or other entity, or  (B)  held  off
  the  market  for a period longer than is reasonably necessary to perform
  repairs needed to  make  such  affordable  housing  unit  available  for
  occupancy.
    (viii)  An affordable housing unit shall not be rented on a temporary,
  transient or short-term basis. Every lease and renewal  thereof  for  an
  affordable  housing unit shall be for a term of one or two years, at the
  option of the tenant.
    (ix) An affordable housing unit shall not be converted to  cooperative
  or condominium ownership.
    (x)  The  agency may establish by rule such requirements as the agency
  deems necessary or appropriate  for  (A)  the  marketing  of  affordable
  housing  units,  both  upon  initial occupancy and upon any vacancy, (B)
  monitoring compliance with the provisions of this paragraph and (C)  the
  marketing and monitoring of any homeownership project that is granted an
  exemption  pursuant  to this subdivision. Such requirements may include,
  but need not be limited to, retaining a monitor approved by  the  agency
  and paid for by the owner.
    (xi)   Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  this  subdivision  to  the
  contrary, a market unit shall be subject to rent  stabilization  unless,
  in  the  absence  of  Affordable  New York Housing Program benefits, the
  owner  would  be  entitled  to  remove  such  market  unit   from   rent
  stabilization  upon  vacancy by reason of the monthly rent exceeding any
  limit established thereunder.
    (h)  Building  service  employees.  (i)  For  the  purposes  of   this
  paragraph,  "applicant"  shall mean an applicant for Affordable New York
  Housing Program benefits,  any  successor  to  such  applicant,  or  any
  employer  of  building  service employees for such applicant, including,
  but not limited to, a property management company or contractor.
    (ii) All building service employees employed by the applicant  at  the
  eligible  site  shall  receive  the  applicable  prevailing wage for the
  entire restriction period or extended restriction period, as applicable.
    (iii)  The  fiscal  officer  shall  have  the  power  to  enforce  the
  provisions  of  this paragraph. In enforcing such provisions, the fiscal
  officer shall have the power:
    (A) to investigate or cause an investigation to be made  to  determine
  the  prevailing  wages  for  building  service employees; in making such
  investigation, the fiscal officer may utilize wage  and  fringe  benefit
  data  from  various  sources,  including,  but  not limited to, data and
  determinations of federal, state or other governmental agencies;

    (B) to institute and conduct inspections at the site of  the  work  or
  elsewhere;
    (C)  to  examine  the  books,  documents and records pertaining to the
  wages paid to, and the hours of  work  performed  by,  building  service
  employees;
    (D) to hold hearings and, in connection therewith, to issue subpoenas,
  administer  oaths  and  examine witnesses; the enforcement of a subpoena
  issued under this paragraph shall be regulated by the civil practice law
  and rules;
    (E) to make a  classification  by  craft,  trade  or  other  generally
  recognized  occupational  category of the building service employees and
  to determine whether such  work  has  been  performed  by  the  building
  service employees in such classification;
    (F)  to require the applicant to file with the fiscal officer a record
  of the wages actually paid by such applicant  to  the  building  service
  employees and of their hours of work;
    (G)  to  delegate  any of the foregoing powers to his or her deputy or
  other authorized representative; and
    (H) to promulgate rules as he or she shall consider necessary for  the
  proper  execution  of  the duties, responsibilities and powers conferred
  upon him or her by the provisions of this subparagraph.
    (iv) If the fiscal officer finds that  the  applicant  has  failed  to
  comply  with  the  provisions of this paragraph, he or she shall present
  evidence of such noncompliance to the agency.
    (v) Subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph shall not be applicable to:
    (A) an eligible multiple dwelling containing less than thirty dwelling
  units; or
    (B) an eligible multiple dwelling in which all of the  dwelling  units
  are  affordable  housing  units  and not less than fifty percent of such
  affordable housing units, upon initial rental and upon  each  subsequent
  rental  following  a  vacancy  during the restriction period or extended
  restriction period, as applicable, are affordable to and  restricted  to
  occupancy  by  individuals  or  families whose household income does not
  exceed one hundred  twenty-five  percent  of  the  area  median  income,
  adjusted  for  family  size,  at  the time that such household initially
  occupies such dwelling unit.
    (i) Replacement ratio. If the  land  on  which  an  eligible  site  is
  located   contained   any  dwelling  units  three  years  prior  to  the
  commencement date of the first eligible multiple dwelling thereon,  then
  such  eligible  site  shall contain at least one affordable housing unit
  for each dwelling unit that existed on  such  date  and  was  thereafter
  demolished, removed or reconfigured.
    (j) Concurrent exemptions or abatements. An eligible multiple dwelling
  receiving Affordable New York Housing Program benefits shall not receive
  any  exemption  from  or  abatement  of real property taxation under any
  other law.
    (k)  Voluntary  renunciation  or  termination.   Notwithstanding   the
  provisions  of  any  general,  special  or local law to the contrary, an
  owner shall not be entitled to voluntarily  renounce  or  terminate  any
  Affordable   New   York  Housing  Program  benefits  unless  the  agency
  authorizes such renunciation  or  termination  in  connection  with  the
  commencement  of  a  new  tax  exemption  pursuant to either the private
  housing finance law or section four hundred twenty-c of this title.
    (l) Termination or revocation. The  agency  may  terminate  or  revoke
  Affordable New York Housing Program benefits for noncompliance with this
  subdivision,  provided,  however, that the agency shall not terminate or
  revoke Affordable New York Housing Program benefits  for  a  failure  to
  comply  with  paragraph  (c) of this subdivision. If Affordable New York

  Housing Program benefits are terminated  or  revoked  for  noncompliance
  with  this  subdivision,  (i)  all of the affordable housing units shall
  remain subject to rent stabilization and all other requirements of  this
  subdivision  for  the restriction period or extended restriction period,
  as applicable, and any additional  period  expressly  provided  in  this
  subdivision,  as if the Affordable New York Housing Program benefits had
  not been terminated or revoked; (ii) all  of  the  market  rate  housing
  units   shall  remain  subject  to  rent  stabilization  and  all  other
  requirements of this subdivision for the restriction period or  extended
  restriction  period,  as applicable, and any additional period expressly
  provided in this subdivision, as if  the  Affordable  New  York  Housing
  Program  benefits had not been terminated or revoked, provided, however,
  that the owner shall still be entitled to remove such market  unit  from
  rent  stabilization upon vacancy by reason of the monthly rent exceeding
  any limit established thereunder; (iii) or for a  homeownership  project
  such  project  shall  continue  to comply with affordability option D of
  this subdivision and all other requirements of this subdivision for  the
  restriction  period and any additional period expressly provided in this
  subdivision, as if the Affordable New York Housing Program benefits  had
  not been terminated or revoked.
    (m)  Powers cumulative. The enforcement provisions of this subdivision
  shall not be exclusive,  and  are  in  addition  to  any  other  rights,
  remedies,  or enforcement powers set forth in any other law or available
  at law or in equity.
    (n) Multiple tax lots. If an eligible site contains multiple tax lots,
  an application may be submitted with respect to one or more of such  tax
  lots.  The  agency  shall  determine eligibility for Affordable New York
  Housing Program benefits based  upon  the  tax  lots  included  in  such
  application  and benefits for each multiple dwelling shall be based upon
  the completion date of such multiple dwelling.
    (o) Applications. (i) The application with  respect  to  any  eligible
  multiple dwelling shall be filed with the agency not later than one year
  after the completion date of such eligible multiple dwelling.
    (ii)  Notwithstanding  the provisions of any general, special or local
  law to the contrary, the agency may require by rule that applications be
  filed electronically.
    (iii) The agency may rely on certification by an architect or engineer
  submitted  by  an  applicant  in  connection  with  the  filing  of   an
  application.  A  false certification by such architect or engineer shall
  be deemed to be professional misconduct pursuant to  section  sixty-five
  hundred  nine  of  the  education law. Any licensee found guilty of such
  misconduct under the procedures prescribed in section sixty-five hundred
  ten of the education law shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in
  section sixty-five hundred  eleven  of  the  education  law,  and  shall
  thereafter  be  ineligible  to  submit  a certification pursuant to this
  subdivision.
    (iv) The agency shall  not  require  that  the  applicant  demonstrate
  compliance with the requirements of paragraph (c) of this subdivision as
  a condition to approval of the application.
    (p)  Filing fee. The agency may require a filing fee of three thousand
  dollars per dwelling unit in connection with any  application.  However,
  the agency may promulgate rules imposing a lesser fee for eligible sites
  containing  eligible multiple dwellings constructed with the substantial
  assistance of grants, loans or subsidies provided by a federal, state or
  local governmental agency or instrumentality pursuant to a  program  for
  the development of affordable housing.
    (q)  Rules.    Except  as  provided  in paragraphs (c) and (h) of this
  subdivision, the agency shall have the sole  authority  to  enforce  the

  provisions of this subdivision and may promulgate rules to carry out the
  provisions of this subdivision.
    (r)  Election.  Notwithstanding  anything  in  this subdivision to the
  contrary, a rental project or homeownership project with a  commencement
  date  on  or before December thirty-first, two thousand fifteen that has
  not received benefits pursuant to this section prior  to  the  effective
  date  of the chapter of the laws of two thousand fifteen that added this
  subdivision may elect  to  comply  with  this  subdivision  and  receive
  Affordable   New   York   Housing  Program  benefits  pursuant  to  this
  subdivision.
    17. (a) Definitions. For purposes of this subdivision:
    (i) "Affordable housing eighty  percent  units"  shall  mean  dwelling
  units that: (A) are situated within the extended affordability property;
  (B)  upon  initial  rental  and  upon each subsequent rental following a
  vacancy during the extended affordability period,  are  each  affordable
  and  restricted  to occupancy by individuals or families whose household
  income does not exceed one hundred percent of the  area  median  income,
  adjusted  for  family  size,  at  the time that such household initially
  occupies such dwelling unit; and (C) upon initial rental and  upon  each
  subsequent  rental following a vacancy during the extended affordability
  period, are collectively  affordable  and  restricted  to  occupancy  by
  individuals  or  families  whose  household  income  does  not exceed an
  average of eighty percent of the area median income, adjusted for family
  size, at the time that such household initially occupies  such  dwelling
  unit.
    (ii)  "Affordable housing one hundred thirty percent units" shall mean
  dwelling units that: (A) are situated within an  extended  affordability
  property;  and  (B)  upon initial rental and upon each subsequent rental
  following a vacancy during the extended affordability period,  are  each
  affordable  and restricted to occupancy by individuals or families whose
  household income does not exceed one hundred thirty percent of the  area
  median income, adjusted for family size, at the time that such household
  initially occupies such dwelling unit.
    (iii)   "Affordable   housing   unit"  shall  mean,  collectively  and
  individually, affordable housing eighty  percent  units  and  affordable
  housing one hundred thirty percent units.
    (iv)  "Agency"  shall  mean the department of housing preservation and
  development.
    (v) "Application" shall mean  an  application  for  extended  benefits
  pursuant to this subdivision.
    (vi)  "Building  service  employee"  shall  mean  any  person  who  is
  regularly employed at, and performs work in connection with the care  or
  maintenance  of,  an extended affordability property, including, but not
  limited to,  a  watchman,  guard,  doorman,  building  cleaner,  porter,
  handyman,   janitor,  gardener,  groundskeeper,  elevator  operator  and
  starter,  and  window  cleaner,  but  not  including  persons  regularly
  scheduled  to  work  fewer  than  eight  hours  per week in the extended
  affordability property.
    (vii) "Commencement date" shall mean the later of: (A) the  expiration
  date; or (B) the restrictive declaration date.
    (viii)  "Expiration  date"  shall  mean  the  date upon which benefits
  granted to a twenty year benefit property or  twenty-five  year  benefit
  property  pursuant  to  this  section prior to the effective date of the
  chapter of the laws of two thousand fifteen that added this  subdivision
  would expire.
    (ix)  "Extended  affordability period" shall mean, notwithstanding any
  earlier termination or revocation of the extended  benefit,  the  period
  commencing  upon  the  commencement  date  and ending: (A) fifteen years

  thereafter for a  twenty  year  benefit  property;  and  (B)  ten  years
  thereafter for a twenty-five year benefit property.
    (x) "Extended affordability property" shall mean a twenty year benefit
  property  or  a twenty-five year benefit property that complies with the
  provisions of this subdivision.
    (xi) "Extended affordability requirement" shall mean that, within  any
  extended affordability property: (A) not less than twenty percent of the
  dwelling  units are affordable housing eighty percent units; and (B) not
  less  than  an  additional  five  percent  of  the  dwelling  units  are
  affordable housing one hundred thirty percent units.
    (xii)  "Extended  benefit"  shall mean, for any extended affordability
  property, a fifty percent exemption from real property  taxation,  other
  than  assessments for local improvements, for the extended affordability
  period.
    (xiii) "Fiscal officer" shall mean the comptroller or other  analogous
  officer in a city having a population of one million or more.
    (xiv)  "Floor  area"  shall  mean  the horizontal areas of the several
  floors, or  any  portion  thereof,  of  a  dwelling  or  dwellings,  and
  accessory  structures  on  a  lot  measured  from  the exterior faces of
  exterior walls, or from the center line of party walls.
    (xv) "Multiple dwelling" shall have  the  meaning  set  forth  in  the
  multiple dwelling law.
    (xvi)  "Residential  tax  lot"  shall  mean  a  tax  lot that contains
  dwelling units.
    (xvii) "Restrictive declaration" shall mean a document executed by all
  parties  in  interest  to  the  extended  affordability  property  which
  provides  that,  during  the extended affordability period, the extended
  affordability property shall  comply  with  the  extended  affordability
  requirement.
    (xviii)  "Restrictive declaration date" shall mean the date upon which
  the  restrictive  declaration   is   recorded   against   the   extended
  affordability property.
    (xix)  "Twenty  year  benefit property" shall mean a multiple dwelling
  that commenced construction prior to July first, two thousand eight  and
  that  was  granted  benefits  pursuant  to  this  section  prior  to the
  effective date of the chapter of the laws of two thousand  fifteen  that
  added  this  subdivision  due to its compliance with the requirements of
  item  b  of  clause  (A)  of  subparagraph  (iv)  of  paragraph  (a)  of
  subdivision two of this section.
    (xx)  "Twenty-five  year  benefit  property"  shall  mean  a  multiple
  dwelling that commenced construction prior to July first,  two  thousand
  eight  and  that  was granted benefits pursuant to this section prior to
  the effective date of the chapter of the laws of  two  thousand  fifteen
  that  added this subdivision due to its compliance with the requirements
  of item b of clause (D)  of  subparagraph  (iii)  of  paragraph  (a)  of
  subdivision two of this section.
    (b)  Benefit.  In  cities  having a population of one million or more,
  notwithstanding the provisions of any other subdivision of this  section
  or  of  any  general,  special or local law to the contrary, an extended
  affordability property shall be granted an extended  benefit,  provided,
  however,  that  such  extended  benefit  shall  be available only if all
  residential tax lots in such extended affordability property operate  as
  rental housing.
    (c) Tax payments. In addition to any other amounts payable pursuant to
  this  subdivision,  the  owner  of  an  extended  affordability property
  receiving an extended benefit shall pay, in each tax year in which  such
  extended  benefit  is  in effect, real property taxes and assessments as
  follows:

    (i) real property taxes on the assessed valuation of such land and any
  improvements thereon  in  effect  during  the  tax  year  preceding  the
  commencement of the construction of such extended affordability property
  without regard to any exemption or abatement from real property taxation
  in  effect prior to such construction which real property taxes shall be
  calculated on the tax rate in effect at the time such taxes are due; and
    (ii) all assessments for local improvements.
    (d) Limitation on benefits for  non-residential  space.  Any  extended
  benefit  shall  be  reduced by the percentage of aggregate floor area of
  the extended affordability property occupied  by  commercial,  community
  facility,  parking,  and  accessory uses as provided in paragraph (d) of
  subdivision two of this section.
    (e) Calculation of benefit. Based on the certification of  the  agency
  certifying  the  applicant's  eligibility  for the extended benefit, the
  assessors shall certify to the collecting officer the amount of taxes to
  be exempted.
    (f)  Affordability  requirement.  During  the  extended  affordability
  period, an extended affordability property must comply with the extended
  affordability  requirement and the restrictive declaration. The extended
  affordability property shall also comply with  all  provisions  of  this
  paragraph during the extended affordability period and with subparagraph
  (i)  of  this paragraph both during and after the extended affordability
  period to the extent provided in such subparagraph.
    (i)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  any  local  law   for   the
  stabilization  of  rents  or  the  emergency  tenant  protection  act of
  nineteen seventy-four, all  affordable  housing  units  in  an  extended
  affordability  property  shall  be  fully  subject to control under such
  local law or such act during the extended affordability period, provided
  that tenants holding a lease and in occupancy of such affordable housing
  units in an extended affordability property at  the  expiration  of  the
  extended  affordability  period  shall  have the right to remain as rent
  stabilized tenants for the duration of their occupancy. Upon any vacancy
  of an affordable housing unit after the extended  affordability  period,
  such  affordable  housing  unit  shall  remain  fully  subject  to  rent
  stabilization unless the owner is entitled  to  remove  such  affordable
  housing  unit from rent stabilization upon such vacancy by reason of the
  monthly rent exceeding any limit established thereunder.
    (ii)  All  rent  stabilization  registrations  required  to  be  filed
  pursuant   to  subparagraph  (i)  of  this  paragraph  shall  contain  a
  designation  that  specifically  identifies  affordable  housing   units
  complying   with   the  extended  affordability  requirement  as  "421-a
  affordable housing units"  and  shall  contain  an  explanation  of  the
  requirements that apply to all such affordable housing units.
    (iii)  Failure  to  comply  with the provisions of this paragraph that
  require the maintenance, rent stabilization and occupancy of  affordable
  housing  units  in  an  extended  affordability property shall result in
  revocation  of  the  extended   benefit   for   the   period   of   such
  non-compliance.
    (iv)  Nothing in this subdivision shall: (A) prohibit the occupancy of
  an affordable housing unit by individuals or families  whose  income  at
  any  time is less than the maximum percentage of the area median income,
  adjusted for family size, specified for  such  affordable  housing  unit
  pursuant  to  this subdivision; or (B) prohibit the owner of an extended
  affordability property from requiring, upon initial rental or  upon  any
  rental following a vacancy, the occupancy of any affordable housing unit
  by such lower income individuals or families.
    (v)  Upon  each  vacancy, an affordable housing unit shall promptly be
  offered for rental by individuals or  families  whose  income  does  not

  exceed  the  maximum  percentage of the area median income, adjusted for
  family size, specified for such affordable housing unit pursuant to this
  subdivision and who intend to occupy such  affordable  housing  unit  as
  their  primary  residence.  An affordable housing unit shall not be: (A)
  rented to a corporation, partnership or other entity; or  (B)  held  off
  the  market  for a period longer than is reasonably necessary to perform
  repairs needed to  make  such  affordable  housing  unit  available  for
  occupancy.
    (vi)  An  affordable  housing unit shall not be rented on a temporary,
  transient or short-term basis. Every lease and renewal  thereof  for  an
  affordable  housing unit shall be for a term of one or two years, at the
  option of the tenant.
    (vii) An affordable housing unit shall not be converted to cooperative
  or condominium ownership.
    (viii) The agency may establish  by  rule  such  requirements  as  the
  agency  deems  necessary  or  appropriate  for:  (A)  the  marketing  of
  affordable  housing  units;  and  (B)  monitoring  compliance  with  the
  provisions  of  this  paragraph. Such requirements may include, but need
  not be limited to, retaining a monitor approved by the agency  and  paid
  for by the owner.
    (g)   Building  service  employees.  (i)  For  the  purposes  of  this
  paragraph, "applicant" shall mean an applicant  for  extended  benefits,
  any  successor  to  such  applicant, or any employer of building service
  employees for such applicant, including, but not limited to, a  property
  management company or contractor.
    (ii)  All  building service employees employed by the applicant at the
  extended affordability property shall receive the applicable  prevailing
  wage for the entire extended affordability period.
    (iii)  The  fiscal  officer  shall  have  the  power  to  enforce  the
  provisions of this paragraph. In enforcing such provisions,  the  fiscal
  officer shall have the power:
    (A)  to  investigate or cause an investigation to be made to determine
  the prevailing wages for building  service  employees;  in  making  such
  investigation,  the  fiscal  officer may utilize wage and fringe benefit
  data from various sources, including,  but  not  limited  to,  data  and
  determinations of federal, state or other governmental agencies;
    (B)  to  institute  and conduct inspections at the site of the work or
  elsewhere;
    (C) to examine the books, documents  and  records  pertaining  to  the
  wages  paid  to,  and  the  hours of work performed by, building service
  employees;
    (D) to hold hearings and, in connection therewith, to issue subpoenas,
  administer oaths and examine witnesses; the enforcement  of  a  subpoena
  issued under this paragraph shall be regulated by the civil practice law
  and rules;
    (E)  to  make  a  classification  by  craft,  trade or other generally
  recognized occupational category of the building service  employees  and
  to  determine  whether  such  work  has  been  performed by the building
  service employees in such classification;
    (F) to require the applicant to file with the fiscal officer a  record
  of  the  wages  actually  paid by such applicant to the building service
  employees and of their hours of work;
    (G) to delegate any of the foregoing powers to his or  her  deputy  or
  other authorized representative; and
    (H)  to promulgate rules as he or she shall consider necessary for the
  proper execution of the duties, responsibilities  and  powers  conferred
  upon him or her by the provisions of this subparagraph.

    (iv)  If  the  fiscal  officer  finds that the applicant has failed to
  comply with the provisions of this paragraph, he or  she  shall  present
  evidence of such noncompliance to the agency.
    (v) Subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph shall not be applicable to:
    (A)  an  extended  affordability  property containing less than thirty
  dwelling units; or
    (B) an extended affordability property in which all  of  the  dwelling
  units  are  affordable  housing units and not less than fifty percent of
  such affordable  housing  units,  upon  initial  rental  and  upon  each
  subsequent  rental following a vacancy during the extended affordability
  period, are affordable to and restricted to occupancy by individuals  or
  families  whose household income does not exceed one hundred twenty-five
  percent of the area median income, adjusted for family size, at the time
  that such household initially occupies such dwelling unit.
    (h) Concurrent exemptions or  abatements.  An  extended  affordability
  property  receiving  an extended benefit shall not receive any exemption
  from or abatement of real property taxation under any other law.
    (i)  Voluntary  renunciation  or  termination.   Notwithstanding   the
  provisions  of  any  general,  special  or local law to the contrary, an
  owner shall not be entitled to  voluntarily  renounce  or  terminate  an
  extended  benefit  unless  the  agency  authorizes  such renunciation or
  termination in connection with the commencement of a new  tax  exemption
  pursuant  to  either  the  private  housing  finance law or section four
  hundred twenty-c of this title.
    (j) Termination or revocation. The agency may terminate or revoke  the
  extended  benefit  for  noncompliance  with  this  subdivision.  If  the
  extended benefit is terminated or revoked for  noncompliance  with  this
  subdivision, all of the affordable housing units shall remain subject to
  the  provisions  of  any local law for the stabilization of rents or the
  emergency tenant protection act of nineteen seventy-four and  all  other
  requirements  of  this subdivision for the entire extended affordability
  period and any additional period expressly provided in this subdivision,
  as if the extended benefit had not been terminated or revoked.
    (k) Powers cumulative. The enforcement provisions of this  subdivision
  shall  not  be  exclusive,  and  are  in  addition  to any other rights,
  remedies, or enforcement powers set forth in any other law or  available
  at law or in equity.
    (l)  Multiple tax lots. If an extended affordability property contains
  multiple tax lots, an application may be submitted with respect  to  one
  or  more of such tax lots. The agency shall determine eligibility for an
  extended benefit based upon the tax lots included in such application.
    (m) Applications. (i) The application with  respect  to  any  extended
  affordability  property  shall  include  a  certification  that: (A) the
  restrictive  declaration  has  been  recorded   against   the   extended
  affordability  property;  and (B) the extended affordability property is
  in compliance with such restrictive declaration and this subdivision.
    (ii) The  application  with  respect  to  any  extended  affordability
  property  shall  be filed with the agency on or before the later of: (A)
  December thirty-first, two thousand  sixteen;  or  (B)  eighteen  months
  after the expiration date.
    (iii)  Notwithstanding the provisions of any general, special or local
  law to the contrary, the agency may require by rule that applications be
  filed electronically.
    (iv) The agency may rely on certification by an architect or  engineer
  submitted   by  an  applicant  in  connection  with  the  filing  of  an
  application. A false certification by such architect or  engineer  shall
  be  deemed  to be professional misconduct pursuant to section sixty-five
  hundred nine of the education law. Any licensee  found  guilty  of  such

  misconduct under the procedures prescribed in section sixty-five hundred
  ten of the education law shall be subject to the penalties prescribed in
  section  sixty-five  hundred  eleven  of  the  education  law, and shall
  thereafter  be  ineligible  to  submit  a certification pursuant to this
  subdivision.
    (n) Filing fee. The agency may require a filing fee of three  thousand
  dollars per dwelling unit in connection with any application.
    (o) Rules. The agency may promulgate rules to carry out the provisions
  of this subdivision.
    (p)  Authority  of  city  to  enact  local  law.  Except  as otherwise
  specified in this subdivision, a  city  to  which  this  subdivision  is
  applicable  may  enact  a  local law to restrict, limit or condition the
  eligibility for or the scope or  amount  of  extended  benefits  in  any
  manner,  provided  that  such  local law may not grant extended benefits
  beyond those provided in this subdivision and provided further that such
  local law shall not take  effect  sooner  than  one  year  after  it  is
  enacted.   The  provisions  of  sections  11-245  and  11-245.1  of  the
  administrative code of the city of New York or of any other local law of
  the city of New York that were enacted on or before the  effective  date
  of  the  chapter  of  the  laws  of two thousand fifteen that added this
  paragraph shall not restrict, limit or condition the eligibility for  or
  the scope or amount of extended benefits pursuant to this subdivision.

Exemption  of certain private dwellings, multiple dwellings
  and improvements from local taxation; certain cases.  1.  (a)  Within  a
  city having a population of one million or more, private dwellings (land
  and  improvements)  to  be  occupied  as a residence for the first time,
  whether newly constructed  or  resulting  from  the  conversion  of  any
  building  or  structure  to  a  private  dwelling,  and existing private
  dwellings previously occupied, reconstructed or improved to  the  extent
  of  at  least  forty  percent  of  their  assessed valuation without the
  improvement, shall be exempt from all local and municipal  taxes,  other
  than  assessments  for  local improvements, during the tax year or years
  next following the taxable status date or dates after  commencement  and
  before completion of construction, reconstruction or conversion thereof,
  but  for no more than two years after commencement of such construction,
  reconstruction or conversion, and shall be exempt from  such  local  and
  municipal  taxes  after  the earlier of completion of such construction,
  reconstruction or conversion or the end of  such  two  year  period,  as
  follows:  two  years  of  exemption from all such taxes; followed by one
  year of exemption from seventy-five percent of such taxes;  followed  by
  one year of exemption from sixty-two and one-half percent of such taxes;
  followed  by  one  year  of  exemption from fifty percent of such taxes;
  followed by one year of exemption from thirty-seven and one-half percent
  of such taxes; followed  by  one  year  of  exemption  from  twenty-five
  percent of such taxes; and followed by one year of exemption from twelve
  and  one-half  percent  of  such  taxes.  Notwithstanding  the foregoing
  provisions of this paragraph:  (i) exemption from  local  and  municipal
  taxes  under this section shall not be available to property exempt from
  such taxes under any other law; (ii) the tax lot (land and improvements)
  upon  which  the  private  dwelling  is  constructed,  reconstructed  or
  converted  shall at all times be subject to local and municipal taxes in
  an amount not less than the amount of local  and  municipal  taxes  that
  would  be  payable  thereon  based  upon  the  lesser  of  the  assessed
  valuation, during the tax year immediately preceding  the  tax  year  in
  which  such  construction,  reconstruction or conversion commenced or in
  the case of  new  construction,  the  assessed  valuation  of  the  land
  appearing  on  the assessment roll in the first year after completion of
  construction; and (iii) in the event that a  private  dwelling,  whether
  owner  occupied  or  not,  is  fully  demolished and removed on or after
  September first, two thousand four, the tax lot (land and  improvements)
  upon  which  such private dwelling was located shall not be eligible for
  exemption from local and municipal taxes under this section for a period
  of three years commencing upon the date of issuance  of  the  demolition
  and removal permit for such private dwelling.
    (b) Within a city having a population of one million or more, multiple
  dwellings (land and improvements) containing not more than four dwelling
  units  to  be  occupied as a residence for the first time, whether newly
  constructed  or  resulting  from  the  conversion  of  any  building  or
  structure  to  a  multiple  dwelling,  and  existing  multiple dwellings
  containing not  more  than  four  dwelling  units  previously  occupied,
  reconstructed  or  improved  to  the extent of at least forty percent of
  their assessed valuation without the improvement, shall be  exempt  from
  all  local  and  municipal  taxes,  other  than  assessments  for  local
  improvements, during the tax year or years next  following  the  taxable
  status  date  or  dates  after  commencement  and  before  completion of
  construction, reconstruction or conversion thereof, but for no more than
  two years after commencement of  such  construction,  reconstruction  or
  conversion,  and  shall  be  exempt  from such local and municipal taxes
  after the earlier of completion of such construction, reconstruction  or
  conversion  or the end of such two year period, as follows: two years of

  exemption from all such taxes; followed by one year  of  exemption  from
  seventy-five  percent  of  such taxes; followed by one year of exemption
  from sixty-two and one-half percent of such taxes; followed by one  year
  of  exemption  from fifty percent of such taxes; followed by one year of
  exemption from thirty-seven and one-half  percent  of  such  taxes;  and
  followed  by  one  year  of  exemption  from twenty-five percent of such
  taxes; and followed by one year of exemption from  twelve  and  one-half
  percent  of such taxes. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
  paragraph: (i) exemption from  local  and  municipal  taxes  under  this
  section  shall not be available to property exempt from such taxes under
  any other law; (ii) the tax lot (land and improvements) upon  which  the
  multiple  dwelling  is  constructed, reconstructed or converted shall at
  all times be subject to local and municipal taxes in an amount not  less
  than  the  amount  of  local  and  municipal taxes that would be payable
  thereon based upon the lesser of the assessed valuation, during the  tax
  year  immediately  preceding  the  tax  year in which such construction,
  reconstruction  or  conversion  commenced  or  in  the   case   of   new
  construction,  the  assessed  valuation  of  the  land  appearing on the
  assessment roll in the first  year  after  completion  of  construction;
  (iii)  multiple  dwellings (land and improvements) shall not be eligible
  for exemption from local and municipal taxes under this  section  unless
  such  multiple  dwellings  are  developed  in  a governmentally assisted
  project, as defined in rules promulgated by the  local  housing  agency;
  and  (iv)  such  multiple  dwellings  are  constructed, reconstructed or
  converted on real property that has been (A)  acquired  by  the  federal
  government  as  the result of the foreclosure of a mortgage loan insured
  by the federal government and (B) conveyed by the federal government  to
  an  owner  approved  by  the  local  housing  agency  for the purpose of
  rehabilitation in accordance with an agreement between the owner of  the
  real property and the federal government.
    2.  (a) For purposes of this section: "private dwelling" shall mean an
  owner occupied building or structure, with the land on which the same is
  constructed,  intended  for residential use and occupancy by one or more
  families living  independently  of  each  other  with  separate  cooking
  facilities,  which  is not a multiple dwelling within the meaning of the
  multiple  dwelling  law,  and  the   construction,   reconstruction   or
  conversion  of which (i) is commenced after July first, nineteen hundred
  seventy-eight and before July first, nineteen hundred eighty-two and  is
  completed  no later than April first, nineteen hundred eighty-four; (ii)
  is commenced on or after July first,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-two  and
  before July first, nineteen hundred eighty-six and is completed no later
  than July first, nineteen hundred eighty-eight; (iii) is commenced on or
  after  July  first,  nineteen  hundred eighty-six and before July first,
  nineteen hundred ninety and is  completed  no  later  than  July  first,
  nineteen  hundred  ninety-two; (iv) is commenced on or after July first,
  nineteen  hundred  ninety  and  before  July  first,  nineteen   hundred
  ninety-four  and is completed no later than July first, nineteen hundred
  ninety-six; (v) is commenced on or after July  first,  nineteen  hundred
  ninety-four  and before July first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight and is
  completed no later than July first, two thousand; (vi) is  commenced  on
  or  after  July  first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-eight and before July
  first, two thousand two and is completed no later than July  first,  two
  thousand  four;  or  (vii)  is  commenced  on  or  after July first, two
  thousand two and before July first, two thousand six and is completed no
  later than July first, two thousand eleven.
    (b) For purposes of this section: "multiple dwelling"  shall  mean  an
  owner occupied building or structure, with the land on which the same is
  constructed,  which is a multiple dwelling within the meaning of section

  four of the multiple dwelling law, and the construction,  reconstruction
  or conversion of which is commenced on or after July first, two thousand
  two  and  before  July first, two thousand six and is completed no later
  than July first, two thousand eight.
    (c)  Construction  or  reconstruction  of, or conversion to, a private
  dwelling or multiple dwelling shall be deemed to have commenced when the
  agency or department of the city having jurisdiction has issued a permit
  for construction  work  and  such  work  has  begun  in  good  faith  in
  accordance  with such permit; construction, reconstruction or conversion
  shall be deemed to have been completed when the agency or department  of
  the  city  having  jurisdiction  has  issued  a  temporary  or permanent
  certificate of occupancy under which occupancy of the  private  dwelling
  or  multiple  dwelling  for  residential  use  may lawfully begin or the
  reconstruction has been finally accepted and approved.
    (d) For the purposes of this section:  "local  housing  agency"  shall
  have  the  same  meaning as the term "agency" under section five hundred
  two of the general municipal law, except that the term  shall  mean  the
  department  of  housing  preservation and development if there is such a
  department in such city.
    (e) Upon issuance of a violation by an agency, department or bureau of
  the city of New York for an illegal occupancy,  the  finance  department
  shall revoke the tax exemption thereunder. The owner shall pay the city,
  with  interest,  the  amount  of  taxes  from  which such owner had been
  exempted. Such amount, if  unpaid,  shall  become  a  lien  against  the
  property.
    3.  (a)  Applications  for exemption under this section shall be filed
  with the assessors between February first and  March  fifteenth  of  the
  calendar  year  and,  based  on  the  certification of the local housing
  agency pursuant to this section, the  assessors  shall  certify  to  the
  collecting  officer  the  amount  of  exemption from local and municipal
  taxes. No such application shall be accepted  by  the  assessors  unless
  accompanied  by  a  certificate  of  the local housing agency certifying
  eligibility for exemption pursuant to this section.
    (b) The local housing agency may promulgate rules and  regulations  to
  carry  out  the  provisions of this section and may require payment of a
  reasonable filing fee, and in the case of  an  application  involving  a
  dwelling  which  has  been reconstructed or improved a fee not to exceed
  ten dollars for the certification of such  local  housing  agency  under
  this subdivision.
    (c) At any time after two years of exemption from taxation pursuant to
  this  section, the local housing agency may certify to the assessors and
  the collecting officer that a private dwelling or multiple  dwelling  is
  not  being  used  for  residential  purposes and upon the filing of such
  certification with the assessors and the collecting  officer,  exemption
  from taxation under this section shall terminate.

Exemption  of  certain  new multiple dwellings from local
  taxation.  1.  The provisions of this section shall apply to each  town,
  village  or  city  with  a population of less than one million which has
  declared an emergency in accordance with the provisions of the emergency
  tenant protection act  of  nineteen  seventy-four  and  which  adopts  a
  resolution  making  the  provisions  of  this section applicable to such
  town, village or city.  The owner of housing accommodations in  a  newly
  constructed  building,  which would be subject to the provisions of such
  act except for the fact that the building  was  completed  on  or  after
  January first, nineteen hundred seventy-four, may file a declaration, in
  a form suitable for recording, with the rent guidelines board subjecting
  such housing accommodations to the provisions of said act.
    2.    Such  new  residential  buildings shall be exempt from all taxes
  imposed by a municipal corporation including those imposed by  a  school
  district,   other   than  assessments  for  local  improvements,  during
  construction and so long as used for residence purposes for a period not
  to exceed ten years in the  aggregate  after  the  taxable  status  date
  immediately following the completion thereof, consisting of two years of
  full exemption followed by two years of exemption from eighty percent of
  such  taxation, followed by two years of exemption from sixty percent of
  such taxation, followed by two years of exemption from forty percent  of
  such taxation, followed by two years of exemption from twenty percent of
  such  taxation; provided that taxes shall be paid during any such period
  at least in  the  amount  of  the  taxes  paid  on  such  land  and  any
  improvements  thereon  during the tax year preceding the commencement of
  such construction and that exemption from taxes shall not be availed  of
  concurrently  under  any other law.   To be eligible for exemption under
  this section such construction shall take place on vacant, predominantly
  vacant or under-utilized land, or on land improved with a non-conforming
  use.   The initial legal regulated rents  to  be  charged  upon  initial
  occupancy after construction aided by exemption under this section shall
  be  at  least  fifteen  percent  less  than  the  rents  prevailing  for
  comparable newly constructed residential units in the same area  or  any
  comparable  area;  and  notwithstanding  the provisions of the emergency
  tenant protection act of nineteen seventy-four, the rents shall be fully
  subject to regulation under such act for a period of ten  years  or  for
  the  period  such  act  is  in  effect  in the municipality in which the
  building is situate, whichever is shorter, at the  expiration  of  which
  such  rent  shall  be  deregulated,  unless  immediately  prior  to such
  expiration such rents would have been regulated by the provisions of any
  law other than pursuant to this section, in which event such rents shall
  continue subject to such regulation to the same extent and in  the  same
  manner  as  if  this  section had never applied thereto.  Any additional
  taxes levied against the building as a result of the  phase-out  of  the
  exemption  provided  by  this section may be charged by the owner to the
  tenants on an equitable basis without seeking the approval of the  local
  rent  guidelines board.   For the purposes of this section, construction
  shall be deemed commenced when excavation has begun in good faith on the
  basis of approved construction plans.
    3.  Application forms for exemption under this section shall be  filed
  with the assessor between February first and March fifteenth, and, based
  on  the  certification of the local rent guidelines board, the assessors
  shall certify to the collecting  officer  the  amount  of  taxes  to  be
  abated.    No such application shall be accepted by the assessors unless
  accompanied  by  a  certificate  of  the  local  rent  guidelines  board
  certifying  the  applicant's  eligibility pursuant to subdivision one of
  this section.   Requests to  these  local  rent  guidelines  boards  for
  certification shall be accompanied by a ten-year projection of the rents

  based   on  current  levels  of  operating  costs  and  showing  to  the
  satisfaction of such board a  relative  stability  of  rents  over  such
  period  reflecting to the extent that this is practicable, and averaging
  of  the  tax  benefits  of this section in the interests of the tenants.
  The state division of housing and community renewal may promulgate rules
  and regulations to  carry  out  the  provisions  of  this  section,  not
  inconsistent with the provisions hereof.

Exemption  of multiple dwellings financed by the New York
  state  housing  finance  agency  from  local  taxation.  1.  The   local
  legislative  body  of  any  city, town or village having a population of
  less than one million is hereby authorized and empowered  to  adopt  and
  amend  a  local  law  to  provide  that any new or rehabilitated housing
  development, as defined in section  forty-two  of  the  private  housing
  finance  law,  subject  to  a  mortgage,  the loan for which was made or
  financed by notes, bonds or other obligations  of  the  New  York  state
  housing  finance  agency,  the interest on which is exempt from taxation
  pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code of 1954,  as  amended,  after  the
  adoption  of such local law shall be exempt from taxation as provided by
  such local law.
    2. (a) Such local law may provide that such eligible property shall be
  exempt from all taxes imposed  by  a  municipal  corporation,  including
  those  imposed  by or on behalf of a school district, other than special
  assessments and  special  ad  valorem  levies,  during  construction  or
  rehabilitation, but for no longer than three years.
    (b)  Such  local law may also provide that the eligible property shall
  be exempt upon the conclusion of  the  exemption  period  authorized  by
  paragraph  (a)  of  this  subdivision,  for  as  long as construction or
  rehabilitation continues and, thereafter, for so long as  such  mortgage
  is  outstanding  and  the  housing  development,  as  defined in section
  forty-two of the private housing finance law, is  used  for  residential
  unit   purposes;   provided,  that  the  exemption  authorized  by  this
  subdivision shall be for a period not to exceed  fifteen  years  in  the
  aggregate  after the conclusion of the exemption authorized by paragraph
  (a) of this subdivision, and shall not exceed the following limitations:
  three years of full exemption, followed by three years of exemption from
  eighty percent of the assessed value of such property, followed by three
  years of exemption from sixty percent of  the  assessed  value  of  such
  property, followed by three years of exemption from forty percent of the
  assessed  value  of  such property, followed by three years of exemption
  from twenty percent of the assessed value of such property; and provided
  that taxes shall be paid during any such period after the taxable status
  date  immediately  following   the   completion   of   construction   or
  rehabilitation at least in the amount of the taxes paid on such land and
  improvements  thereon  during the fiscal year preceding the commencement
  of such construction or rehabilitation and that the exemption from taxes
  shall not be availed of concurrently under any other law.

Legislative declaration.   It is hereby found and declared
  that continued operation of railroads in the state  and  improvement  of
  their service and facilities are essential to the commerce, defense, and
  general welfare of the people of the state; that the financial condition
  of railroads in the state has deteriorated in recent years to the extent
  that  it  now  constitutes  a  serious  threat  to continuation of vital
  operations; that this condition is the result, among  other  things,  of
  competition from other forms of transportation, increased costs, and the
  incidence  of taxation; that the consequences of these developments have
  been a loss of commerce, a decrease in employment,  and  a  decrease  in
  service  rendered  by  railroads; that the reversal of these trends is a
  matter of public concern; that it is in the public interest  to  enhance
  the  ability of railroads to continue their operations and improve their
  service under private enterprise; that the real property tax  burden  on
  railroads  in  the  state does not fluctuate in accordance with earnings
  and generally cannot be readily  passed  on  to  users  of  the  service
  because of the industry's economic position; that substantial tax relief
  will  help  strengthen railroads financially so that they can contribute
  their share to the economic well-being of the state; and that  therefore
  it  is  the  policy  of the state to grant to the railroads in the state
  partial tax exemption in a manner which will grant greater relief to the
  railroads that need it more by giving increasingly greater exemptions as
  the rate of earnings of a railroad system declines.
Definitions.    When used in this title, unless otherwise
  expressly stated:
    1.  "Assessing unit" means a city, town or village.
    2.   "Railroad company" means  a  corporation,  joint  stock  company,
  association,   partnership,  individual  or  other  person  operating  a
  railroad system wholly within the state of New York as a common  carrier
  by  rail, including but not limited to a street, surface, underground or
  elevated  railroad,  whether  as  owner,  lessee,  mortgagee,   trustee,
  receiver or assignee of railroad real property.
    3.    "Railroad  real  property"  means the land, real estate and real
  property (as defined in subdivision twelve of section one hundred two of
  this chapter) of a railroad company, which  is  used  by  such  railroad
  company  for  transportation  purposes  and  which  is  subject  to real
  property taxation except as provided in this  title,  and  includes  (a)
  such  property  leased to such railroad company, (b)  such property used
  for transportation purposes by such railroad company  under  a  trackage
  right  or  other  operating agreement, title to which is in other than a
  railroad company, as defined in subdivision  two  of  this  section  and
  subdivision  two of section four hundred eighty-nine-bb of this chapter,
  (c) such property used or occupied by such railroad  company,  title  to
  which  is in the state or in any municipal corporation thereof under any
  of the grade crossing elimination acts, and (d) such  tangible  property
  of  such  railroad company situated in, upon, under or above any street,
  highway, public place or public waters; but does not include  the  value
  of any franchise, right or permission to construct, maintain or operate,
  in, under, above, on or through, streets, highways or public places.
    4.    "Subsidized  railraod  real  property"  means  any railroad real
  property for which a rail service continuation subsidy is  paid  by  the
  United States or the state of New York.
    5.    "Tax"  or  "taxation"  means  an ad valorem charge or special ad
  valorem levy imposed upon real property by or on  behalf  of  a  county,
  city, town, village, school district or special district.

Assessment of real property of railroads. 1. The assessor in
  each city,  town  and  village  and  in  each  county  having  a  county
  department  of  assessment  shall  annually  assess all real property of
  railroad companies situated in such city, town, village  or  county,  as
  the  case  may be, including all railroad real property of such railroad
  companies as defined  in  subdivision  three  of  section  four  hundred
  eighty-nine-b  of  this chapter. Where a village has enacted a local law
  as provided in subdivision three of section fourteen hundred two of this
  chapter, the town or county assessor shall apportion that  part  of  the
  railroad  property  assessment applicable to the village for purposes of
  the copy of the part of the town or  county  assessment  roll  used  for
  village tax purposes.
    2.  Railroad  real  property  shall  be  separately assessed from real
  property of railroad companies not used for transportation purposes  and
  subsidized  railroad  real  property  shall  be separately assessed from
  other railroad real property. The commissioner  and  railroad  companies
  upon request shall furnish the assessor information and data relating to
  the  classification  of the real property of railroads as transportation
  and non-transportation property and to the identification of  subsidized
  railroad real property. Action by assessors under this subdivision shall
  not  in any way affect the classification of property or the segregation
  of assessments in accordance with section four hundred eighty-nine-p  of
  this chapter in connection with the application of railroad ceilings.
    3.  Railroad  real  property  shall be assessed according to value and
  ownership as of the dates specified by subdivision four of section  four
  hundred  eighty-nine-e  of this title for the computation of the ceiling
  of such property.
Exemption  of  railroad  real  property  from  taxation. 1.
  Subsidized railroad real property shall be  exempt  from  taxation.  The
  exemption  shall  be  granted each year only upon (a) application by the
  owner of said property on a form prescribed by the commissioner and  (b)
  submission of such proof as may be required by the commissioner that the
  property is subsidized railroad real property. The application and proof
  shall be filed with the appropriate assessing authority on or before the
  appropriate  taxable  status  date,  with  copies thereof simultaneously
  filed with the commissioner and the department of transportation.
    2. Bridges, viaducts, and other similar structures constructed  on  or
  after  January  first,  nineteen hundred fifty-nine as the result of the
  creation, pursuant to article twelve-B of the  highway  law,  of  a  new
  highway,  street,  or roadway carrying railroad facilities over such new
  highway, street, or roadway shall be exempt from taxation. No assessment
  of any bridges, viaducts, and other  similar  structures  lengthened  or
  reconstructed  on or after January first, nineteen hundred fifty-nine as
  the result of the widening, relocation, or reconstruction of an existing
  highway, street, or roadway, pursuant to article twelve-B of the highway
  law, shall be increased by reason of such reconstruction or  relocation,
  notwithstanding  the provisions of any general, special, or local law to
  the contrary; provided, however, that the  assessment  on  the  original
  portion  of  such bridges, viaducts, and other similar structures may be
  varied in accordance with the changes made generally in  assessments  on
  other  local real property. Whenever any new construction of property is
  exempt pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision and the provisions
  of subdivision three-a or three-b of this section, such  property  shall
  receive the exemption provided by subdivision three-a or three-b of this
  section.
    3.  Railroad real property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent
  of any increase in value thereof by  reason  of  any  of  the  following
  additions,   betterments,   improvements,  or  reconstructions  made  or
  installed thereon after the last preceding taxable status date prior  to
  April twenty-first, nineteen hundred fifty-nine: (a) the installation of
  automatic  grade crossing protective devices, such as flashing lights or
  automatic gates and their attendant facilities; (b)  the  reconstruction
  or  the  replacement  of  signals,  railroad  bridges, stations, freight
  houses, classification yards, repair shops, or any other  facility  used
  for transportation purposes; provided that the property as reconstructed
  or  replaced  is the same general type of facility and is located in the
  same city or town as the property reconstructed or replaced; and (c) the
  construction  or  reconstruction  pursuant   to   the   grade   crossing
  elimination  acts,  the  railroad  law,  or the highway law of any grade
  separation structure, such  as  bridges,  viaducts,  tunnels,  retaining
  walls,  and  embankments  constructed  for the purpose of eliminating or
  avoiding  highway-railroad  crossings  at  grade.    Whenever  any   new
  construction  of  property  is exempt pursuant to the provisions of this
  subdivision and the provisions of subdivision three-a or three-b of this
  section,  such  property  shall  receive  the  exemption   provided   by
  subdivision three-a or three-b of this section.
    3-a. Whenever a railroad company makes any improvements, enhancements,
  or  upgrades  to any existing railroad real property in order to improve
  freight service or to provide improved or  new  passenger  service,  the
  cost  of  such  project  shall not be included in the calculation of any
  subsequent railroad ceilings for a period of ten years from the date  of
  completion  of  such project; provided that such project's improvements,
  enhancements, or upgrades  were  made  pursuant  to  a  capital  project
  proposal   approved   by   the   commissioner   of   the  department  of
  transportation, as provided in section  four  hundred  eighty-nine-v  of

  this  title.  The  department  of  transportation  shall  certify to the
  commissioner  the  location  and  cost   of   any   such   improvements,
  enhancements,  or  upgrades  in  a manner that provides the commissioner
  with  sufficient time to carry out its responsibilities pursuant to this
  chapter.
    3-b. The cost of bridges, viaducts, other structures, or  improvements
  and  new  rail  lines,  including  any  new  rail lines built to replace
  existing rail lines, shall not be included in  the  calculation  of  any
  subsequent  railroad ceilings for a period of ten years from the date of
  completion of such project; provided that such construction was pursuant
  to a capital project  proposal  approved  by  the  commissioner  of  the
  department  of  transportation  as  provided  in  section  four  hundred
  eighty-nine-v of this title.  The  department  of  transportation  shall
  certify   to  the  commissioner  the  location  and  cost  of  any  such
  construction in a manner that provides the commissioner with  sufficient
  time to carry out its responsibilities pursuant to this chapter.
    4.  Except  as  provided in subdivision five of this section, railroad
  real property other than subsidized  railroad  real  property  shall  be
  exempt  from  taxation to the extent that the assessed valuation thereof
  exceeds the railroad ceiling determined in accordance with the  earnings
  ratio as hereinafter prescribed.
    5. Railroad real property other than subsidized railroad real property
  of a railroad company shall not be exempt from taxation under this title
  on  an  assessment  roll of any assessing unit if the company failed for
  any reason to pay within thirty days of the date when due the tax levied
  upon the taxable portion of the assessment of any railroad real property
  of the company set forth on the immediately preceding assessment roll of
  any assessing unit, provided, however, that this subdivision  shall  not
  apply  if  the  payment  or  enforcement of such taxes was restrained or
  prohibited by an order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction under
  the bankruptcy act of the United States.

Railroad ceiling. For the purpose of determining the extent
  to which railroad real property shall be  exempt  under  this  title,  a
  railroad  ceiling  for  the railroad real property other than subsidized
  railroad real  property  of  each  railroad  company  situated  in  each
  assessing  unit  shall  be  established  annually by the commissioner as
  follows:
    (1) Determine (a) the system reproduction cost in accordance with  the
  provisions  of  sections  four  hundred  eighty-nine-f  and four hundred
  eighty-nine-g of this chapter,  (b)  the  average  railway  earnings  in
  accordance  with  the  provisions of sections four hundred eighty-nine-f
  and four hundred eighty-nine-h of this chapter, (c) the  earnings  ratio
  in  accordance with the provisions of section four hundred eighty-nine-i
  of this chapter,  (d)  the  exemption  factor  in  accordance  with  the
  provisions  of  section  four hundred eighty-nine-j of this chapter, and
  (e) the local reproduction cost in accordance  with  the  provisions  of
  sections  four  hundred  eighty-nine-f and four hundred eighty-nine-k of
  this chapter;
    (2) Multiply the local reproduction cost by the exemption  factor  and
  subtract the result thereof from the local reproduction cost; and
    (3) Multiply the result of such calculations by the state equalization
  rate  determined  or  established  in  accordance with the provisions of
  section four hundred eighty-nine-l of this chapter. The result shall  be
  the railroad ceiling.
    (4)  Determinations  made pursuant to this section shall be based upon
  the value of the railroad real property as of the  rate  valuation  date
  and  ownership of such railroad real property as of the thirty-first day
  of December of the year preceding the year in which the assessment  roll
  to  which  such  ceiling assessment will apply is filed in the office of
  the city or town clerk, except that those determinations shall be  based
  upon ownership as of the thirty-first day of December of the second year
  preceding  the  date  required  by  law  for  the  filing  of  the final
  assessment roll for purposes of city assessment  rolls  required  to  be
  filed between January first and June first inclusive and for all village
  assessment  rolls. As used in this subdivision, the term "rate valuation
  date" means the date as of which the full value of taxable real property
  on  an  assessement  roll  is  estimated  for  purposes  of  the   state
  equalization  rate  to  be  applied in the establishment of the railroad
  ceiling.

Railroad ceiling. For the purpose of determining the extent
  to which railroad real property shall be  exempt  under  this  title,  a
  railroad  ceiling  for  the railroad real property other than subsidized
  railroad real  property  of  each  railroad  company  situated  in  each
  assessing  unit  shall  be  established  annually by the commissioner as
  follows:
    (1) Determine (a) the system reproduction cost in accordance with  the
  provisions  of  sections  four  hundred  eighty-nine-f  and four hundred
  eighty-nine-g of this chapter,  (b)  the  average  railway  earnings  in
  accordance  with  the  provisions of sections four hundred eighty-nine-f
  and four hundred eighty-nine-h of this chapter, (c) the  earnings  ratio
  in  accordance with the provisions of section four hundred eighty-nine-i
  of this chapter,  (d)  the  exemption  factor  in  accordance  with  the
  provisions  of  section  four hundred eighty-nine-j of this chapter, and
  (e) the local reproduction cost in accordance  with  the  provisions  of
  sections  four  hundred  eighty-nine-f and four hundred eighty-nine-k of
  this chapter;
    (2) Multiply the local reproduction cost by the exemption  factor  and
  subtract the result thereof from the local reproduction cost; and
    (3) Multiply the result of such calculations by the state equalization
  rate  determined  or  established  in  accordance with the provisions of
  section four hundred eighty-nine-l of this chapter. The result shall  be
  the railroad ceiling.
    (4)  Determinations  made pursuant to this section shall be based upon
  the value of the railroad real property as of the  rate  valuation  date
  and  ownership of such railroad real property as of the thirty-first day
  of December of the year preceding the year in which the assessment  roll
  to  which  such  ceiling assessment will apply is filed in the office of
  the city or town clerk, except that those determinations shall be  based
  upon ownership as of the thirty-first day of December of the second year
  preceding  the  date  required  by  law  for  the  filing  of  the final
  assessment roll for purposes of city assessment  rolls  required  to  be
  filed between January first and June first inclusive and for all village
  assessment  rolls. As used in this subdivision, the term "rate valuation
  date" means the date as of which the full value of taxable real property
  on  an  assessement  roll  is  estimated  for  purposes  of  the   state
  equalization  rate  to  be  applied in the establishment of the railroad
  ceiling.

Relationships among elements used in computation of railroad
  ceiling. In order to effectuate the legislative policy that  the  amount
  of exemptions from real property taxation granted to railroads should be
  related to their individual rates of earnings, and in order to provide a
  uniform   and   equitable  method  for  implementing  this  policy,  the
  commissioner shall establish and  maintain  relationships  among  system
  reproduction  cost,  railway  earnings,  local reproduction cost and the
  state equalization rates, so that:
    (1) System reproduction cost, local reproduction cost  and  the  state
  equalization  rates shall be based so far as may be practicable upon the
  same period price levels;
    (2)  System  reproduction  cost  shall  include  so  far  as  may   be
  practicable the property constituting the railroad system from which the
  railway  earnings  were  derived  for  the  latest  year included in the
  average railway earnings; and
    (3) The aggregate of the local  reproduction  cost  of  each  railroad
  company shall approximate the amount included in the system reproduction
  cost  of  such  railroad  company on account of the property included in
  such local reproduction costs so far as may be practicable.

System reproduction cost. 1. The system reproduction cost of
  each railroad company shall be determined by ascertaining so far as  may
  be  practicable for the property of each railroad company used by it for
  transportation purposes and owned by or leased to  it  constituting  the
  railroad  system:  (a) the cost of reproduction new less depreciation of
  road and equipment, (b) the value of land and rights, including value of
  rights in land in,  above  and  under  any  public  street,  highway  or
  parkway,  and  (c)  working  capital  including  material  and supplies,
  provided, however, that if on the effective date of this title the major
  portion of the property of a railroad company  and  the  management  and
  control of such company are located outside of the territorial limits of
  the United States, the system reproduction cost of such railroad company
  shall  consist of the property of such company located within the United
  States.
    2. In making determinations under this  section  as  to  the  property
  constituting  the  railroad  system, the commissioner shall classify the
  property  of  each  railroad  company  as  between   transportation   or
  non-transportation so far as may be practicable.
    3.  In  ascertaining  depreciation  of  property  under  this section,
  consideration may be given to physical condition, average service  lives
  of  groups  of  property  and  other  factors, which, however, shall not
  include earnings.
    4. As used in this section, the term "value of land" means  the  value
  of  similar  land in the immediate vicinity used for other than railroad
  transportation purposes, and the term "value of rights in land in, above
  and under any public street, highway or parkway" means  ten  percent  of
  the value of land in the immediate vicinity used for other than railroad
  transportation purposes.
    5. In making determinations under this section, the commissioner shall
  consider the information contained in the publication entitled "Elements
  of  Value of Property Used in Common Carrier Service" then most recently
  issued or made available by the bureau of  accounts,  cost  finding  and
  valuation  of  the  interstate commerce commission. The commissioner may
  consider information available from the commissioner  of  transportation
  or other regulatory agency having jurisdiction over the property of such
  railroad  company,  as well as information available from other sources,
  including  reports   required   pursuant   to   section   four   hundred
  eighty-nine-q,  and  such  other  information  on  the subject as may be
  available to it.
    6. In determining a system reproduction cost for purposes of  railroad
  ceilings  determined  for  assessment  rolls  filed  on or after January
  first, two thousand three, grading shall be deemed a depreciable  asset.
  The  allowance  for grading in place shall be eighteen percent per annum
  but shall not exceed ninety percent.
    7. In determining a system reproduction cost for purposes of  railroad
  ceilings  determined  for  assessment  rolls  filed  on or after January
  first, two thousand three, the commissioner shall not include  a  factor
  for  any  construction  overhead  in  its  calculation,  nor  shall such
  overhead costs be included for any new construction begun  on  or  after
  the effective date of this subdivision.
    8.  (a)  In  determining  a  system  reproduction cost for purposes of
  railroad ceilings established for assessment rolls filed in two thousand
  three, the  commissioner  shall  allow  for  increased  depreciation  of
  railroad  track. For high speed/high tonnage track and medium speed/high
  tonnage track, whether main track or side track, depreciation  shall  be
  increased  to  seventy-five percent. For low speed/medium tonnage track,
  whether main track or side track, depreciation  shall  be  increased  to

  eighty-five percent. For low speed/low tonnage track, whether main track
  or side track, depreciation shall be increased to ninety percent.
    (b)  Such  increased  depreciation  pursuant  to paragraph (a) of this
  subdivision shall be  granted  for  railroad  ceilings  established  for
  assessment  rolls  filed  in  two thousand four and thereafter only upon
  application of a railroad company. Any increased depreciation  shall  be
  granted  to  all  the  tracks  owned  by  the railroad in this state not
  otherwise exempt from inclusion in the calculation of railroad ceilings.
  Such grant of increased depreciation shall continue for  ten  years  and
  may be approved for subsequent periods of ten years upon application and
  compliance  with  the  standards established by rule and regulation. The
  commissioner   shall,   in   consultation   with   the   department   of
  transportation  and  the  division  of the budget, establish by rule and
  regulation the schedules for increased depreciation  and  standards  for
  improved  service  that  must  be met in order for a railroad to receive
  such  increased  depreciation  for  railroad  ceilings  established  for
  assessment  rolls  filed in two thousand four and thereafter. A railroad
  company that has failed to file an application or  failed  to  meet  the
  standards  for  improved  services  contained  in  any  such  rules  and
  regulations of the commissioner prior to the establishment  of  railroad
  ceilings  for  assessment rolls filed in two thousand four shall receive
  one-half the benefit for increased depreciation that such company  would
  have received had such application been made and such standards been met
  in  a  timely  fashion.  The standards for increased depreciation may be
  based upon increased tonnage,  increased  level  of  passenger  service,
  increased   number   of   passenger   trains   and/or  improved  on-time
  performance, increased average speed, and any other  factors  indicating
  improved  rail  service  as  the  commissioner  and  the  department  of
  transportation shall specify.

System reproduction cost. 1. The system reproduction cost of
  each railroad company shall be determined by ascertaining so far as  may
  be  practicable for the property of each railroad company used by it for
  transportation purposes and owned by or leased to  it  constituting  the
  railroad  system:  (a) the cost of reproduction new less depreciation of
  road and equipment, (b) the value of land and rights, including value of
  rights in land in,  above  and  under  any  public  street,  highway  or
  parkway,  and  (c)  working  capital  including  material  and supplies,
  provided, however, that if on the effective date of this title the major
  portion of the property of a railroad company  and  the  management  and
  control of such company are located outside of the territorial limits of
  the United States, the system reproduction cost of such railroad company
  shall  consist of the property of such company located within the United
  States.
    2. In making determinations under this  section  as  to  the  property
  constituting  the  railroad  system, the commissioner shall classify the
  property  of  each  railroad  company  as  between   transportation   or
  non-transportation so far as may be practicable.
    3.  In  ascertaining  depreciation  of  property  under  this section,
  consideration may be given to physical condition, average service  lives
  of  groups  of  property  and  other  factors, which, however, shall not
  include earnings.
    4. As used in this section, the term "value of land" means  the  value
  of  similar  land in the immediate vicinity used for other than railroad
  transportation purposes, and the term "value of rights in land in, above
  and under any public street, highway or parkway" means  ten  percent  of
  the value of land in the immediate vicinity used for other than railroad
  transportation purposes.
    5. In making determinations under this section, the commissioner shall
  consider the information contained in the publication entitled "Elements
  of  Value of Property Used in Common Carrier Service" then most recently
  issued or made available by the bureau of  accounts,  cost  finding  and
  valuation  of  the  interstate commerce commission. The commissioner may
  consider information available from the commissioner  of  transportation
  or other regulatory agency having jurisdiction over the property of such
  railroad  company,  as well as information available from other sources,
  including  reports   required   pursuant   to   section   four   hundred
  eighty-nine-q,  and  such  other  information  on  the subject as may be
  available to it.
    6. In determining a system reproduction cost for purposes of  railroad
  ceilings  determined  for  assessment  rolls  filed  on or after January
  first, two thousand three, grading shall be deemed a depreciable  asset.
  The  allowance  for grading in place shall be eighteen percent per annum
  but shall not exceed ninety percent.
    7. In determining a system reproduction cost for purposes of  railroad
  ceilings  determined  for  assessment  rolls  filed  on or after January
  first, two thousand three, the commissioner shall not include  a  factor
  for  any  construction  overhead  in  its  calculation,  nor  shall such
  overhead costs be included for any new construction begun  on  or  after
  the effective date of this subdivision.
    8.  (a)  In  determining  a  system  reproduction cost for purposes of
  railroad ceilings established for assessment rolls filed in two thousand
  three, the  commissioner  shall  allow  for  increased  depreciation  of
  railroad  track. For high speed/high tonnage track and medium speed/high
  tonnage track, whether main track or side track, depreciation  shall  be
  increased  to  seventy-five percent. For low speed/medium tonnage track,
  whether main track or side track, depreciation  shall  be  increased  to

  eighty-five percent. For low speed/low tonnage track, whether main track
  or side track, depreciation shall be increased to ninety percent.
    (b)  Such  increased  depreciation  pursuant  to paragraph (a) of this
  subdivision shall be  granted  for  railroad  ceilings  established  for
  assessment  rolls  filed  in  two thousand four and thereafter only upon
  application of a railroad company. Any increased depreciation  shall  be
  granted  to  all  the  tracks  owned  by  the railroad in this state not
  otherwise exempt from inclusion in the calculation of railroad ceilings.
  Such grant of increased depreciation shall continue for  ten  years  and
  may be approved for subsequent periods of ten years upon application and
  compliance  with  the  standards established by rule and regulation. The
  commissioner   shall,   in   consultation   with   the   department   of
  transportation  and  the  division  of the budget, establish by rule and
  regulation the schedules for increased depreciation  and  standards  for
  improved  service  that  must  be met in order for a railroad to receive
  such  increased  depreciation  for  railroad  ceilings  established  for
  assessment  rolls  filed in two thousand four and thereafter. A railroad
  company that has failed to file an application or  failed  to  meet  the
  standards  for  improved  services  contained  in  any  such  rules  and
  regulations of the commissioner prior to the establishment  of  railroad
  ceilings  for  assessment rolls filed in two thousand four shall receive
  one-half the benefit for increased depreciation that such company  would
  have received had such application been made and such standards been met
  in  a  timely  fashion.  The standards for increased depreciation may be
  based upon increased tonnage,  increased  level  of  passenger  service,
  increased   number   of   passenger   trains   and/or  improved  on-time
  performance, increased average speed, and any other  factors  indicating
  improved  rail  service  as  the  commissioner  and  the  department  of
  transportation shall specify.

Average  railway  earnings. 1. The average railway earnings
  shall be determined for each railroad company as follows:
    (a) Ascertain so far as may be practicable  the  revenues  which  such
  railroad  company is entitled to receive from transportation service and
  from rents from property constituting the railroad  system  included  in
  the system reproduction cost;
    (b)  Ascertain  so  far as may be practicable the expenses incurred in
  furnishing transportation service, including expenses  incurred  in  the
  operation  and  maintenance  of  the  property constituting the railroad
  system included in the system reproduction cost,  depreciation  of  such
  property,  rents  and  other expenses incurred for property used by such
  railroad company for transportation purposes not included in the  system
  reproduction  cost,  and  United  States  government  taxes  for old-age
  retirement under  the  federal  railroad  retirement  tax  act  and  for
  unemployment insurance under the federal railroad unemployment insurance
  act but excluding all other taxes;
    (c)  Subtract  the  expenses from the revenues and the result shall be
  the railway earnings; and
    (d) Average the railway earnings for the latest  five  calendar  years
  available  prior to the tentative determination of the railroad ceiling.
  The result shall be the average railway earnings.
    2. In making determinations under this section, the commissioner shall
  consider the information  contained  in  the  income,  profit  and  loss
  statements  and other financial statements of the railroad company filed
  with the interstate commerce  commission,  and  the  accounting  records
  maintained  by  such  railroad  company  in  accordance with the uniform
  system of accounts for railroad companies prescribed by  the  interstate
  commerce commission. The commissioner may consider information available
  from  the  commissioner  of  transportation  or  other regulatory agency
  having jurisdiction over the accounts of such railroad company, as  well
  as  information available from other sources, including reports required
  pursuant  to  section  four  hundred  eighty-nine-q   and   such   other
  information on the subject as may be available to it.

Earnings ratio. The commissioner shall determine the earnings
  ratio for each railroad company by ascertaining the ratio of its average
  railway  earnings  to  its  system  reproduction  cost,  computed to the
  nearest hundredth of one per cent.

Exemption  factor.  (a)  In  accordance  with the policy of
  granting increasingly greater exemptions as the rate of  earnings  of  a
  railroad  company  declines,  the  exemption  factor  for  each railroad
  company shall be determined in accordance with its earnings  ratio.  For
  each  railroad company the percentage indicated under "exemption factor"
  in the following table opposite the earnings ratio of such company shall
  be the exemption factor. If the earnings ratio  of  a  railroad  company
  does not coincide with a specific earnings ratio indicated in the table,
  the   exemption   factor   for  such  company  shall  be  determined  by
  interpolation to the nearest tenth of one percent.
        Earnings Ratio                         Exemption Factor
          (Percent)                               (Percent)
             10                                      0
              9                                      5
              8                                     10
              7                                     15
              6                                     20
              5                                     30
              4                                     40
              3                                     50
              2                                     60
              1                                     80
              0                                     80
 
    (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision (a) of this section,
  for purposes of determining railroad ceilings for  intrastate  railroads
  for assessment rolls completed in two thousand three and thereafter, the
  percentage  indicated  under  "exemption  factor"  in  the table in this
  subdivision opposite the earnings ratio of the railroad company shall be
  the exemption factor for each railroad company. If the earnings ratio of
  a railroad company does not coincide  with  a  specific  earnings  ratio
  indicated  in  the  table  in this subdivision, the exemption factor for
  such company  shall  be  determined  by  interpolation  to  the  nearest
  hundredth of one percent.
            Earnings Ratio                Exemption Factor
               (Percent)                     (Percent)
                 12                              0
                 11                              5
                 10                             10
                  9                             15
                  8                             20
                  7                             25
                  6                             30
                  5                             35
                  4                             40
                  3                             50
                  2                             60
                  1                             80
                  0                             85
    (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision (b) of this section,
  whenever  it  shall  appear  that an exemption factor is decreasing more
  than one-tenth from the exemption factor established in the prior  year,
  such decrease may not exceed one-tenth.

Unadjusted  local  reproduction cost and local reproduction
  cost.    1.  The  commissioner  shall  determine  the  unadjusted  local
  reproduction  cost  for  each railroad company in each assessing unit as
  follows:
    (a) Ascertain in each assessing unit the cost of reproduction new less
  depreciation of the railroad real property other than land;
    (b) Ascertain in each assessing unit the value of the land portion  of
  railroad  real  property  and  the value of rights in land in, above and
  under any public street,  highway  or  parkway  used  by  such  railroad
  company;
    (c)  Add  the  amounts  ascertained  under  (a) and (b) above for each
  assessing unit. The result shall be the  unadjusted  local  reproduction
  cost.
    2.  The  commissioner  shall determine the local reproduction cost for
  each railroad company in each assessing unit as follows:
    (a) Compute the ratio of the  total  amount  included  in  the  system
  reproduction  cost  of  such railroad company on account of the property
  included in the unadjusted local reproduction costs  for  all  assessing
  units  to  the  aggregate of the unadjusted local reproduction costs for
  all assessing units for such railroad company;
    (b) Multiply the unadjusted local reproduction cost for each assessing
  unit by the ratio computed in (a) above. The result shall be  the  local
  reproduction cost.
    3. In making determinations under this section, the commissioner shall
  classify   the  real  property  of  each  railroad  company  as  between
  transportation or non-transportation so far as may be practicable.
    4. In  ascertaining  depreciation  of  property  under  this  section,
  consideration  may be given to physical condition, average service lives
  of groups of property and  other  factors,  which,  however,  shall  not
  include earnings.
    5.  As  used in this section, the term "value of land" means the value
  of similar land in the immediate vicinity used for other  than  railroad
  transportation  purposes and the term "value of rights in land in, above
  and under any public street, highway or parkway" means ten per  cent  of
  the value of land in the immediate vicinity used for other than railroad
  transportation purposes.
    6.  The determinations made under this section shall reflect so far as
  may  be  practicable  the  status  of  the  property  as   of   December
  thirty-first of the preceding year.
    7. In making determinations under this section, the commissioner shall
  consider  the  information  contained in accounts maintained pursuant to
  the uniform system of accounts for railroad companies prescribed by  the
  interstate commerce commission and in the publication entitled "Elements
  of  Value or Property Used in Common Carrier Service" then most recently
  issued or made available by the bureau of  accounts,  cost  finding  and
  valuation  of  the  interstate commerce commission. The commissioner may
  consider information available from the commissioner  of  transportation
  and  from  other sources, including reports required pursuant to section
  four hundred eighty-nine-q, and such other information on the subject as
  may be available to it.

State equalization rate. 1. In determining railroad ceilings,
  the  commissioner shall apply the latest state equalization rate for the
  assessing unit, except that, if a special  equalization  rate  has  been
  established  as  provided  in subdivision two of this section, such rate
  shall be applied. For the purposes of this title, the equalization  rate
  to  be  applied  in  computing railroad ceilings in the city of New York
  shall be computed by the  commissioner  on  a  city-wide  basis,  giving
  appropriate  weight  to  the  latest state equalization rates or special
  equalization rates of the five counties within such city.
    2. The commissioner shall establish a special  equalization  rate  for
  the  purposes  of this section where there has been a change in level of
  assessment on the assessment roll for which a railroad ceiling is to  be
  determined,  subject to the provisions of title two of article twelve of
  this chapter, or the state equalization rate  that  would  otherwise  be
  applied  reflects the level of assessment on the property subject to the
  railroad ceiling or where a final state equalization rate has  not  been
  established for the assessment roll of the preceding year.

Railroad real property used for transportation purposes. In
  making determinations as to railroad real property  which  is  used  for
  transportation  purposes,  the commissioner shall consider the manner in
  which  property  is  classified  as  property  used  for  transportation
  purposes  in  accounts  maintained  pursuant  to  the  uniform system of
  accounts for railroad companies as prescribed by the interstate commerce
  commission and the commissioner of transportation and in the publication
  of the interstate commerce commission entitled  "Elements  of  Value  of
  Property  Used  in  Common  Carrier  Service"  as  well  as  information
  available from other sources, including  reports  required  pursuant  to
  section four hundred eighty-nine-q.

Tentative  determination  of  railroad  ceiling;  notice,
  complaints and hearing. 1. Each  year  the  commissioner  shall  make  a
  tentative  determination  of  each  railroad  ceiling.  Thereafter,  the
  commissioner shall give notice in writing to  each  assessing  unit  and
  each  railroad  company  for  which  such  tentative  determination of a
  railroad ceiling shall have been made  specifying  the  amount  of  such
  ceiling  and the time and place where the commissioner will meet to hear
  any complaint concerning such tentative determination. Such notice  must
  be  served  at  least  twenty  days  prior to the date specified for the
  hearing.
    2. A railroad company or  assessing  unit  objecting  to  a  tentative
  determination  of the railroad ceiling must serve its complaint upon the
  commissioner in writing and a copy thereof upon the  assessing  unit  or
  railroad  company, as the case may be, at least five days before the day
  specified for the hearing, specifying its objections to  such  tentative
  determination.  Service  may  be made either in person or by mail. On or
  before the date specified for the hearing an affidavit of service  shall
  be  filed  with  the  commissioner stating in substance that service has
  been made in accordance with the provisions of this section.
    3. The commissioner shall meet at the time and place specified in such
  notice to hear complaints in relation to the tentative determination  of
  the  railroad  ceiling. The provisions of section five hundred twelve of
  this chapter shall apply so far as may be practicable to a hearing under
  this section. Nothing contained in this subdivision shall  be  construed
  to require a hearing to be conducted when no complaints have been filed.

Final  determination  of  railroad ceiling; certificate. 1.
  After the hearing provided for in section four hundred eighty-nine-n  of
  this  title, the state board of real property tax services shall finally
  determine the railroad ceiling for the railroad real  property  of  each
  railroad   company  situated  in  each  assessing  unit.  Whenever  upon
  complaint the state board shall revise the local reproduction cost of  a
  railroad  company  in  an  assessing  unit, it shall revise the railroad
  ceiling therefor to reflect such revision, but it shall not, on  account
  of  such  revision,  modify  any other determination with respect to the
  railroad  ceilings  for   such   railroad   company   for   such   year.
  Notwithstanding  the  fact  that no complaint shall have been filed with
  respect to a tentative determination of a railroad  ceiling,  the  state
  board  shall  give  effect to any special equalization rate established,
  pursuant to subdivision two of section  four  hundred  eighty-nine-l  of
  this title prior to the final determination of the railroad ceiling.
    2.  Not later than ten days before the last date prescribed by law for
  the levy of taxes, the state board  shall  file  a  certificate  setting
  forth  each  railroad ceiling as finally determined with the assessor of
  the appropriate assessing unit  or  the  town  or  county  assessor  who
  prepares  a copy of the applicable part of the town or county assessment
  roll for village tax  purposes  as  provided  in  subdivision  three  of
  section fourteen hundred two of this chapter, and at the same time shall
  transmit  to  each  railroad  company  for  which  such ceiling has been
  determined a duplicate copy of such certificate.
    3. Any final determination of a railroad ceiling by  the  state  board
  pursuant to subdivision one of this section shall be subject to judicial
  review in a proceeding under article seventy-eight of the civil practice
  law and rules.

Application of railroad ceiling; computation of exemption.
  1.  Upon receipt of a certificate setting forth the railroad ceiling for
  a railroad company, the assessor shall compute for  his  assessing  unit
  the   aggregate   of   the  assessed  valuations  and  portions  thereof
  attributable to railroad real property of such railroad company included
  in the railroad ceiling.  If the aggregate of such assessed  valuations,
  as  so  computed,  does  not  exceed  the  ceiling  as  set forth in the
  certificate for  the  railroad  company,  the  assessor  shall  make  no
  adjustment  in  such assessed valuations.  If, however, the aggregate of
  such assessed valuations, as so computed, shall  exceed  the  amount  of
  such  ceiling  as  set  forth  in  the  certificate,  such railroad real
  property shall be exempt from taxation to the extent of such excess  and
  the  assessor  shall  forthwith  reduce the assessments of such railroad
  real property of such railroad company, so that  the  aggregate  of  the
  taxable  assessed  valuations  of  such  property  shall not exceed such
  ceiling; provided, however, that the assessor shall make  no  adjustment
  in  such assessed valuations if the company failed for any reason to pay
  within thirty days of the date when due the tax levied upon the  taxable
  portion  of  the assessment of any railroad real property of the company
  set forth on the immediately preceding assessment roll of any  assessing
  unit  unless  the  payment  or  enforcement of such tax is restrained or
  prohibited by an order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction under
  the bankruptcy act of the United States.  In reducing  such  assessments
  for  the  purpose  of giving effect to exemptions granted by this title,
  the assessor shall distribute such reduction to the parcels affected  in
  direct  proportion  to  the  assessed  valuations  of such railroad real
  property  included  in  the  assessment  of  each  parcel  as  initially
  determined  by  the assessor.   The amount so deducted from the assessed
  valuation of each parcel shall be  set  forth  on  the  portion  of  the
  assessment roll provided for property exempt from taxation.  The taxable
  portion  of  the assessment remaining on railroad real property shall be
  apportioned among the school districts and special districts directly in
  proportion to the apportionments of  the  assessed  valuations  of  such
  railroad  real property made by the assessor prior to the adjustment for
  the exemption resulting from application of the railroad ceiling.    All
  certificates  of  railroad  ceilings shall be attached to the assessment
  roll or filed  therewith  as  provided  in  article  fifteen-C  of  this
  chapter.
    2.    The  assessor  is  hereby  authorized  and  directed to make the
  reductions, if any, provided for in this section on the assessment  roll
  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  he  may receive the certificate of the
  railroad ceiling after the final completion, verification and filing  of
  such   assessment   roll.     Other  local  officers,  including  school
  authorities  having  custody  and  control  of  such  roll,  are  hereby
  authorized  and  directed,  on  the  basis of information which shall be
  furnished by the assessor, to make the reductions provided for  in  this
  section.
    3.    In assessing units for which he is required by law to prepare an
  assessment roll, the assessor of a county having a county department  of
  assessment shall perform all the acts prescribed for an assessor by this
  title.  Where  a  village  has  enacted  a  local  law  as  provided  in
  subdivision three of section fourteen hundred two of this  chapter,  the
  assessor  of  the  town or county who prepares a copy of this applicable
  part of the town or county assessment  roll  for  village  tax  purposes
  shall  also  perform  the acts prescribed for assessors by this title on
  behalf of the village.
Reports to commissioner. Each railroad company shall furnish
  the commissioner the following:
    1. A  copy  of  all  income,  profit  and  loss  and  other  financial
  statements  filed  with  the  interstate  commerce  commission  and  the
  commissioner of transportation; and
    2. Such other reports as  the  commissioner  may  from  time  to  time
  require  containing  such  information  and  data  as  it  may  specify,
  including cost and valuation data relating to or  an  inventory  of  the
  railroad  real property of such company situated in each assessing unit,
  in order to carry out the provisions of this title.
    3. Each railroad company shall pay  an  annual  charge  to  the  state
  office.    All  costs  and  expenses  of  the  state  office, direct and
  indirect, incurred in the establishment of railroad ceilings pursuant to
  this title shall be paid from the collection of an  annual  charge  upon
  railroad   companies.   The  commissioner  shall  provide  by  rule  for
  computation of this charge through the apportionment of these costs  and
  expenses  to  railroad companies in direct relation to the value of such
  real property subject to the ceiling. Charges shall be  subject  to  the
  annual  approval  of the director of the budget. Any unpaid charge shall
  be a lien upon the  assets  of  the  company  and  may  be  enforced  by
  appropriate administrative and judicial proceedings commenced by counsel
  to the state office.
    4.  Any  railroad  company  failing  to make any report required by or
  pursuant to this section within  a  reasonable  time  specified  by  the
  commissioner  shall  forfeit  to  the people of the state the sum of one
  hundred dollars for each failure and the additional sum of fifty dollars
  for each day that such failure continues. Acknowledgment of  receipt  of
  blank reports which contain the penalty provisions of this section shall
  be deemed sufficient notice of such penalties.

Inspection of accounts and property of railroad companies. 1.
  The  commissioner  or its authorized representative shall have access at
  reasonable times to all accounts and records established and  maintained
  by  a  railroad company relating to its property used for transportation
  purposes and the earnings derived therefrom.
    2. The commissioner or its authorized representative  shall  have  the
  power  at  reasonable times to enter in or upon and to inspect the road,
  equipment, structures and other property of any railroad company.
Estimated  railroad  ceiling. Upon application of a county,
  city,  town,  village,  school  district  or   special   district,   the
  commissioner   shall  establish  estimated  railroad  ceilings  for  the
  assessment roll or rolls used thereby. Such estimated railroad  ceilings
  may  be  used  in  the computation of average full valuation for tax and
  debt limit purposes in accordance with the provisions of section 2.00 of
  the local finance law.
Inapplicability of title. The provisions of this title shall
  not apply to railroad real property which  is  owned  by  or  under  the
  jurisdiction, supervision or control of either an industrial development
  agency or a municipal corporation.
Capital improvements to railroad property. 1. As used in this
  section:
    (a) "Completed capital project" shall mean a capital project which has
  been  certified by the commissioner to be completed in accordance with a
  capital project proposal approved by the commissioner.
    (b) "Capital project proposal" shall mean a proposal,  prepared  by  a
  railroad  company  and submitted to the commissioner, which sets forth a
  proposed capital project. Such proposal shall include a  description  of
  the proposed capital project and conditions relating to railroad tracks,
  roadbeds,  bridge  and structural improvements, improvements to railroad
  yards,  switches,  sidings,   or   other   facilities,   signal   system
  improvements,  or  other  railroad projects that improve the efficiency,
  capacity, or safety  of  railroad  facilities.  The  proposal  shall  be
  reviewed  by  the commissioner and shall be approved if the commissioner
  determines that the proposed project is consistent with  the  provisions
  of   paragraph  (e)  of  this  subdivision  and  rules  and  regulations
  prescribed by the department pursuant to this section.  Capital  project
  proposals  that  have  been  approved by the commissioner may be amended
  with the approval of the commissioner.
    (c) "Commissioner" shall mean the commissioner of the New  York  state
  department of transportation.
    (d)   "Department"  shall  mean  the  New  York  state  department  of
  transportation.
    (e) "Capital project" shall mean a construction  project  which  shall
  modify  railroad  facilities  to  substantially  improve the efficiency,
  capacity, or safety of railroad freight or passenger transportation,  as
  determined by the commissioner, in one or more of the following manners:
    (i)   a   substantial   enhancement   in  rail  freight  or  passenger
  transportation performance, such as upgrading the class of the  railroad
  track  as track classes are defined in the track safety standards of the
  United States department of transportation;
    (ii) the construction of significant new facilities for  rail  freight
  or  passenger  transportation,  such as the construction of new railroad
  lines, additional tracks  along  existing  lines,  sidings,  structures,
  yards,  stations, signal systems or switching facilities, and intermodal
  facilities, including, but not limited to,  automotive,  bulk  transfer,
  trailer on flatcar, container on flatcar, and reload facilities; and
    (iii)  major  renovations  to  or expansions of components of railroad
  infrastructure, such as the reconstruction of bridges or the increase in
  bridge capacity, the expansion of railroad  yards,  or  the  substantial
  improvement of the technology or safety of signal systems.
    2.  (a)  A  railroad  company  shall  propose a capital project to the
  commissioner for approval under this section on forms prescribed by  the
  department.  The  commissioner  shall  approve capital project proposals
  that are consistent with  the  terms  of  this  section  and  rules  and
  regulations  prescribed by the department. The commissioner shall notify
  the submitting railroad company within  thirty  days  of  receipt  of  a
  proposal  whether  or  not the commissioner considers the proposal to be
  consistent with the definition of a capital  project  as  set  forth  in
  paragraph (e) of subdivision one of this section.
    (b)  Upon  a  railroad  company's  completion of the construction of a
  capital project, such railroad  company  may  make  application  to  the
  commissioner for certification under this section on forms prescribed by
  the  department. If the commissioner finds that such capital project was
  completed in accordance with, and is in  compliance  with,  an  approved
  capital  project  proposal,  the commissioner is authorized to forward a
  certificate of approval to the property owner thereof, with the approved
  capital project proposal for the completed capital project.

    (c) The department is hereby authorized to adopt and promulgate  rules
  and  regulations  necessary for the implementation of this section. Such
  regulations may relate to the nature and  content  of  eligible  capital
  projects, approved capital project proposals, certifications and notices
  issued  by  the  commissioner, and completed capital projects. Rules and
  regulations relating to capital projects and  approved  capital  project
  proposals   or   amendments  thereto  may  provide  for  alternative  or
  contingent terms based on the scope and nature of the capital project.
    (d) This section  shall  apply  to  any  certified  completed  capital
  project.    The  obligations  and benefits of this section shall devolve
  upon the property owner and the heirs, successors, and assigns  thereof,
  as the case may be.
    3.  (a)  Whenever  any  alteration  of  a completed capital project is
  proposed during the period of exemption pursuant to section four hundred
  eighty-nine-d or four hundred eighty-nine-dd of this article in a manner
  that would reduce the utility of  the  completed  capital  project,  the
  property  owner  shall  give  not  less  than  sixty  days notice to the
  commissioner in a manner and upon such form as shall  be  prescribed  by
  the department. Such notice shall include information as to the location
  and nature of such proposed alteration.
    (b)  The  commissioner  shall, in response to a notice from a property
  owner or on the commissioner's own initiative, after notice and hearing,
  issue a notice of revocation  of  the  certificate  of  approval  issued
  pursuant  to this section for any completed capital project whenever the
  commissioner finds that:
    (i) any completed capital project or portion thereof is not maintained
  or is converted to a use which precludes the use of the improvement  for
  common carrier railroad use; or
    (ii)  the property owner fails to give notice of a proposed alteration
  of such completed capital project pursuant  to  paragraph  (a)  of  this
  subdivision; or
    (iii)  the  property  owner  fails  to  comply  with  the terms of the
  approved capital project proposal for such improved property.
    4. Any determination made pursuant to this section  shall  be  binding
  upon the commissioner in any calculation pursuant to this title or title
  two-B of this article.
Railroad ceiling; transitional adjustment. 1. Any reduction
  in a railroad ceiling established pursuant to this title or title  two-B
  of  this  article resulting from amendments to this title or title two-B
  of this article effective in the year two thousand three for  assessment
  rolls  filed  in  two thousand three through two thousand eight shall be
  adjusted as follows:
    (a) Ceilings for assessment rolls filed in two thousand three and  two
  thousand  four  shall  only  be  reduced by one-fourth of the difference
  between the ceilings or assessments against which taxes were  levied  on
  assessment  rolls  filed  in two thousand and the ceilings that would be
  established for the two thousand three and two thousand four  assessment
  rolls but for the provisions of this section.
    (b)  Ceilings  for assessment rolls filed in two thousand five and two
  thousand six shall only be reduced by one-half of the difference between
  the  ceilings  or  assessments  against  which  taxes  were  levied   on
  assessment  rolls  filed in two thousand, and the ceilings that would be
  established for the two thousand five and two  thousand  six  assessment
  rolls but for the provisions of this section.
    (c)  Ceilings for assessment rolls filed in two thousand seven and two
  thousand eight shall only be reduced by three-quarters of the difference
  between the ceilings or assessments against which taxes were  levied  on
  assessment  rolls  filed  in two thousand and the ceilings that would be
  established for the two thousand seven and two thousand eight assessment
  rolls but for the provisions of this section.
    (d) In calculating  the  limitations  created  by  this  section,  the
  commissioner  shall  reflect  any material change in level of assessment
  calculated pursuant to article  twelve  of  this  chapter  and  any  new
  construction  or  demolition  in the net amount of five hundred thousand
  dollars or more in any one year.
    2. State assistance shall be paid pursuant to this section,  beginning
  in  the  year  two thousand three, to municipal corporations and special
  districts that are affected by amendments to this title or  title  two-B
  of  this article enacted in the year two thousand two; provided that the
  determination of such assistance shall be subject to the approval of the
  director of the budget.
    (a) Upon issuance of a warrant by a tax-levying body for an assessment
  roll filed in the year two thousand three, the chief fiscal  officer  of
  such  tax-levying  body  shall  report to the commissioner the amount of
  taxes  due  on  any  assessment  of  railroad  transportation   property
  appearing  on  such  roll,  or the taxes that would have been due on the
  railroad ceiling for that property if such ceiling were higher than  the
  assessment,  and  the taxes paid on the same assessment of such railroad
  real property appearing on the assessment roll filed  in  the  year  two
  thousand.  A county shall prepare a single report for the cities, towns,
  and special districts for which it levies taxes. The commissioner  shall
  thereupon  certify to the comptroller payment of state assistance in the
  amount by which the  amount  of  taxes  paid  on  those  assessments  or
  ceilings  on  the  assessment roll filed in the year two thousand exceed
  the taxes due on the lower of the  assessment  or  ceiling  of  railroad
  transportation  property  appearing  on the assessment roll filed in the
  year two thousand three.
    (b) Upon annexation of a warrant to an assessment roll  filed  in  two
  thousand  four  through two thousand six, the commissioner shall certify
  payments in the same amount as  those  certified  for  assessment  rolls
  completed  in  two  thousand  three.  Upon annexation of a warrant to an
  assessment roll filed in two thousand seven and two thousand eight,  the
  commissioner  shall  certify payments in the amount of one hundred fifty
  percent of the amount certified for assessment rolls  completed  in  two

  thousand  three.  For  assessment  rolls  completed in two thousand nine
  through two thousand twelve, the commissioner shall certify payments  in
  the amount of two hundred percent of the amount certified for assessment
  rolls  completed  in  two thousand three. Any state aid pursuant to this
  section may  be  reduced  proportionately  to  reflect  an  increase  in
  railroad  ceilings  due to the failure of the owner to receive increased
  depreciation as  provided  in  section  four  hundred  eighty-nine-g  or
  section   four  hundred  eighty-nine-ii  of  this  article.  Such  state
  assistance shall not be available for assessment rolls completed in  two
  thousand thirteen and thereafter.
    (c)  The  amount  of any assistance certified pursuant to this section
  may be modified to reflect proportionally new construction or demolition
  in the net amount of five hundred thousand dollars or more  in  any  one
  year.
    (d)  No payment of state aid shall be made pursuant to this section if
  a  railroad  ceiling,  adjusted  pursuant  to  paragraph  (c)  of   this
  subdivision,  is  higher than the ceiling established for the assessment
  roll filed in the year two thousand.
    (e) No payment of state aid shall be made pursuant to this section  if
  the amount of such payment would be less than one hundred dollars.
    3.  State  assistance  shall  be  paid  pursuant  to  this  section to
  municipal corporations and special districts that are  affected  by  any
  exemption  of  railroad  real  property  as a result of acquisition by a
  public authority, or lease or sublease of such railroad real property by
  the public authority; provided that such contract  for  acquisition,  or
  lease or sublease of such railroad real property by the public authority
  went  into  effect in the year two thousand three. Such assistance shall
  be equivalent to the amount the municipality or special  district  would
  have  received  pursuant  to  subdivision two of this section as if such
  acquisition, lease or sublease of such railroad real  property  by  such
  public authority had not occurred.

Legislative declaration.  It is hereby found and declared
  that continued operation of the interstate railroads in  the  state  and
  improvement  of  their  service  and  facilities  are  essential  to the
  commerce, defense, and general welfare of the people of the state;  that
  in  the  year  nineteen  hundred fifty-nine at a time when the financial
  condition of railroads in the state had deteriorated to the extent  that
  the continuation of vital operations was threatened, a partial exemption
  from  taxation  was  granted  railroad  property  in a manner which gave
  increasingly greater exemptions as the rate of earnings  of  a  railroad
  system  declined;  that  since  that  time  major  interstate  railroads
  operating in New York state have become bankrupt  and  the  earnings  of
  non-bankrupt  railroads  have  also  declined  substantially;  that rail
  services heretofore operated by the insolvent railroads will continue to
  be operated by new rail systems of railroad companies created  under  or
  in  compliance with federal statutes; that federal law requires that the
  property in the new systems be taxed  in  a  non-discriminatory  manner;
  that  in  order  for  the new systems to be viable the railroad property
  which will constitute such new systems should be eligible for a  partial
  exemption which reflects lack of earnings; that railroad ceilings cannot
  be  established  for the new systems under existing formulas without the
  expenditure of large sums  of  money  to  obtain  cost  data  on  system
  railroad  property  located  outside  the  state; that railroad ceilings
  established on the basis of the ratio   of the  operating  revenues  and
  expenses  of  a  railroad  system  will accomplish the same policy; and,
  therefore, that various provisions of the railroad partial tax exemption
  law applicable to interstate railroads  must  be  changed  in  order  to
  extend the partial exemption to the new rail systems.

Definitions.   When used in this title, unless otherwise
  expressly stated:
    1.  "Assessing unit" means a city, town or village.
    2.   "Railroad company" means a corporation  ,  joint  stock  company,
  association,   partnership,  individual  or  other  person  operating  a
  railroad system both within and without the  State  of  New  York  as  a
  common  carrier by rail, including but not limited to a street, surface,
  underground or elevated railroad and any corporation created under or in
  compliance with the rail  passenger  service  act  of  nineteen  hundred
  seventy  or  the  regional  rail  reorganization act of nineteen hundred
  seventy-three as those  acts  were  amended  to  April  first,  nineteen
  hundred  seventy-six,  whether  as  owner,  lessee,  mortgagee, trustee,
  receiver or assignee of railroad real property.
    3.  "Railroad real property" means the  land,  real  estate  and  real
  property (as defined in subdivision twelve of section one hundred two of
  this  chapter)  of  a  railroad  company, which is used by such railroad
  company for  transportation  purposes  and  which  is  subject  to  real
  property  taxation  except  as  provided in this title, and includes (a)
  such property  leased to such railroad company, (b) such  property  used
  for  transportation  purposes  by such railroad company under a trackage
  right or other operating agreement, title to which is in  other  than  a
  railroad  company  as  defined  in  subdivision  two of this section and
  subdivision two of section four hundred eighty-nine-b of  this  chapter,
  (c)  such  property  used or occupied by such railroad company, title to
  which is in the state or in any municipal corporation thereof under  any
  of the grade crossing elimination acts, and (d) the tangible property of
  such  railroad  company  situated  in,  upon, under or above any street,
  highway, public place or public waters; but does not include  the  value
  of any franchise, right or permission to construct, maintain or operate,
  in, under, above, on or through, streets, highways or public places.
    4.    "Subsidized  railroad  real  property"   means any railroad real
  property for which a rail service continuation subsidy is  paid  by  the
  United States or the state of New York.
    5.    "Tax"  or  "taxation"  means  an ad valorem charge or special ad
  valorem levy imposed upon real property by or on  behalf  of  a  county,
  city, town, village, school district or special district.

Assessment of real property of railroads. 1. The assessor in
  each  city,  town  and  village  and  in  each  county  having  a county
  department of assessment shall annually  assess  all  real  property  of
  railroad  companies  situated  in such city, town, village or county, as
  the case may be, including all railroad real property of  such  railroad
  companies  as  defined  in  subdivision  three  of  section four hundred
  eighty-nine-bb of this chapter. Where a village has enacted a local  law
  as provided in subdivision three of section fourteen hundred two of this
  chapter,  the  town  or county assessor shall apportion that part of the
  railroad property assessment applicable to the village for  purposes  of
  the  copy  of  the  part  of the town or county assessment roll used for
  village tax purposes.
    2. Railroad real property  shall  be  separately  assessed  from  real
  property of railroad companies not used for transportation purposes, and
  subsidized  railroad real property shall be separately assessed from all
  other railroad real property. The commissioner  and  railroad  companies
  upon request shall furnish the assessor information and data relating to
  the  classification  of the real property of railroads as transportation
  and non-transportation property and to the identification of  subsidized
  railroad real property. Action by assessors under this subdivision shall
  not  in any way affect the classification of property or the segregation
  of assessments in accordance with section four hundred eighty-nine-mm of
  this chapter in connection with the application of railroad ceilings.
    3. Railroad real property shall be assessed according to its value and
  ownership as of the dates specified by subdivision four of section  four
  hundred  eighty-nine-ee of this title for the computation of the ceiling
  of such property.
Assessment of real property of railroads. 1. The assessor in
  each  city,  town  and  village  and  in  each  county  having  a county
  department of assessment shall annually  assess  all  real  property  of
  railroad  companies  situated  in such city, town, village or county, as
  the case may be, including all railroad real property of  such  railroad
  companies  as  defined  in  subdivision  three  of  section four hundred
  eighty-nine-bb of this chapter. Where a village has enacted a local  law
  as provided in subdivision three of section fourteen hundred two of this
  chapter,  the  town  or county assessor shall apportion that part of the
  railroad property assessment applicable to the village for  purposes  of
  the  copy  of  the  part  of the town or county assessment roll used for
  village tax purposes.
    2. Railroad real property  shall  be  separately  assessed  from  real
  property of railroad companies not used for transportation purposes, and
  subsidized  railroad real property shall be separately assessed from all
  other railroad real property. The commissioner  and  railroad  companies
  upon request shall furnish the assessor information and data relating to
  the  classification  of the real property of railroads as transportation
  and non-transportation property and to the identification of  subsidized
  railroad real property. Action by assessors under this subdivision shall
  not  in any way affect the classification of property or the segregation
  of assessments in accordance with section four hundred eighty-nine-mm of
  this chapter in connection with the application of railroad ceilings.
    3. Railroad real property shall be assessed according to its value and
  ownership as of the dates specified by subdivision four of section  four
  hundred  eighty-nine-ee of this title for the computation of the ceiling
  of such property.
Exemption  of  railroad  real  property  from taxation. 1.
  Subsidized railroad real property shall be  exempt  from  taxation.  The
  exemption  shall  be  granted each year only upon (a) application by the
  owner of said property on a form prescribed by the commissioner and  (b)
  submission of such proof as may be required by the commissioner that the
  property is subsidized railroad real property. The application and proof
  shall be filed with the appropriate assessing authority on or before the
  appropriate  taxable  status  date,  with  copies thereof simultaneously
  filed with the commissioner and the department of transportation.
    2. Bridges, viaducts and other similar structures  constructed  on  or
  after  January  first,  nineteen hundred fifty-nine as the result of the
  creation, pursuant to article twelve-B of the  highway  law,  of  a  new
  highway,  street,  or roadway carrying railroad facilities over such new
  highway, street, or roadway shall be exempt from taxation. No assessment
  of any bridges, viaducts, and other  similar  structures  lengthened  or
  reconstructed  on or after January first, nineteen hundred fifty-nine as
  the result of the widening, relocation, or reconstruction of an existing
  highway, street, or roadway, pursuant to article twelve-B of the highway
  law, shall be increased by reason of such reconstruction or  relocation,
  notwithstanding  the provisions of any general, special, or local law to
  the contrary; provided, however, that the  assessment  on  the  original
  portion  of  such  bridges, viaducts and other similar structures may be
  varied in accordance with the changes made generally in  assessments  on
  other  local real property. Whenever any new construction of property is
  exempt pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision and the provisions
  of subdivision six or seven of this section, such property shall receive
  the exemption provided by subdivision six or seven of this section.
    3. Railroad real property shall be exempt from taxation to the  extent
  of  any  increase  in  value  thereof  by reason of any of the following
  additions,  betterments,  improvements,  or  reconstructions   made   or
  installed  thereon after the last preceding taxable status date prior to
  April twenty-first, nineteen hundred fifty-nine: (a) the installation of
  automatic grade crossing protective devices, such as flashing lights  or
  automatic  gates  and their attendant facilities; (b) the reconstruction
  or the replacement  of  signals,  railroad  bridges,  stations,  freight
  houses,  classification  yards, repair shops, or any other facility used
  for transportation purposes; provided that the property as reconstructed
  or replaced is the same general type of facility and is located  in  the
  same city or town as the property reconstructed or replaced; and (c) the
  construction   or   reconstruction   pursuant   to  the  grade  crossing
  elimination acts, the railroad law, or the  highway  law  of  any  grade
  separation  structure,  such  as  bridges,  viaducts, tunnels, retaining
  walls, and embankments constructed for the  purpose  of  eliminating  or
  avoiding   highway-railroad  crossings  at  grade.    Whenever  any  new
  construction is exempt pursuant to the provisions  of  this  subdivision
  and  the  provisions  of  subdivision six or seven of this section, such
  property shall receive the exemption  provided  by  subdivision  six  or
  seven of this section.
    4.  Except  as  provided in subdivision five of this section, railroad
  real property other than subsidized  railroad  real  property  shall  be
  exempt  from  taxation to the extent that the assessed valuation thereof
  exceeds the railroad ceiling determined in accordance with the  earnings
  ratio as hereinafter prescribed.
    5. Railroad real property other than subsidized railroad real property
  of a railroad company shall not be exempt from taxation under this title
  on  an  assessment  roll of any assessing unit if the company failed for
  any reason to pay within thirty days of the date when due the tax levied
  upon the taxable portion of the assessment of any railroad real property

  of the company set forth on the immediately preceding assessment roll of
  any assessing unit provided, however, that this  subdivision  shall  not
  apply  if  the  payment  or  enforcement of such taxes was restrained or
  prohibited by an order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction under
  the bankruptcy act of the United States.
    6.  Whenever  a railroad company makes any improvements, enhancements,
  or upgrades to any existing railroad real property in order  to  improve
  freight  service  or  to  provide improved or new passenger service, the
  cost of such project shall not be included in  the  calculation  of  any
  subsequent  railroad ceilings for a period of ten years from the date of
  completion of that project; provided that such  project's  improvements,
  enhancements,  or  upgrades  were  made  pursuant  to  a capital project
  proposal  approved  by   the   commissioner   of   the   department   of
  transportation as provided in section four hundred eighty-nine-v of this
  article.   The   department  of  transportation  shall  certify  to  the
  commissioner  the  location  and  cost   of   any   such   improvements,
  enhancements,  or  upgrades  in  a manner that provides the commissioner
  with sufficient time to carry out its responsibilities pursuant to  this
  chapter.
    7.  The  cost  of bridges, viaducts, other structures, or improvements
  and new rail lines, including  any  new  rail  lines  built  to  replace
  existing  rail  lines,  shall  not be included in the calculation of any
  subsequent railroad ceilings for a period of ten years from the date  of
  completion of such project; provided that such construction was pursuant
  to  a  capital  project  proposal  approved  by  the commissioner of the
  department  of  transportation  as  provided  in  section  four  hundred
  eighty-nine-v  of  this  article. The department of transportation shall
  certify  to  the  commissioner  the  location  and  cost  of  any   such
  construction  in a manner that provides the commissioner with sufficient
  time to carry out its responsibilities pursuant to this chapter.
Railroad ceiling. A railroad ceiling for the railroad real
  property other than subsidized railroad real property of  each  railroad
  company situated in each assessing unit shall be established annually by
  the commissioner as follows:
    1.  Determine  (a)  the  average  railway  revenues  and  expenses  in
  accordance with the provisions of section four hundred eighty-nine-ff of
  this chapter, (b) a ratio in accordance with the provisions  of  section
  four  hundred eighty-nine-gg of this chapter, (c) the economic factor in
  accordance with the provisions of section four hundred eighty-nine-hh of
  this chapter, and (d) the local reproduction cost in accordance with the
  provisions of section four hundred eighty-nine-ii of this chapter;
    2. Multiply the local reproduction cost by the economic factor; and
    3. Multiply the result of such calculation by the  state  equalization
  rate  determined  or  established  in  accordance with the provisions of
  section four hundred eighty-nine-jj of this chapter. The result shall be
  the railroad ceiling.
    4. Determinations made pursuant to this section shall  be  based  upon
  the  value  of  the railroad real property as of the rate valuation date
  and ownership of such railroad real property as of the thirty-first  day
  of  December of the year preceding the year in which the assessment roll
  to which such ceiling assessment will apply is filed in  the  office  of
  the  city or town clerk, except that those determinations shall be based
  upon ownership as of the thirty-first day of December of the second year
  preceding the  date  required  by  law  for  the  filing  of  the  final
  assessment  roll  for  purposes  of city assessment rolls required to be
  filed between January first and June first inclusive and for all village
  assessment rolls. As used in this subdivision, the term "rate  valuation
  date" means the date as of which the full value of taxable real property
  on   an   assessment  roll  is  estimated  for  purposes  of  the  state
  equalization rate to be applied in the  establishment  of  the  railroad
  ceiling.
Average  railway  revenues  and  expenses.  1. The average
  railway revenues shall  be  determined  for  each  railroad  company  as
  follows:
    (a)  Ascertain  so  far  as may be practicable the revenues which such
  railroad company is entitled to receive from transportation service  and
  from  operations  incident thereto and from rents derived from property,
  other than transportation equipment, used for  transportation  purposes,
  and either increase that amount by the net rental receivable or decrease
  it by the net rental payable for the possession or use of transportation
  equipment;
    (b)  Average the revenue ascertained pursuant to paragraph (a) of this
  subdivision for the most recent five fiscal years ending  on  or  before
  the   last   day   of   December  immediately  preceding  the  tentative
  determination of the railroad ceiling. If a railroad company shall  have
  operated for less than such five years, then average the revenue for the
  number  of  years  of  operation  immediately  preceding  the  tentative
  determination of the railroad ceiling. The result shall be  the  average
  railway revenues.
    2.  The average railway expenses shall be determined for each railroad
  company as follows:
    (a) Ascertain so far as may be practicable the  expenses  incurred  in
  furnishing  transportation  service  and in operations incident thereto,
  including the expense of rents on and maintenance  and  depreciation  of
  the  property  used  in the service and taxes for old-age retirement and
  unemployment insurance but excluding all other taxes;
    (b) Average the expenses ascertained pursuant to paragraph (a) of this
  subdivision for the most recent five fiscal years ending  on  or  before
  the   last   day   of   December  immediately  preceding  the  tentative
  determination of the railroad ceiling. If a railroad company shall  have
  operated  for  less  than such five years, then average the expenses for
  the number of years of operation  immediately  preceding  the  tentative
  determination  of  the railroad ceiling. The result shall be the average
  railway expenses.
    3. If on the effective date of this title, the major  portion  of  the
  property  of  a  railroad company and the management and control of such
  company are located outside of the  territorial  limits  of  the  United
  States,  the  average  railway  revenues  and  expenses of such railroad
  company shall consist of the revenues  and  expenses  as  defined  above
  attributable to transportation operations in the United States.
    4. In making determinations under this section, the commissioner shall
  consider  the  information  contained  in  the  income,  profit and loss
  statements and other financial statements of each railroad company filed
  with the interstate commerce  commission,  and  the  accounting  records
  maintained  by  such  railroad  company  in  accordance with the uniform
  system of accounts for railroad companies prescribed by  the  interstate
  commerce commission. The commissioner may consider information available
  from  the  commissioner  of  transportation  or  other regulatory agency
  having jurisdiction over the accounts of such railroad company, as  well
  as  information available from other sources, including reports required
  pursuant to section four hundred eighty-nine-nn  of  this  chapter,  and
  such other information as may be available to it.
Average  railway  revenues  and  expenses.  1. The average
  railway revenues shall  be  determined  for  each  railroad  company  as
  follows:
    (a)  Ascertain  so  far  as may be practicable the revenues which such
  railroad company is entitled to receive from transportation service  and
  from  operations  incident thereto and from rents derived from property,
  other than transportation equipment, used for  transportation  purposes,
  and either increase that amount by the net rental receivable or decrease
  it by the net rental payable for the possession or use of transportation
  equipment;
    (b)  Average the revenue ascertained pursuant to paragraph (a) of this
  subdivision for the most recent five fiscal years ending  on  or  before
  the   last   day   of   December  immediately  preceding  the  tentative
  determination of the railroad ceiling. If a railroad company shall  have
  operated for less than such five years, then average the revenue for the
  number  of  years  of  operation  immediately  preceding  the  tentative
  determination of the railroad ceiling. The result shall be  the  average
  railway revenues.
    2.  The average railway expenses shall be determined for each railroad
  company as follows:
    (a) Ascertain so far as may be practicable the  expenses  incurred  in
  furnishing  transportation  service  and in operations incident thereto,
  including the expense of rents on and maintenance  and  depreciation  of
  the  property  used  in the service and taxes for old-age retirement and
  unemployment insurance but excluding all other taxes;
    (b) Average the expenses ascertained pursuant to paragraph (a) of this
  subdivision for the most recent five fiscal years ending  on  or  before
  the   last   day   of   December  immediately  preceding  the  tentative
  determination of the railroad ceiling. If a railroad company shall  have
  operated  for  less  than such five years, then average the expenses for
  the number of years of operation  immediately  preceding  the  tentative
  determination  of  the railroad ceiling. The result shall be the average
  railway expenses.
    3. If on the effective date of this title, the major  portion  of  the
  property  of  a  railroad company and the management and control of such
  company are located outside of the  territorial  limits  of  the  United
  States,  the  average  railway  revenues  and  expenses of such railroad
  company shall consist of the revenues  and  expenses  as  defined  above
  attributable to transportation operations in the United States.
    4. In making determinations under this section, the commissioner shall
  consider  the  information  contained  in  the  income,  profit and loss
  statements and other financial statements of each railroad company filed
  with the interstate commerce  commission,  and  the  accounting  records
  maintained  by  such  railroad  company  in  accordance with the uniform
  system of accounts for railroad companies prescribed by  the  interstate
  commerce commission. The commissioner may consider information available
  from  the  commissioner  of  transportation  or  other regulatory agency
  having jurisdiction over the accounts of such railroad company, as  well
  as  information available from other sources, including reports required
  pursuant to section four hundred eighty-nine-nn  of  this  chapter,  and
  such other information as may be available to it.
Ratio.  The  commissioner  shall  compute  to  the nearest
  thousandth of one percent a ratio for each railroad company by  dividing
  its  average railway expenses by its average railway revenues; provided,
  however, that if a railroad company shall have operated  for  less  than
  one  full  year  prior to the first day of the year in which a tentative
  determination of a railroad ceiling for that railroad company  is  made,
  then the ratio for that ceiling of that railroad company shall be one.
Economic  factor.  (a)  In  accordance  with the policy of
  reflecting the effect of the rate of earnings of a railroad company upon
  the taxable value of its railroad property, an economic factor for  each
  railroad  company  shall be determined in relation to its ratio computed
  pursuant to section four hundred eighty-nine-gg of this title. The  said
  economic  factor  shall  be  twenty percent if the ratio is one or more,
  forty percent if the ratio is nine-tenths and one hundred percent if the
  ratio is three-fourths or  less.  The  said  economic  factor  shall  be
  determined  by  interpolation to the nearest tenth of one percent if the
  ratio  is  between  one  and  nine-tenths  or  between  nine-tenths  and
  three-fourths.
    (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision (a) of this section,
  for  purposes  of determining railroad ceilings for interstate railroads
  for assessment rolls completed in two thousand three and thereafter, the
  percentage indicated opposite the ratio in the table in this subdivision
  shall be the economic factor. If the ratio  does  not  coincide  with  a
  specific  rate  indicated in the table in this subdivision, the economic
  factor for such company shall be  determined  by  interpolation  to  the
  nearest tenth of one percent.
 
                 Ratio                    Economic Factor
                                          (Percent)
                  .60                     100
                  .65                     85
                  .70                     70
                  .75                     60
                  .80                     50
                  .85                     40
                  .90                     30
                  .95                     20
                 1.00                     15
    (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision (b) of this section,
  whenever it shall appear that an economic factor is increasing more than
  one-tenth  from  the economic factor established in the prior year, such
  increase may not exceed one-tenth.
Local reproduction cost. 1. The commissioner shall determine
  the  local reproduction cost for each railroad company in each assessing
  unit as follows:
    (a) Ascertain in each assessing unit the cost of reproduction new less
  depreciation of the railroad real property other than land;
    (b) Ascertain in each assessing unit the value of the land portion  of
  railroad  real  property  and  the value of rights in land in, above and
  under any public street,  highway  or  parkway  used  by  such  railroad
  company;
    (c) Add the amounts ascertained under paragraphs (a) and (b) above for
  each assessing unit. The result shall be the local reproduction cost.
    2.  Local  reproduction  cost and the state equalization rates used in
  establishing railroad ceilings shall be based so far as practicable upon
  the same period price levels.
    3. In making determinations under this section, the commissioner shall
  classify  the  real  property  of  each  railroad  company   as   either
  transportation  or  non-transportation  so far as may be practicable and
  shall consider the manner  in  which  such  property  is  classified  as
  property   used  for  transportation  purposes  in  accounts  maintained
  pursuant to the uniform system of accounts  for  railroad  companies  as
  prescribed by the interstate commerce commission and the commissioner of
  transportation  and  in  the  publication  of  the  interstate  commerce
  commission entitled "Elements  of  Value  of  Property  Used  in  Common
  Carrier  Service"  as  well as information available from other sources,
  including  reports   required   pursuant   to   section   four   hundred
  eighty-nine-nn of this chapter.
    4.  In  ascertaining  depreciation  of  property  under  this section,
  consideration may be given to physical condition, average service  lives
  of  groups  of  property  and  other  factors,  which however, shall not
  include earnings.
    5. As used in this section, the term "value of land" means  the  value
  of  similar  land in the immediate vicinity used for other than railroad
  transportation purposes and the term "value of rights in land in,  above
  and  under  any public street, highway or parkway" means ten per cent of
  the value of land in the immediate vicinity used for other than railroad
  transportation purposes.
    6. The determinations made under this section shall reflect so far  as
  may   be   practicable  the  status  of  the  property  as  of  December
  thirty-first of the preceding year.
    7. In determining local reproduction cost  for  purposes  of  railroad
  ceilings  determined  for  assessment  rolls  filed  on or after January
  first, two thousand three, grading shall be deemed a depreciable  asset.
  The  allowance for depreciation of grading shall be eighteen percent for
  each year in service up to a total of ninety percent.
    8. In determining local reproduction cost  for  purposes  of  railroad
  ceilings  determined  for  assessment  rolls  filed  on or after January
  first, two thousand three, the commissioner shall not include  a  factor
  for  any  construction  overhead  in  its  calculation,  nor  shall such
  overhead costs be included for any new construction begun  on  or  after
  the effective date of this subdivision.
    9.  In  determining a local reproduction cost for purposes of railroad
  ceilings established for assessment rolls filed in two  thousand  three,
  the  commissioner  shall  allow  for  increased depreciation of railroad
  track. For high speed/high tonnage track and medium  speed/high  tonnage
  track, whether main track or side track, depreciation shall be increased
  to  seventy-five  percent.  For  low speed/medium tonnage track, whether
  main track or side track, depreciation shall be increased to eighty-five
  percent. For low speed/low tonnage track, whether  main  track  or  side

  track, depreciation shall be increased to ninety percent. Such increased
  depreciation shall only be granted for railroad ceilings established for
  assessment  rolls  filed  in  two  thousand  four  upon application of a
  railroad company. Any increased depreciation shall be granted to all the
  tracks  owned  by  the  railroad in this state not otherwise exempt from
  inclusion in the calculation  of  railroad  ceilings.  The  commissioner
  shall,  in  consultation  with  the department of transportation and the
  division of the budget, establish by rule and regulation  the  schedules
  for increased depreciation and standards for improved service that shall
  be  met  in  order  for  a  railroad  company  to receive such increased
  depreciation for railroad  ceilings  established  for  assessment  rolls
  filed  in  two thousand four and thereafter. A railroad company that has
  failed to file an application  or  failed  to  meet  the  standards  for
  improved  services  contained  in  the  rules  and  regulations  of  the
  commissioner  prior  to  the  establishment  of  railroad  ceilings  for
  assessment  rolls  filed  in two thousand four shall receive one-half of
  the benefit for increased depreciation that it would have  received  had
  such  application  been  made  or  such  standards  been met in a timely
  fashion. The standards for increased depreciation shall  be  based  upon
  increased  tonnage,  increased  level  of  passenger  service, increased
  number  of  passenger  trains  and/or  improved   on-time   performance,
  increased  average speed, and any other factors indicating improved rail
  service as the commissioner and the department of  transportation  shall
  specify.
State  equalization  rate.  1.  In  determining  railroad
  ceilings, the commissioner shall apply  the  latest  state  equalization
  rate  for  the  appropriate  assessing  unit,  except that, if a special
  equalization rate has been established as provided in subdivision two of
  this section, such rate shall be  applied.  For  the  purposes  of  this
  title,  the  equalization  rate  to  be  applied  in  computing railroad
  ceilings in the city of New York shall be computed by  the  commissioner
  on  a  city-wide  basis,  giving  appropriate weight to the latest state
  equalization rates or special equalization rates of  the  five  counties
  within such city.
    2.  The  commissioner  shall establish a special equalization rate for
  the purposes of this section where there has been a change in  level  of
  assessment  on the assessment roll for which a railroad ceiling is to be
  determined, subject to the provisions of title two of article twelve  of
  this  chapter,  or  the  state equalization rate that would otherwise be
  applied reflects the level of assessment on the property subject to  the
  railroad  ceiling  or where a final state equalization rate has not been
  established for the assessment roll of the preceding year.
Tentative  determination  of  railroad  ceiling;  notice,
  complaints and hearing. 1. Each  year  the  commissioner  shall  make  a
  tentative  determination  of  each  railroad  ceiling.  Thereafter,  the
  commissioner shall give notice in writing to  each  assessing  unit  and
  each  railroad  company  for  which  such  tentative  determination of a
  railroad ceiling shall have been made  specifying  the  amount  of  such
  ceiling  and the time and place where the commissioner will meet to hear
  any complaint concerning such tentative determination. Such notice  must
  be  served  at  least  twenty  days  prior to the date specified for the
  hearing.
    2. A railroad company or  assessing  unit  objecting  to  a  tentative
  determination  of the railroad ceiling must serve its complaint upon the
  commissioner in writing and a copy thereof upon the  assessing  unit  or
  railroad  company, as the case may be, at least five days before the day
  specified for the hearing, specifying its objections to  such  tentative
  determination.  Service  may  be made either in person or by mail. On or
  before the date specified for the hearing an affidavit of service  shall
  be  filed  with  the  commissioner stating in substance that service has
  been made in accordance with the provisions of this section.
    3. The commissioner shall meet at the time and place specified in such
  notice to hear complaints in relation to the tentative determination  of
  the  railroad  ceiling. The provisions of section five hundred twelve of
  this chapter shall apply so far as may be practicable to a hearing under
  this section. Nothing contained in this subdivision shall  be  construed
  to require a hearing to be conducted when no complaints have been filed.
Final  determination  of railroad ceiling; certificate. 1.
  After the hearing provided for in section four hundred eighty-nine-kk of
  this title, the state board of real property tax services shall  finally
  determine  the  railroad  ceiling for the railroad real property of each
  railroad  company  situated  in  each  assessing  unit.  Whenever   upon
  complaint  the state board shall revise the local reproduction cost of a
  railroad company in an assessing unit, it shall revise  the  appropriate
  railroad  ceiling to reflect such revision, but it shall not, on account
  of such revision, modify any other determination  with  respect  to  the
  railroad   ceilings   for   such   railroad   company   for  such  year.
  Notwithstanding the fact that no complaint shall have  been  filed  with
  respect  to  a  tentative determination of a railroad ceiling, the state
  board shall give effect to any  special  equalization  rate  established
  pursuant  to  subdivision  two of section four hundred eighty-nine-jj of
  this title prior to the final determination of the railroad ceiling.
    2. Not later than ten days before the last date prescribed by law  for
  the  levy  of  taxes,  the  state board shall file a certificate setting
  forth each railroad ceiling as finally determined with the  assessor  of
  the  appropriate  assessing  unit  or  the  town  or county assessor who
  prepares a copy of the applicable part of the town or county  assessment
  roll  for  village  tax  purposes  as  provided  in subdivision three of
  section fourteen hundred two of this chapter, and at the same time shall
  transmit to each railroad  company  for  which  such  ceiling  has  been
  determined a duplicate copy of such certificate.
    3.  Any  final  determination of a railroad ceiling by the state board
  pursuant to subdivision one of this section shall be subject to judicial
  review in a proceeding under article seventy-eight of the civil practice
  law and rules.
Reports  to  commissioner.  1. Each railroad company shall
  furnish the commissioner the following:
    (a) A copy  of  all  income,  profit  and  loss  and  other  financial
  statements  filed  with  the interstate commerce commission or any other
  federal agency or officer and the commissioner of transportation; and
    (b) Such other reports as the  commissioner  may  from  time  to  time
  require  containing  such  information  and  data  as  it  may  specify,
  including cost and valuation data relating to or  an  inventory  of  the
  railroad  real property of such company situated in each assessing unit,
  in order to carry out the provisions of this title.
    2. Each railroad company shall pay  an  annual  charge  to  the  state
  office.    All  costs  and  expenses  of  the  state  office, direct and
  indirect, incurred in the establishment of railroad ceilings pursuant to
  this title shall be paid from the collection of an  annual  charge  upon
  railroad   companies.   The  commissioner  shall  provide  by  rule  for
  computation of this charge through the apportionment of these costs  and
  expenses  to  railroad companies in direct relation to the value of such
  real property subject to the ceiling. Charges shall be  subject  to  the
  annual  approval  of the director of the budget. Any unpaid charge shall
  be a lien upon the  assets  of  the  company  and  may  be  enforced  by
  appropriate administrative and judicial proceedings commenced by counsel
  to the state office.
    3.  Any  railroad  company  failing  to make any report required by or
  pursuant to this section within  a  reasonable  time  specified  by  the
  commissioner  shall  forfeit  to  the people of the state the sum of one
  hundred dollars for each failure and the additional sum of fifty dollars
  for each day that such failure continues. Acknowledgement of receipt  of
  blank reports which contain the penalty provisions of this section shall
  be deemed sufficient notice of such penalties.
Inspection of accounts and property of railroad companies.
  1.  The commissioner or its authorized representative shall have  access
  at  reasonable  times  to  all  accounts  and  records  established  and
  maintained by a railroad company  relating  to  its  property  used  for
  transportation purposes and the earnings derived therefrom.
    2.  The  commissioner  or its authorized representative shall have the
  power at reasonable times to enter in or upon and to inspect  the  road,
  equipment, structures and other property of any railroad company.
Determination of railroad ceilings for certain railroads in
  transition.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, railroad
  ceilings  established during the first five years in which such ceilings
  are made pursuant to this title for railroad real property acquired  (a)
  from  a  railroad  in  reorganization  as  defined  in the regional rail
  reorganization act of nineteen hundred  seventy-three  by  a  profitable
  railroad  as  defined in that act or by a subsidiary thereof or (b) from
  any source or in any manner by  any  corporation  created  under  or  in
  compliance  with  that act or the rail passenger service act of nineteen
  hundred seventy shall be established by  using  an  economic  factor  of
  twenty  percent  and  by  using,  except  for  property  for which local
  reproduction cost was not determined prior to the effective date of this
  act, the same local  reproduction  cost  as  would  have  been  used  if
  acquisition of the property by the said corporations had not occurred.
Inapplicability of title. The provisions of this title shall
  not  apply  to  railroad  real  property  which is owned by or under the
  jurisdiction, supervision or control of either an industrial development
  agency or a municipal corporation.
Definitions. When used in this title:
    1.  "Applicant"  means any person or corporation obligated to pay real
  property taxes on the property for which an exemption is sought,  or  in
  the  case  of  exempt  property,  the  record  owner  thereof, provided,
  however, that such property is not commercial  property  located  in  an
  area   designated   as   excluded   pursuant  to  section  four  hundred
  eighty-nine-ccc of this title;
    2. "Board" means the industrial and commercial incentive board;
    3. "Commercial" means any non-residential property used primarily  for
  the  buying,  selling  or  otherwise  providing  of  goods  or services,
  provided that the use of such property has  not  been  designated  as  a
  restricted   commercial   use   pursuant   to   section   four   hundred
  eighty-nine-ccc of this title;
    4. "Construction" means the building of new industrial  or  commercial
  structures on vacant or predominantly vacant land, or the modernization,
  rehabilitation   or  expansion  or  other  improvement  of  an  existing
  commercial structure where such modernization, rehabilitation, expansion
  or other improvement is not physically or functionally  integrated  with
  the  existing  structure  or results in additional usable square footage
  fifty per centum  greater  than  the  square  footage  of  the  existing
  structure;
    5. "Industrial" means property used primarily for the manufacturing or
  assembling of goods or the processing of raw materials;
    6. "Predominantly vacant land" means land, including land under water,
  on  which  not  more  than  fifteen  percent  of  the  lot area contains
  enclosed, permanent improvements; in addition,  such  land  may  include
  existing foundations.  A fence, shed, garage, attendant's booth, paving,
  pier, bulkhead, lighting fixtures, and similar items, or any improvement
  having  an  assessed  value  of less than two thousand dollars shall not
  constitute an enclosed, permanent improvement;
    7. "Reconstruction" means the modernization, rehabilitation, expansion
  or other improvement of an existing commercial or  industrial  structure
  where  the total proposed project cost is in an amount equal to at least
  twenty percentum of the assessed value of the property at  the  time  an
  application  for  a certificate of eligibility pursuant to this title is
  made, and where such modernization, rehabilitation, expansion  or  other
  improvement  is physically and functionally integrated with the existing
  structure and does not create additional usable square  footage  greater
  than  fifty  per  centum  of  the  usable square footage of the existing
  structure except in  a  case  where  the  existing  structure  has  been
  substantially destroyed by fire or other casualty;
    8.  "Residential  property"  shall  mean property, other than property
  used for  hotel  purposes,  on  which  will  exist  upon  completion  of
  construction   a   building   or  structure  containing  more  than  one
  independent dwelling unit or where more  than  one-third  of  the  total
  square footage of said structure is to be used for residential purposes;
  it  shall  also  mean,  in the case of reconstruction, property on which
  exists or will exist upon completion of the reconstruction a building or
  structure where more than one-third of the total square footage is  used
  or is to be used for dwelling purposes;
    9.  "Vacant  land"  means  land,  including  land  under  water, which
  contains no enclosed, permanent  improvement.  A  fence,  shed,  garage,
  attendant's  booth,  paving,  pier,  bulkhead,  lighting  fixtures,  and
  similar items, or any improvement having an assessed value of less  than
  two  thousand  dollars  shall  not  constitute  an  enclosed,  permanent
  improvement;
Industrial and commercial incentive board.  Any city of one
  million  or  more persons may, by local law, establish an industrial and
  commercial incentive board to consist of the deputy mayor for,  economic
  policy  and  development,  who  shall  be  chairman  of  the  board, the
  commissioner of finance, the chairman of the  city  planning  commission
  and  the  director of management and budget, each of whom shall have the
  power to designate an alternate to represent him at board meetings  with
  all  the rights and powers, including the right to vote, reserved to all
  board members, provided that such  designation  be  in  writing  to  the
  chairman  of  the  board, and three other members to be appointed by the
  mayor.   In addition, the borough  president  of  each  borough  or  his
  designated  representative,  shall  be  a  member  of such board for the
  purpose of taking  action  with  respect  to  property  located  in  his
  borough.  The  members of any board established pursuant to this section
  who shall be agents, officers, or employees of  said  city  shall  serve
  without  compensation  but  shall be reimbursed for expenses necessarily
  incurred in the performance of their duties. The members  of  any  board
  established  pursuant  to  this section who are not agents, officers, or
  employees of said city shall receive as compensation for their  services
  one  hundred  dollars  per  diem,  provided,  however,  that  the  total
  compensation paid to any such member shall  not  exceed  twelve  hundred
  dollars  for  any  calendar  year.  Four members of any such board shall
  constitute a quorum.
Functions,  powers  and  duties  of  the  board;  annual
  designation of exemption areas and restricted commercial  uses.  1.  The
  members  of  the  board  shall  have the following functions, powers and
  duties:
    (a) to receive and review applications for certificates of eligibility
  pursuant to this title and pursuant  to  any  local  law  authorized  by
  chapter  seven  hundred  seventy-two  of  the  laws  of nineteen hundred
  sixty-six, containing provisions analogous to subsection four-d thereof;
    (b) to make  findings  and  determinations  on  the  qualification  of
  applicant  for  certificates  of  eligibility pursuant to this title and
  pursuant  to  any  local  law  authorized  by  chapter   seven   hundred
  seventy-two  of  the  laws  of  nineteen  hundred  sixty-six, containing
  provisions analogous to subdivision (f) of subsection  one  hundred  one
  thereof;
    (c) to issue certificates of eligibility and amendments thereto;
    (d)  to  make recommendations to the tax commission on the termination
  of a tax exemption pursuant to section four hundred  eighty-nine-ggg  of
  this title;
    (e)  to  designate  annually,  pursuant  to  subdivision  two  of this
  section, areas  in  which  exemptions  for  commercial  construction  or
  reconstruction  shall  be  granted  as  of  right, areas from which such
  exemptions shall be excluded and commercial uses for which the  granting
  of exemptions shall be restricted; and
    (f)  to  make  and  promulgate  rules and regulations to carry out the
  purposes of the board.
    2. (a) Not later than October first  of  each  year  the  board  shall
  publish  a  notice at least once in the official paper or a newspaper of
  general  circulation  in  the  city  setting  forth:  (i)  the  proposed
  boundaries  of  areas in which commercial construction or reconstruction
  shall be granted exemptions as of right, proposed  boundaries  of  areas
  from  which  exemptions  for  commercial  construction or reconstruction
  shall be excluded and proposed restricted commercial uses; and (ii)  the
  date,  not  earlier  than  ten  nor later than thirty days following the
  publication of such notice, on  which  the  board  will  hold  a  public
  hearing  to  hear  all  persons  interested  in  the designation of such
  boundaries and restricted commercial uses.
    (b) Not earlier than ten nor later  than  thirty  days  following  the
  conclusion  of  the public hearing provided for in paragraph (a) of this
  subdivision, the board shall designate the boundaries of areas in  which
  exemptions  for  commercial  construction  or  reconstruction  shall  be
  granted as of right and  areas  from  which  such  exemptions  shall  be
  excluded  and  shall  also  designate  restricted  commercial uses. Such
  designations shall be made upon the following determinations:
    (i)  With  respect  to  areas  in  which  exemption   for   commercial
  construction  or  reconstruction shall be granted as of right, the board
  shall determine that market  conditions  in  each  area  are  such  that
  exemptions   are   required   to   attract  commercial  construction  or
  reconstruction to the area and  that  attracting  such  construction  or
  reconstruction,  and  the  granting  of  exemptions therefor, are in the
  public interest. In making such determination, the board  may  consider,
  among  other factors, that the area is experiencing economic distress or
  is characterized by an unusually large number of vacant,  underutilized,
  unsuitable   or   substandard   structures,  or  by  other  substandard,
  unsanitary, deteriorated or deteriorating conditions,  with  or  without
  tangible  blight,  or  that  commercial  development in the area will be
  beneficial to the city's economy.
    (ii) With respect  to  areas  from  which  exemptions  for  commercial
  construction  or  reconstruction  are  to  be  excluded, the board shall

  determine that market conditions in each area are such  that  exemptions
  are not required to attract commercial construction or reconstruction to
  the  area,  or that it is not in the public interest to grant exemptions
  for   commercial   construction   or  reconstruction  in  the  area.  No
  applications   for   exemptions   for   commercial    construction    or
  reconstruction shall be accepted from such areas.
    (iii)  With  respect  to  restricted  commercial uses, the board shall
  determine that it is not in the public interest to grant exemptions  for
  such  uses  unless  the  board  further determines that in certain areas
  designated  pursuant  to  this  subdivision,  such  uses  will  have  an
  especially  positive  impact on the area's economy. All applications for
  exemptions for restricted commercial uses shall be  determined  pursuant
  to  paragraphs  (b)  and  (c) of subdivision two of section four hundred
  eighty-nine-eee of this title.
    (c) Designations made pursuant to this subdivision shall be  effective
  on the first day of January of each year.
    3. So far as practicable and subject to the approval of the mayor, the
  services  of  all  other  city  departments  and  agencies shall be made
  available by their respective heads to the board for the carrying out of
  the functions stated in this title. The head of any department or agency
  shall furnish information in the possession of such department or agency
  when the board, after consultation with the mayor, so requests.
Real  property  tax  exemption.  1.  A  real property tax
  exemption pursuant to this title shall be granted to an  applicant  who,
  within a period of thirty-six months, or following an extension pursuant
  to section four hundred eighty-nine-hhh of this title within a period of
  forty-eight  months,  from  the  date  of  issuance  of a certificate of
  eligibility  has  completed  reconstruction  or  construction  work   in
  accordance  with  the  plans approved by the board in the certificate of
  eligibility. The amount of the tax  exemption  shall  be  determined  as
  follows:
    (a)  In  the  case  of  an  applicant  who  has  completed  industrial
  construction or reconstruction work, or commercial  reconstruction  work
  designated  as of right pursuant to section four hundred eighty-nine-ccc
  of this title or as specially needed pursuant to  section  four  hundred
  eighty-nine-eee  of  this  title,  the  tax exemption shall continue for
  nineteen tax years in an amount decreasing by five per centum each  year
  from  an  exemption  of ninety-five per centum of the exemption base, as
  defined in paragraph (d) of this subdivision.
    (b) In the case of an applicant who  has  completed  other  commercial
  reconstruction  work,  or new commercial construction work designated as
  of right pursuant to section four hundred eighty-nine-ccc of this  title
  or  as specially needed pursuant to section four hundred eighty-nine-eee
  of this title, the tax exemption shall continue for ten tax years, in an
  amount decreasing by five per centum each  year  from  an  exemption  of
  fifty per centum of the exemption base.
    (c) In the case of an applicant who has completed other new commercial
  construction work, the exemption shall continue for five tax years in an
  amount decreasing by ten per centum each year from an exemption of fifty
  per centum of the exemption base.
    (d)  The  term  "exemption base" shall mean the difference between the
  final assessed value of the property as determined  upon  completion  of
  the  construction  or  reconstruction  work  and  the  lesser of (i) the
  assessed value of  the  property  at  the  time  an  application  for  a
  certificate  of  eligibility pursuant to this title is made, or (ii) the
  assessed value as may thereafter be reduced pursuant to  application  to
  the tax commission.
    The tax exemption shall be computed according to the following tables:
 
                CONSTRUCTION OR RECONSTRUCTION OF INDUSTRIAL
               STRUCTURES OR RECONSTRUCTION OF AS OF RIGHT OR
                   SPECIALLY NEEDED COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES
         Year following                             Percentage of
         completion of work                           exemption
                 1.                                      95
                 2.                                      90
                 3.                                      85
                 4.                                      80
                 5.                                      75
                 6.                                      70
                 7.                                      65
                 8.                                      60
                 9.                                      55
                10.                                      50
                11.                                      45
                12.                                      40
                13.                                      35
                14.                                      30
                15.                                      25
                16.                                      20

                17.                                      15
                18.                                      10
                19.                                       5
                RECONSTRUCTION OF OTHER COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES
                 OR CONSTRUCTION OF AS OF RIGHT OR SPECIALLY
                        NEEDED COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES
         Year following                             Percentage of
         completion of work                           exemption
                 1.                                      50
                 2.                                      45
                 3.                                      40
                 4.                                      35
                 5.                                      30
                 6.                                      25
                 7.                                      20
                 8.                                      15
                 9.                                      10
                10.                                       5
               CONSTRUCTION OF OTHER NEW COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES
         Year following                             Percentage of
         completion of work                           exemption
                 1.                                      50
                 2.                                      40
                 3.                                      30
                 4.                                      20
                 5.                                      10
 
    2.  The  taxes  payable  during  the  period  from  the  issuance of a
  certificate of eligibility to the approval of the tax exemption pursuant
  to section four hundred eighty-nine-fff of this title shall be  paid  on
  the lesser of:
    (a)  the assessed value of the property at the time an application for
  a certificate of eligibility pursuant to this title is made, or (b)  the
  assessed  value  as may thereafter be reduced pursuant to application to
  the  tax  commission,  provided,  however,  that  if  reconstruction  or
  construction  is  not completed in accordance with the plans approved in
  the certificate of eligibility including any amendments  thereto,  taxes
  shall be due and payable retroactively as otherwise required by law.
    3.  In  all  cases  where the board shall have issued a certificate of
  eligibility prior to January first,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-two,  the
  exemption  percentage  shall  apply  to  any  subsequent increase in the
  assessed valuation of the property during the tenure of  the  exemption.
  Where  the  board  has  issued  a certificate of eligibility on or after
  January first, nineteen hundred  eighty-two,  the  exemption  percentage
  shall  apply to any subsequent increase in the assessed valuation of the
  property during the first two years after approval of the tax  exemption
  pursuant   to  section  four  hundred  eighty-nine-fff  of  this  title.
  Commencing two years after approval of the  tax  exemption  pursuant  to
  section  four  hundred  eighty-nine-fff  of  this  title,  the exemption
  percentage shall apply to any subsequent increase in assessed  valuation
  of  the property only to the extent such increase is attributable to the
  construction or reconstruction  work  approved  in  the  certificate  of
  eligibility.
    4.  The  provisions  of  this title shall not apply to any increase in
  assessed value resulting from the construction or  reconstruction  of  a
  residential  structure  on any property receiving an exemption under the
  provisions of this title. The  provisions  of  this  title  shall  apply

  exclusively to those structures and the lands underlying them which were
  identified explicitly in the certificate of eligibility.
    5.  The  provisions  of  this  title  shall  not  apply  if any new or
  rehabilitated construction displaces or replaces a building or buildings
  containing more than twenty-five occupied dwelling units in existence on
  the date an application for certificate of eligibility is submitted  for
  preliminary approval pursuant to section four hundred eighty-nine-eee of
  this  title,  which  are  administered under the local emergency housing
  rent control  act,  the  rent  stabilization  law  of  nineteen  hundred
  sixty-nine   or   the   emergency  tenant  protection  act  of  nineteen
  seventy-four, unless a certificate of eviction has been issued  for  any
  of the displaced or replaced units pursuant to the powers granted by the
  city rent and rehabilitation law.
    6.  The  provisions  of this title shall not apply to an applicant who
  has commenced construction or reconstruction work prior to the  granting
  of  a certificate of eligibility except where applicant, having filed an
  application for a certificate of eligibility receives written permission
  to commence from the board or its designated representative prior to the
  granting  of  a  certificate  of  eligibility.  Demolition  of  existing
  structures, site preparation limited to grading, filling or clearing, or
  the  curing  of  a  safety  or sanitary hazard shall not be deemed to be
  commencement of construction or reconstruction work.
    7. Any property enjoying the benefits of a tax exemption  approved  by
  the  board  shall  be  ineligible  for  any subsequent or additional tax
  exemption pursuant to the provisions of this title until the  expiration
  of  the original exemption period or earlier termination of the existing
  exemption by action of the tax commission.
Applications   for   certificates  of  eligibility.  1.
  Applications for a certificate of eligibility  pursuant  to  this  title
  shall  be  submitted for preliminary approval to the office for economic
  development commencing immediately after the effective date of  a  local
  law  enacted  pursuant to this title and continuing until the earlier of
  the thirty-first day of January, nineteen hundred eighty-six or the last
  day before the date on which applications may  be  filed  in  accordance
  with   a   local   law   enacted   pursuant   to  section  four  hundred
  eighty-nine-bbbb of this chapter, on such form  or  forms  as  shall  be
  prescribed  by  the board. In addition to any other information required
  by the board, the application shall include plans for reconstruction  or
  construction  that  have been certified by a professional engineer or an
  architect of the applicant's choice and cost estimates or bids  for  the
  proposed  reconstruction  or construction. Upon a finding by such office
  that the application satisfies the  requirements  of  reconstruction  or
  construction  as  defined  in  this  title,  the  application  shall  be
  presented to the board for evaluation and written notice  thereof  shall
  be given to the community board of the district in which the application
  site is located.
    2.   (a)   In   the   case  of  an  application  for  construction  or
  reconstruction of an industrial  structure  or  a  commercial  structure
  located  in  an  area  designated  as  of right, the board shall issue a
  certificate  of  eligibility  upon  determining  that  the   application
  satisfies  the requirements of construction or reconstruction as defined
  in this title, that the applicant has obtained plans for construction or
  reconstruction certified by a professional engineer  or  architect,  and
  that  the  applicant  has otherwise complied with the provisions of this
  title and other applicable provisions of law.
    (b) In the case of an application for construction  or  reconstruction
  of  a  commercial  structure  not  located  in  an  as of right area, or
  involving  a  restricted  commercial  use,  the  board  shall  issue   a
  certificate  of  eligibility  upon making the determination specified in
  paragraph  (a)  of  this  subdivision  and  upon  making   the   further
  determination  that the granting of a tax exemption for the construction
  or reconstruction of such a structure in the proposed location is in the
  public interest. In making such  determination,  the  board  shall  make
  findings  that  there  is  a  need  in  the  area  for  the services the
  enterprise will provide, that the enterprise  will  generate  or  retain
  employment  in the area, and that a tax incentive is required to attract
  construction or reconstruction of such  a  structure  to  the  area.  In
  addition,  the  board shall consider the economic impact such commercial
  structure will have in the area.
    (c) In the case of an application for construction  or  reconstruction
  of  a  commercial  structure  not  located  in  an  as of right area, or
  involving a restricted commercial use, the  board  may  make  a  further
  determination   that   special  circumstances  warrant  designating  the
  proposed construction or reconstruction as "specially needed". In making
  such determination, the board shall make findings  that  the  commercial
  services  to  be provided will have an especially positive impact on the
  area's or the city's economy and that  the  applicant  has  demonstrated
  that the project cannot go forward without the greater exemption granted
  by such designation.
    3.  Any meeting of the board at which an application for a certificate
  of eligibility is to be considered shall be  open  to  the  public,  and
  notice  of  such meeting shall be given at least two weeks prior thereto
  by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.
    4. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to show by clear  and
  convincing  evidence  that the requirements for granting a tax exemption

  pursuant to this title have been satisfied, and the board shall have the
  authority to require  that  statements  made  in  consideration  of  the
  application be taken under oath.
    5.  After  the  issuance of a certificate of eligibility the applicant
  shall apply to the city tax commission, during the  period  provided  by
  law  for filing applications for corrections of assessed valuations, for
  a tax exemption as provided for in section four hundred  eighty-nine-ddd
  of  this  title.  The  application shall be accompanied by a copy of the
  certificate of eligibility.
Approval  of  tax  exemption.    On  completion  of the
  reconstruction or construction work the applicant shall notify the board
  in  writing  of  said  completion.    The  board  shall  determine   the
  eligibility  of  the  applicant  for  the  tax  exemption as provided in
  subdivision one of section four hundred eighty-nine-ddd and shall notify
  the  tax  commission  of  such  determination.    If  the  applicant  is
  determined  to  be  qualified  the  commission  shall  approve  the  tax
  exemption.
 Continuation  of  tax  exemption;  termination  of  tax
  exemption. The tax exemption approved by the  board  shall  continue  in
  accordance  with this title, provided that the applicant files an annual
  certificate of continuing use stating that the  structure  and  property
  continue to be used for the industrial or commercial purposes justifying
  the  issuance  of  the  certificate of eligibility.   The certificate of
  continuing use shall be filed with the tax commission on  such  form  or
  forms  and containing such information as shall be prescribed by the tax
  commission. The tax commission shall have authority to terminate  a  tax
  exemption  on  failure  of an applicant to file an annual certificate of
  continuing use or on the recommendation of the finance commissioner who,
  in reviewing the certificate filed by an applicant, has determined  that
  the  structure  or  property has ceased to be used for the industrial or
  commercial purposes  justifying  the  issuance  of  the  certificate  of
  eligibility.
 Extension  of time for completion. Where an applicant has
  received a certificate of eligibility but has not completed or will  not
  be  able  to  complete  the  construction  or reconstruction work within
  thirty-six  months,  the  board  shall,  upon  application,  extend   to
  forty-eight  months,  from the time of issuance of such certificate, the
  time for completion of the construction or reconstruction work; provided
  the applicant has completed not less than  two-thirds  of  the  work  as
  specified  in  the certified plans previously filed with the application
  at the time of such application for extension.
Prior certificates of eligibility.  Any project for which
  a certificate of eligibility has been approved  by  the  industrial  and
  commercial  incentive board prior to the enactment of this section shall
  be eligible for a tax exemption computed according to the tax  exemption
  tables and formulae in effect on the date of such approval.
When used in this title: 1. "Applicant" means
  any  person  obligated  to  pay  real property taxes on the property for
  which an exemption from or abatement or deferral of  real  property  tax
  payments  is sought, or in the case of exempt property, the record owner
  or lessee thereof.
    2. "Approved plans" means plans  submitted  to  and  approved  by  the
  department  of  buildings  in  connection  with the applicant's building
  permit,  including  any  amendments  to  such  plans  approved  by  such
  department before final inspection of the work for which such permit was
  issued.
    3.  "Benefit  period"  means  the  period  of time when a recipient is
  eligible to receive benefits pursuant to this title,  including  in  the
  case  of  a  recipient  of  a  certificate of eligibility for commercial
  construction work in a deferral area, the period of  time  tax  payments
  are  to  be  deferred, the interim period when no tax payments are to be
  deferred and no deferred tax payments are required to be made,  and  the
  period of time when the deferred tax payments are to be made.
    4. "Commission" means the temporary commercial incentive area boundary
  commission.
    5.  "Commercial  construction  work"  means  the construction of a new
  building  or  structure,  or  portion  thereof,  or  the  modernization,
  rehabilitation,  expansion, or other improvement of an existing building
  or structure, or portion thereof, for use as commercial property.
    6. "Commercial property" means nonresidential property  (a)  on  which
  will  exist after completion of commercial construction work, a building
  or structure used for the buying,  selling  or  otherwise  providing  of
  goods  or  services  including  hotel  services,  or  for  other  lawful
  business, commercial or manufacturing activities;  and  (b)  (i)  where,
  except  as provided in subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph and paragraph
  (c) of this subdivision, not more than fifteen per centum of  the  total
  net  square  footage  of  any building or structure on such property was
  used for manufacturing activities at any one or more  times  during  the
  twenty-four  months  immediately preceding the date of application for a
  certificate of eligibility or (ii)  where  not  more  than  fifteen  per
  centum  of  the total net square footage of any building or structure on
  such property was used for manufacturing activities at any one  or  more
  times  during  the  sixty  months  immediately  preceding  the  date  of
  application for  a  certificate  of  eligibility  if  such  property  is
  located,  in  whole  or in part, in the area in the borough of Manhattan
  lying south of the center line of 96th Street; and (c) in the commercial
  revitalization  area,  and  with  respect  to  an  application   for   a
  certificate  of  eligibility filed on or after July first, two thousand,
  "commercial property" means nonresidential property on which will  exist
  after   completion  of  commercial  construction  work,  a  building  or
  structure used for the buying, selling or otherwise providing  of  goods
  or  services  including  hotel  services,  or for other lawful business,
  commercial or manufacturing activities.
    6-a. "Commercial revitalization area" means any area of a city  having
  a  population  of  one million or more, provided that in the city of New
  York a commercial revitalization area shall mean any  district  that  is
  zoned C4, C5, C6, M1, M2, or M3 in accordance with the zoning resolution
  of such city in any area of such city except the area lying south of the
  center line of 96th Street in the borough of Manhattan.
    7.  "Deferral area" means an area in which deferral of payment of real
  property taxes in accordance  with  subdivision  four  of  section  four
  hundred eighty-nine-bbbb of this title shall be available to a recipient
  who has performed commercial construction work.

    8.  "Excluded  area"  means each area specified in paragraphs (a), (b)
  and (c) of subdivision five of section four hundred eighty-nine-cccc  of
  this title.
    9.  "Exemption  base."  (a)  For  purposes  of computing the exemption
  pursuant to subdivision one, two, three or four of section four  hundred
  eighty-nine-bbbb  of  this  title,  "exemption  base"  shall  mean, with
  respect to property that is the subject of a certificate of  eligibility
  with an effective date of June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-two or
  before:  (i) for the first, second and third taxable years following the
  effective date of a certificate of eligibility, the  assessed  value  of
  improvements made since the effective date of such certificate which are
  attributable  exclusively  to commercial or industrial construction work
  described in approved plans; and (ii) for all other years, the  assessed
  value  of  such  improvements  which  have  been  made before the fourth
  taxable status date following the effective date of such certificate.
    (b) For purposes of computing the exemption  pursuant  to  subdivision
  three,  four  or  five  of section four hundred eighty-nine-bbbb of this
  title, "exemption base" shall mean, with respect to property that is the
  subject of a certificate of eligibility with an effective date  of  July
  first,  nineteen  hundred ninety-two or after: (i) for the first through
  fifth taxable years following the effective date  of  a  certificate  of
  eligibility, the assessed value of improvements made since the effective
  date   of   such  certificate  which  are  attributable  exclusively  to
  commercial or renovation construction work described in approved  plans;
  and  (ii)  for  all other years, the assessed value of such improvements
  which have been made before the sixth taxable status date following  the
  effective date of such certificate.
    (c)  For  purposes  of computing the exemption pursuant to subdivision
  one or two of section  four  hundred  eighty-nine-bbbb  of  this  title,
  "exemption  base"  shall  mean,  with  respect  to  property that is the
  subject of a certificate of eligibility with an effective date  of  July
  first,  nineteen  hundred ninety-two or after: (i) for the first through
  fifth taxable years following the effective date  of  a  certificate  of
  eligibility, the assessed value of improvements made since the effective
  date   of   such  certificate  which  are  attributable  exclusively  to
  commercial or industrial construction work described in  approved  plans
  plus  any  equalization increases or minus any equalization decreases in
  the assessed value of the property  so  improved  (excluding  the  land)
  occurring subsequent to the effective date of such certificate; and (ii)
  for all other years, the assessed value of such improvements made before
  the  sixth  taxable  status  date  following  the effective date of such
  certificate plus any equalization increases or  minus  any  equalization
  decreases  in  the assessed value of the property so improved (excluding
  the land) occurring subsequent to the effective date of such certificate
  but before the fourteenth taxable status date  following  the  effective
  date  of  such  certificate.  For purposes of the preceding sentence: no
  adjustment shall be made to  the  assessed  value  of  the  improvements
  referred  to  in  subparagraphs  (i)  and (ii) of this paragraph for any
  portion of an equalization increase or decrease which is being phased in
  pursuant to section eighteen hundred five of this chapter subsequent  to
  the effective date of the certificate of eligibility if such increase or
  decrease  occurred  prior  to  such  effective date; with respect to any
  taxable year, an adjustment for an  equalization  increase  or  decrease
  shall  reflect  only  the  portion of such increase or decrease which is
  being phased in during such taxable year or which was phased in during a
  prior taxable year; no adjustment for  an  equalization  decrease  shall
  reduce  the  exemption base to an amount less than the assessed value of
  the improvements referred to in  subparagraphs  (i)  and  (ii)  of  this

  paragraph,  and,  to  the extent that any such decrease would reduce the
  exemption base below such amount, such decrease shall reduce the taxable
  portion of the assessed value; and no adjustment shall be  made  for  an
  equalization  increase  or  decrease  if the improvements referred to in
  subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this paragraph do not result in a physical
  increase in the assessed value of the property.
    (d) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this subdivision, for purposes of
  computing the exemption pursuant to  subdivision  one  of  section  four
  hundred  eighty-nine-bbbb  of  this  title, "exemption base" shall mean,
  with respect to industrial property that is located in the area  in  the
  borough  of  Manhattan lying north of the center line of 96th Street, or
  that is located in the Bronx, Brooklyn, Queens  or  Staten  Island;  and
  that  is  the  subject of a certificate of eligibility with an effective
  date after  December  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-nine  and
  before  July  first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-two:  (i) for the first,
  second and third  taxable  years  following  the  effective  date  of  a
  certificate  of  eligibility,  the  assessed  value of improvements made
  since the effective date of  such  certificate  which  are  attributable
  exclusively to industrial construction work described in approved plans;
  and  (ii)  for  all other years, the assessed value of such improvements
  made before the fourth taxable status date following the effective  date
  of  such  certificate  plus  any  equalization  increases  or  minus any
  equalization decreases in the assessed value of the property so improved
  (excluding the land) occurring subsequent to the fourth  taxable  status
  date  following  the  effective  date of such certificate but before the
  fourteenth taxable status date following  the  effective  date  of  such
  certificate. For purposes of the preceding sentence: no adjustment shall
  be  made  to  the  assessed  value  of  the  improvements referred to in
  subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this  paragraph  for  any  portion  of  an
  equalization  increase  or decrease which is being phased in pursuant to
  section  eighteen  hundred  five  of  this  chapter  subsequent  to  the
  effective  date  of  the  certificate of eligibility if such increase or
  decrease occurred prior to such effective  date;  with  respect  to  any
  taxable  year,  an  adjustment  for an equalization increase or decrease
  shall reflect only the portion of such increase  or  decrease  which  is
  being phased in during such taxable year or which was phased in during a
  prior  taxable  year;  no  adjustment for an equalization decrease shall
  reduce the exemption base to an amount less than the assessed  value  of
  the  improvements  referred  to  in  subparagraphs  (i) and (ii) of this
  paragraph, and, to the extent that any such decrease  would  reduce  the
  exemption base below such amount, such decrease shall reduce the taxable
  portion  of  the  assessed value; and no adjustment shall be made for an
  equalization increase or decrease if the  improvements  referred  to  in
  subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this paragraph do not result in a physical
  increase in the assessed value of the property.
    (e)   For  purposes  of  computing  the  exemption:  (i)  pursuant  to
  subdivision five-a of section  four  hundred  eighty-nine-bbbb  of  this
  title, "exemption base" shall mean, with respect to property that is the
  subject  of  a certificate of eligibility with an effective date of July
  first, nineteen hundred ninety-five or after and that is located in  the
  new   construction   exemption   area  specified  in  paragraph  (a)  of
  subdivision six of section four hundred eighty-nine-cccc of this  title:
  for  any  taxable  year following the effective date of a certificate of
  eligibility, the assessed value of improvements made since the effective
  date of such certificate  which  are  attributable  exclusively  to  the
  construction  of a new building or structure that meets the requirements
  set forth in subdivision nine of section four  hundred  eighty-nine-dddd
  of this title as described in approved plans, provided such improvements

  are  made  within  thirty-six  months  of  the  effective  date  of such
  certificate or by December thirty-first, nineteen  hundred  ninety-nine,
  whichever is earlier; and (ii) pursuant to subdivision five-a of section
  four  hundred  eighty-nine-bbbb  of  this  title, "exemption base" shall
  mean, with respect to property that is the subject of a  certificate  of
  eligibility  with  an  effective  date  of  July first, nineteen hundred
  ninety-five or after  and  that  is  located  in  the  new  construction
  exemption  area specified in paragraph (b) of subdivision six of section
  four hundred eighty-nine-cccc  of  this  title:  for  any  taxable  year
  following  the  effective  date  of  a  certificate  of eligibility, the
  assessed value of improvements made since the  effective  date  of  such
  certificate  which are attributable exclusively to the construction of a
  new building or structure that  meets  the  requirements  set  forth  in
  subdivision  nine of section four hundred eighty-nine-dddd of this title
  as described in approved plans,  provided  such  improvements  are  made
  within forty-two months of the effective date of such certificate.
    (f)  For  purposes  of  this  subdivision  "equalization  increase  or
  decrease" means an  increase  or  decrease  in  the  assessed  value  of
  property   which   is  not  attributable  to  construction  work,  fire,
  demolition, destruction or other change in the physical  characteristics
  of   the   property   (excluding   gradual   physical  deterioration  or
  obsolescence), or to a change in the description or  boundaries  of  the
  property.
    10.  "Industrial  construction  work"  means the construction of a new
  building or structure or the modernization, rehabilitation, expansion or
  improvement of an existing building or structure for use  as  industrial
  property.
    11.  "Industrial property" means nonresidential property on which will
  exist after completion of industrial construction  work  a  building  or
  structure  wherein  at  least  seventy-five  per centum of the total net
  square footage is used or immediately available and held out for use for
  manufacturing  activities  involving  the  assembly  of  goods  or   the
  fabrication or processing of raw materials.
    12.  "Initial  assessed  value"  means  the  lesser of (a) the taxable
  assessed value of real property appearing on the  books  of  the  annual
  record  of the assessed valuation of real property on the effective date
  of a recipient's certificate of eligibility or (b) the assessed value to
  which such assessment is thereafter reduced pursuant to  application  to
  the  tax  commission or court order. Where the real property is used for
  both residential and nonresidential purposes on the  effective  date  of
  such certificate of eligibility, the initial assessed value of such real
  property,  determined  as  provided  in the preceding sentence, shall be
  apportioned between the residential and nonresidential portions  thereof
  in  such  manner as shall properly reflect the initial assessed value of
  each such portion. Such apportionment shall be in accordance with  rules
  promulgated by the department of finance.
    13.  "Manufacturing activity" means an activity involving the assembly
  of goods or the fabrication or processing of raw materials.
    14. "Minimum required expenditure" means expenditure  for  commercial,
  renovation  or industrial construction work in an amount equal to twenty
  per centum of the initial assessed value; provided, however,  that  with
  respect  to a recipient who filed an application on or after July first,
  nineteen hundred  ninety-five  for  a  certificate  of  eligibility  for
  industrial  construction  work  or for commercial construction work in a
  special exemption area or a regular  exemption  area,  minimum  required
  expenditure  means  expenditure  for such work in an amount equal to ten
  per centum of the initial assessed value; provided, however,  that  with
  respect  to a recipient who filed an application on or after July first,

  nineteen hundred  ninety-five  for  a  certificate  of  eligibility  for
  industrial  construction  work  and  for  the  purpose  of  receiving an
  abatement of real property taxes in accordance  with  paragraph  (c)  of
  subdivision  one of section four hundred eighty-nine-bbbb of this title,
  minimum required expenditure means  expenditure  for  such  work  in  an
  amount  equal  to  twenty-five per centum of the initial assessed value;
  and  provided  further  that  if  the  department  of   finance,   after
  consultation with the deputy mayor for finance and economic development,
  determines   that   a  greater  expenditure  is  required  to  encourage
  significant industrial and commercial development it  may  establish  by
  rule  a higher percentage of initial assessed value, not to exceed fifty
  per centum thereof, as the minimum required expenditure. Expenditure for
  residential construction work shall  not  be  included  in  the  minimum
  required  expenditure;  provided,  however, that for mixed-use property,
  expenditures for construction work  related  to  the  common  areas  and
  systems  of  such  property shall be allocated, in accordance with rules
  promulgated by the department of finance, between  the  residential  and
  nonresidential  portions  of the property. If real property was used for
  both residential and nonresidential purposes on the  effective  date  of
  the  certificate of eligibility, the initial assessed value of such real
  property, for  purposes  of  this  subdivision,  shall  be  the  initial
  assessed value apportioned to the nonresidential portions thereof.
    15.   "Person"   means   an   individual,   corporation,  partnership,
  association, agency, trust, estate, foreign or  domestic  government  or
  subdivision thereof, or other entity.
    16.   "Recipient"   means  an  applicant  to  whom  a  certificate  of
  eligibility has been issued pursuant to this title, or the successor  in
  interest of such applicant, provided that where a person who has entered
  into  a  lease  or purchase agreement with the owner or lessee of exempt
  property has been a  co-applicant,  such  person  or  the  successor  in
  interest of such person shall be the recipient.
    17.  "Regular  exemption  area"  means  an  area  in  which  a regular
  exemption from taxes in accordance with  subdivision  three  of  section
  four  hundred  eighty-nine-bbbb  of  this  title shall be available to a
  recipient who performs commercial construction work.
    18.  "Residential   construction   work"   means   any   construction,
  modernization,  rehabilitation,  expansion  or  improvement  of dwelling
  units other than dwelling units in a hotel.
    19. "Residential property" means property, other  than  property  used
  for  hotel  purposes,  on which exists or will exist, upon completion of
  construction  work,  a  building  or  structure  used  for   residential
  purposes.
    20.  "Restricted  activity" means any entertainment activity which the
  department of finance has identified in regulations promulgated pursuant
  to a local law enacted pursuant to this title as an activity  which,  in
  the  public  interest,  should not be encouraged through the benefits of
  this title.
    21. "Special exemption area" means an area in which the commission has
  determined  that  a  special  exemption  from  real  property  taxes  in
  accordance with subdivision two of section four hundred eighty-nine-bbbb
  of  this title shall be available to a recipient who performs commercial
  construction  work  and,  in  addition,  means  the  area  specified  in
  paragraph   (d)   of   subdivision   four   of   section   four  hundred
  eighty-nine-cccc of this title.
    22. "Mixed-use property" means property on which exists, or will exist
  upon completion of construction work, a building or structure  used  for
  both residential and nonresidential purposes.

    23.   "Renovation   construction   work"   means   the  modernization,
  rehabilitation, expansion or improvement  of  an  existing  building  or
  structure,  or  portion  thereof,  for  use  as commercial property in a
  renovation exemption  area  where  such  modernization,  rehabilitation,
  expansion  or improvement is physically and functionally integrated with
  the existing  building  or  structure,  or  portion  thereof,  does  not
  increase  the  bulk  of  the existing building or structure by more than
  thirty per centum and does not  increase  the  height  of  the  existing
  building or structure by more than thirty per centum.
    24.  "Renovation exemption area" means the area specified in paragraph
  (d) of subdivision five of section four hundred eighty-nine-cccc of this
  title in which a renovation exemption  from  taxes  in  accordance  with
  subdivision  five of section four hundred eighty-nine-bbbb of this title
  shall be available to a recipient who performs  renovation  construction
  work.
    25.  "New  construction  exemption areas" means the areas specified in
  subdivision six of section four hundred eighty-nine-cccc of  this  title
  in  which  an  exemption  from  real  property  taxes in accordance with
  subdivision five-a of section  four  hundred  eighty-nine-bbbb  of  this
  title shall be available to a recipient who constructs a new building or
  structure  that  meets the requirements set forth in subdivision nine of
  section four hundred eighty-nine-dddd of this title.
Power  to  enact local law; real property tax exemption;
  deferral of tax payments. Any city having a population of one million or
  more, acting through its  local  legislative  body,  is  authorized  and
  empowered  to determine that incentives in the form of exemption from or
  abatement or deferral of payment of real property taxes are necessary to
  encourage industrial and commercial development  in  such  city  and  to
  enact  a local law providing that such benefits shall be provided in the
  manner set forth in this title. Such city  shall  be  divided  into  six
  classes  of  areas as provided in this title and pursuant to designation
  of areas to be made by a temporary commercial  incentive  area  boundary
  commission. Within such areas, the following benefits shall be available
  to qualified recipients:
    1.  (a) A recipient who, following the effective date of a certificate
  of eligibility, has performed industrial construction work in  any  area
  of such city shall be eligible for an exemption from real property taxes
  as  follows:  For  the  first thirteen tax years, the recipient shall be
  exempt from taxation on one hundred per centum of  the  exemption  base.
  For  the  following  nine  tax years, the recipient shall be exempt from
  taxation on a percentage of the exemption base beginning at  ninety  per
  centum  thereof  in  the  fourteenth  tax year and decreasing by ten per
  centum of said exemption base each year.
    The following table shall illustrate the computation of the  exemption
  for industrial construction work:
 
  Tax year following effective
  date of certificate of
  eligibility:                        Amount of exemption:
 
         1 through 13                 Tax on 100% of exemption base
        14                            Tax on 90% of exemption base
        15                            Tax on 80% of exemption base
        16                            Tax on 70% of exemption base
        17                            Tax on 60% of exemption base
        18                            Tax on 50% of exemption base
        19                            Tax on 40% of exemption base
        20                            Tax on 30% of exemption base
        21                            Tax on 20% of exemption base
        22                            Tax on 10% of exemption base
 
    (b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this subdivision, a recipient who
  filed  an  application  for  a certificate of eligibility for industrial
  construction work in any area of such  city  on  or  after  July  first,
  nineteen  hundred  ninety-five, and who, following the effective date of
  such  certificate  of  eligibility,  has   performed   such   industrial
  construction  work shall be eligible for an exemption from real property
  taxes as follows: For the first sixteen tax years, the  recipient  shall
  be exempt from taxation on one hundred per centum of the exemption base.
  For  the  following  nine  tax years, the recipient shall be exempt from
  taxation on a percentage of the exemption base beginning at  ninety  per
  centum  thereof  in  the  seventeenth tax year and decreasing by ten per
  centum of said exemption base each year.
    The following table shall illustrate the computation of the  exemption
  for industrial construction work pursuant to this paragraph:
 
  Tax year following effective
  date of certificate of
  eligibility:                        Amount of exemption:

         1 Through 16                 Tax on 100% of exemption base
        17                            Tax on 90% of exemption base
        18                            Tax on 80% of exemption base
        19                            Tax on 70% of exemption base
        20                            Tax on 60% of exemption base
        21                            Tax on 50% of exemption base
        22                            Tax on 40% of exemption base
        23                            Tax on 30% of exemption base
        24                            Tax on 20% of exemption base
        25                            Tax on 10% of exemption base
 
    (c)(i)  A  recipient  who  filed  an  application for a certificate of
  eligibility for industrial construction work in any area of such city on
  or after July first, nineteen hundred ninety-five,  and  who,  following
  the  effective  date  of such certificate of eligibility, both commenced
  and completed such work, shall be eligible  for  an  abatement  of  real
  property  taxes as follows: For the first tax year immediately following
  completion of such work, and for the second, third and fourth tax  years
  following  completion  of such work, the abatement shall equal fifty per
  centum of the real property tax that was imposed on the  property  which
  is  the  subject  of  the  certificate  of  eligibility for the tax year
  immediately  preceding  the  effective  date  of  such  certificate   of
  eligibility,  provided,  however,  that  if  such  property was fully or
  partially exempt from real property taxes during such tax year, then the
  abatement shall equal fifty per centum of the  real  property  tax  that
  would  have  been  imposed on such property but for such full or partial
  exemption. For the fifth and sixth tax years, the abatement shall  equal
  forty  per  centum of such amount; for the seventh and eighth tax years,
  the abatement shall equal thirty per centum  of  such  amount;  for  the
  ninth  and  tenth tax years, the abatement shall equal twenty per centum
  of such amount;  and  for  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  tax  years,  the
  abatement shall equal ten per centum of such amount. Notwithstanding any
  inconsistent  provision  of  this  paragraph,  a  recipient shall not be
  eligible for an abatement for the first tax year following completion of
  such work, unless  the  recipient  submits  proof  satisfactory  to  the
  department  of  finance  that  such  work was completed on or before the
  taxable status date for such first tax year no later  than  thirty  days
  after such taxable status date. Where the recipient fails to submit such
  proof  in  accordance with the foregoing sentence, a recipient shall not
  be eligible for  an  abatement  until  the  second  tax  year  following
  completion  of  such  work. In such case, a recipient shall submit proof
  satisfactory to the department of finance that such work  was  completed
  on  or  before  the taxable status date for such first tax year no later
  than thirty days after the taxable status date for such second tax year.
  A recipient whose abatement begins in  the  second  tax  year  following
  completion  of  such  work shall not thereby have his or her twelve-year
  benefit period shortened.
    The following table shall illustrate the computation of the  abatement
  for industrial construction work pursuant to this paragraph:
 
     Tax year following
     completion of industrial
     construction work:                     Amount of abatement:
 
               1                                  50%
               2                                  50%
               3                                  50%
               4                                  50%

               5                                  40%
               6                                  40%
               7                                  30%
               8                                  30%
               9                                  20%
              10                                  20%
              11                                  10%
              12                                  10%
 
    (ii)  If,  due  to a determination of the department of finance or tax
  commission of such city or a court, the real  property  tax  imposed  on
  such  property for the tax year immediately preceding the effective date
  of such certificate of eligibility is changed, then any  abatement  that
  was  granted  in  accordance with this paragraph prior to such reduction
  shall be recalculated and any abatement to be granted in accordance with
  this paragraph shall be based on the real property tax imposed  on  such
  property  for  the  tax year immediately preceding the effective date of
  such certificate of eligibility, as changed by such  determination.  The
  amount  equal to the difference between the abatement originally granted
  and the abatement as so recalculated shall be deducted from  any  refund
  otherwise payable or remission otherwise due as a result of a change due
  to  such  determination, and any balance of such amount remaining unpaid
  after making any such deduction shall  be  paid  to  the  department  of
  finance within thirty days from the date of mailing by the department of
  finance  of  a  notice  of the amount payable. Such amount payable shall
  constitute a tax lien on such property as of the  date  of  such  notice
  and,  if not paid within such thirty-day period, penalty and interest at
  the rate applicable to  delinquent  taxes  on  such  property  shall  be
  charged and collected on such amount from the date of such notice to the
  date of payment.
    (iii) No property which is the subject of a certificate of eligibility
  pursuant to this title shall receive more than one abatement pursuant to
  this  title  and  no  abatement shall exceed one consecutive twelve-year
  period as specified in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.
    (iv) In no event shall an abatement granted  pursuant  to  this  title
  exceed  in  any tax year the real property taxes imposed on the property
  which is the subject of a certificate of eligibility  pursuant  to  this
  title.
    (v) For the purpose of calculating an abatement of real property taxes
  pursuant  to this title, where a tax lot contains more than one building
  or structure and not all of the buildings or structures comprising  such
  tax  lot  are the subject of a certificate of eligibility for industrial
  construction work pursuant  to  this  title,  the  real  property  taxes
  imposed  on  such  tax  lot  for  the tax year immediately preceding the
  effective date of such certificate of eligibility shall  be  apportioned
  among  the  buildings,  structures  and land comprising such tax lot and
  only such real property taxes as are allocable to the property which  is
  the  subject  of  the  certificate of eligibility pursuant to this title
  shall be abated in accordance with this  paragraph.  Such  apportionment
  shall  be  in  accordance  with  rules  promulgated by the department of
  finance.
    (vi) A recipient  who  filed  an  application  for  a  certificate  of
  eligibility   for   industrial   construction  work  in  the  commercial
  revitalization area on or after  July  first,  two  thousand,  and  who,
  following  the  effective  date of such certificate of eligibility, both
  commenced and completed such work, shall be eligible for an abatement of
  real  property  taxes  in  accordance  with  subparagraph  (i)  of  this
  paragraph, provided, however, that where the total net square footage of

  the  industrial  property used or immediately available and held out for
  use for manufacturing activities involving the assembly of goods or  the
  fabrication or processing of raw materials is less than seventy-five per
  centum  of  the total net square footage of the industrial property, the
  abatement of real property taxes shall be determined in accordance  with
  rules  promulgated  by  the  department  of finance. Notwithstanding the
  foregoing sentence, no such abatement shall be allowed where  the  total
  net  square  footage  of  the  industrial  property  used or immediately
  available and held out for use  for  such  manufacturing  actives  after
  completion  of  industrial  construction work is less than the total net
  square footage used or immediately available and held out  for  use  for
  such   manufacturing   activities   before   the  commencement  of  such
  construction work. For purposes of  this  subparagraph  only,  the  term
  "industrial   construction   work"   shall   mean   the   modernization,
  rehabilitation, expansion or improvement  of  an  existing  building  or
  structure  for  use  as  industrial  property  and  the term "industrial
  property" shall mean nonresidential property on which will  exist  after
  completion  of  industrial  construction  work  a  building or structure
  wherein at least twenty-five per centum of the total net square  footage
  is  used or immediately available and held out for use for manufacturing
  activities involving  the  assembly  of  goods  or  the  fabrication  or
  processing of raw materials.
    2.  (a) A recipient who, following the effective date of a certificate
  of eligibility, has performed commercial construction work in a  special
  exemption  area  shall  be  eligible for an exemption from real property
  taxes as follows: For the first thirteen tax years, the recipient  shall
  be exempt from taxation on one hundred per centum of the exemption base.
  For  the  following  nine  tax years, the recipient shall be exempt from
  taxation on a percentage of the exemption base beginning at  ninety  per
  centum  thereof  in  the  fourteenth  tax year and decreasing by ten per
  centum of said exemption base each year.
    The following table shall illustrate the computation of the  exemption
  for commercial construction work in a special exemption area:
 
  Tax year following effective
  date of certificate of
  eligibility:                        Amount of exemption:
 
         1 through 13                 Tax on 100% of exemption base
        14                            Tax on 90% of exemption base
        15                            Tax on 80% of exemption base
        16                            Tax on 70% of exemption base
        17                            Tax on 60% of exemption base
        18                            Tax on 50% of exemption base
        19                            Tax on 40% of exemption base
        20                            Tax on 30% of exemption base
        21                            Tax on 20% of exemption base
        22                            Tax on 10% of exemption base
 
    (b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this subdivision, a recipient who
  filed  an  application  for  a certificate of eligibility for commercial
  construction work in a special exemption area on or  after  July  first,
  nineteen  hundred  ninety-five, and who, following the effective date of
  such  certificate  of  eligibility,  has   performed   such   commercial
  construction  work shall be eligible for an exemption from real property
  taxes as follows: For the first sixteen tax years, the  recipient  shall
  be exempt from taxation on one hundred per centum of the exemption base.
  For  the  following  nine  tax years, the recipient shall be exempt from

  taxation on a percentage of the exemption base beginning at  ninety  per
  centum  thereof  in  the  seventeenth tax year and decreasing by ten per
  centum of said exemption base each year.
    The  following table shall illustrate the computation of the exemption
  for commercial construction work in a special exemption area pursuant to
  this paragraph:
 
  Tax year following effective
  date of certificate of
  eligibility:                        Amount of exemption:
 
         1 through 16                 Tax on 100% of exemption base
        17                            Tax on 90% of exemption base
        18                            Tax on 80% of exemption base
        19                            Tax on 70% of exemption base
        20                            Tax on 60% of exemption base
        21                            Tax on 50% of exemption base
        22                            Tax on 40% of exemption base
        23                            Tax on 30% of exemption base
        24                            Tax on 20% of exemption base
        25                            Tax on 10% of exemption base
 
    3. (a) A recipient who, following the effective date of a  certificate
  of  eligibility, has performed commercial construction work in a regular
  exemption area shall be eligible for an  exemption  from  real  property
  taxes  as follows: For the first eight tax years, the recipient shall be
  exempt from taxation on one hundred per centum of  the  exemption  base.
  For  the  following  four  tax years, the recipient shall be exempt from
  taxation on a percentage of the exemption base beginning at  eighty  per
  centum thereof in the ninth tax year and decreasing by twenty per centum
  of said exemption base each year.
    The  following table shall illustrate the computation of the exemption
  for commercial construction work in a regular exemption area:
 
  Tax year following effective
  date of certificate of
  eligibility:                        Amount of exemption:
 
         1 through 8                  Tax on 100% of exemption base
         9                            Tax on 80% of exemption base
        10                            Tax on 60% of exemption base
        11                            Tax on 40% of exemption base
        12                            Tax on 20% of exemption base
 
    (b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this subdivision, a recipient who
  filed an application for a certificate  of  eligibility  for  commercial
  construction  work  in  a regular exemption area on or after July first,
  nineteen hundred ninety-five, and who, following the effective  date  of
  such   certificate   of   eligibility,  has  performed  such  commercial
  construction work shall be eligible for an exemption from real  property
  taxes as follows: For the first eleven tax years, the recipient shall be
  exempt  from  taxation  on one hundred per centum of the exemption base.
  For the following four tax years, the recipient  shall  be  exempt  from
  taxation  on  a percentage of the exemption base beginning at eighty per
  centum thereof in the twelfth tax year  and  decreasing  by  twenty  per
  centum of said exemption base each year.

    The  following table shall illustrate the computation of the exemption
  for commercial construction work in a regular exemption area pursuant to
  this paragraph:
 
  Tax year following effective
  date of certificate of
  eligibility:                        Amount of exemption:
 
         1 through 11                 Tax on 100% of exemption base
        12                            Tax on 80% of exemption base
        13                            Tax on 60% of exemption base
        14                            Tax on 40% of exemption base
        15                            Tax on 20% of exemption base
 
    4. Except as provided in paragraphs (b) and (c) of subdivision five of
  section  four  hundred  eighty-nine-cccc of this title, a recipient who,
  following the effective  date  of  a  certificate  of  eligibility,  has
  performed  commercial  construction  work  in  a  deferral area shall be
  eligible for a deferral of tax payments as follows: For the first  three
  tax  years following the effective date of a certificate of eligibility,
  the tax payment on one hundred per centum of the exemption base shall be
  deferred. For the following  four  tax  years,  the  tax  payment  on  a
  percentage  of the exemption base beginning at eighty per centum thereof
  in the fourth tax year and decreasing by twenty  per  centum  each  year
  shall be deferred. The total amount of tax payments deferred pursuant to
  this  title  shall be paid subsequently over the course of ten tax years
  as follows: Commencing in the eleventh tax year following the  effective
  date  of  the  certificate  of  eligibility,  through  and including the
  twentieth tax year following such effective date, an amount equal to ten
  per centum of the total amount of tax payments deferred pursuant to this
  section shall be added to the  amount  of  tax  otherwise  assessed  and
  payable in each such tax year on the property subject to such deferral.
    The  following  table shall illustrate the computation of deferral and
  payment of taxes for commercial construction work in a deferral area:
 
  Tax year following effective
  date of certificate of              Amount of tax payments to
  eligibility:                        be deferred or paid:
 
        1 through 3                   Deferral of tax payment on 100%
                                      of the exemption base
        4                             Deferral of tax payment on 80%
                                      of the exemption base
        5                             Deferral of tax payment on 60%
                                      of the exemption base
        6                             Deferral of tax payment on 40%
                                      of the exemption base
        7                             Deferral of tax payment on 20%
                                      of the exemption base
        11 through 20                 Payment each year of 10% of
                                      total dollar amount of tax
                                      payments deferred pursuant
                                      to this title
 
    5. A recipient who, following the effective date of a  certificate  of
  eligibility,  has performed renovation construction work in a renovation
  exemption area shall be eligible for an  exemption  from  real  property
  taxes  as follows: For the first eight tax years, the recipient shall be

  exempt from taxation on one hundred per centum of  the  exemption  base.
  For  the  following  four  tax years, the recipient shall be exempt from
  taxation on a percentage of the exemption base beginning at  eighty  per
  centum thereof in the ninth tax year and decreasing by twenty per centum
  of said exemption base each year.
    The  following table shall illustrate the computation of the exemption
  for renovation construction work in a renovation exemption area:
 
  Tax year following effective
  date of certificate of
  eligibility:                        Amount of exemption:
 
         1 through 8                  Tax on 100% of exemption base
         9                            Tax on 80% of exemption base
        10                            Tax on 60% of exemption base
        11                            Tax on 40% of exemption base
        12                            Tax on 20% of exemption base
 
    5-a. A recipient who, following the effective date of a certificate of
  eligibility, constructs a new  building  or  structure  that  meets  the
  requirements  set  forth  in  subdivision  nine  of section four hundred
  eighty-nine-dddd of this title in the new  construction  exemption  area
  specified  in  paragraph  (a),  (b) or (c) of subdivision six of section
  four hundred eighty-nine-cccc of this title shall  be  eligible  for  an
  exemption  from  real  property taxes as follows: For the first four tax
  years, the recipient shall be exempt from taxation on  one  hundred  per
  centum  of  the  exemption  base.  For the following four tax years, the
  recipient shall be exempt from taxation on a percentage of the exemption
  base beginning at eighty per centum thereof in the fifth  tax  year  and
  decreasing by twenty per centum of said exemption base each year.
    The  following table shall illustrate the computation of the exemption
  for the construction of a new  building  or  structure  that  meets  the
  requirements  set  forth  in  subdivision  nine  of section four hundred
  eighty-nine-dddd of this title in the new  construction  exemption  area
  specified  in  paragraph  (a),  (b) or (c) of subdivision six of section
  four hundred eighty-nine-cccc of this title:
 
  Tax year following effective
  date of certificate of
  eligibility:                        Amount of exemption:
 
        1 through 4                   Tax on 100% of exemption base
        5                             Tax on 80% of exemption base
        6                             Tax on 60% of exemption base
        7                             Tax on 40% of exemption base
        8                             Tax on 20% of exemption base
 
    6. There shall be no exemption from or deferral of a payment  of  real
  property  taxes  available  pursuant  to  this  title  to any person who
  performs commercial or renovation construction work in an excluded area,
  except as provided in paragraphs (b) and  (c)  of  subdivision  five  of
  section four hundred eighty-nine-cccc of this title.
    7.  The  benefits  of  this  title  shall  be  granted exclusively for
  industrial, commercial or  renovation  construction  work  described  in
  approved   plans.   No   benefits   shall  be  granted  for  residential
  construction work. Any parcel which is partly  located  in  an  excluded
  area shall be deemed to be entirely located in such area.

    8.  No benefits pursuant to this title shall be granted for work which
  is the subject of a certificate of eligibility issued pursuant to  title
  two-C of this article.
Temporary commercial incentive area boundary commission;
  classes of area; excluded areas.  1.  Any  city  enacting  a  local  law
  pursuant  to  section  four hundred eighty-nine-bbbb of this title shall
  establish a temporary commercial incentive area boundary  commission  to
  consist  of  the deputy mayor for economic development and planning, the
  commissioner of finance, the chair of the city planning commission,  the
  director  of  management and budget, the borough presidents, the speaker
  of the city council and a public member appointed by the mayor to  serve
  at the mayor's pleasure. Each member except the public member shall have
  the  power  to  designate  an  alternate  to  represent  him  or  her at
  commission meetings to exercise  all  the  rights  and  powers  of  such
  member,  including  the right to vote, provided that such designation be
  made in writing to the chair of the commission.  The  deputy  mayor  for
  economic  development and planning shall be the chair of the commission.
  Each borough president shall be entitled to vote only on the designation
  of areas within his or her borough.  Commission  members  who  shall  be
  officers  or employees of such city shall serve without compensation but
  shall be reimbursed for expenses necessarily incurred in the performance
  of their duties. Any other commission member shall receive as  exclusive
  compensation  for  his  or  her  services  one hundred dollars per diem,
  provided, however, that the total compensation paid to any  such  member
  shall  not  exceed  twelve  hundred  dollars  for  any  calendar year. A
  majority of members of such commission entitled  to  vote  on  a  matter
  shall  constitute  a  quorum  for such issue. Decisions shall be made by
  majority  vote  of  those  present  entitled  to  vote  on   a   matter.
  Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, no officer or employee of
  the  state  or any of its subdivisions or any public benefit corporation
  shall be deemed to have forfeited his or her office or employment or any
  benefits provided under the retirement and social security law or  under
  any  public  retirement  system  maintained  by  the state or any of its
  subdivisions by reason of accepting membership on such commission.
    2. (a) The commission  shall  meet  in  nineteen  hundred  ninety-two,
  nineteen  hundred  ninety-five,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-nine  and two
  thousand four to determine the boundaries of the various areas which  it
  is   authorized  to  designate  pursuant  to  this  section.  The  areas
  designated by the commission in  effect  as  of  December  thirty-first,
  nineteen  hundred  ninety-one  shall  remain  in  effect until the first
  taxable status date after the local  legislative  body  approves  a  new
  designation pursuant to paragraph (d) of this subdivision.
    (b)  Not  later  than  October first of each year when areas are to be
  designated, the commission shall publish a notice at least once  in  the
  city's  official paper or a newspaper of general circulation in the city
  setting forth the proposed boundaries of areas to be designated and  the
  date,  not  earlier  than five nor later than fifteen days following the
  publication of such notice, on which the commission will hold  a  public
  hearing  to  hear  all persons interested in the designation of areas. A
  copy of such notice shall be forwarded to the local legislative body and
  each community board of the city.
    (c) The commission shall make such designation, and notify  the  local
  legislative  body  of such designation, not later than November first of
  each year when areas are to be  designated.  The  designation  shall  be
  effective as provided in paragraph (d) of this subdivision.
    (d)  Within  thirty  days  after the first stated meeting of the local
  legislative body following the receipt of notice  of  such  designation,
  the  local  legislative  body  may,  by  majority  vote, disapprove such
  designation. If, within such thirty-day period,  the  local  legislative
  body  fails  to  act  or  fails  to  act by the required vote, the local
  legislative body shall be deemed to have approved such designation. Such

  designation shall be effective as of the first taxable status date after
  the local legislative body approves such designation and shall remain in
  effect until the first taxable status date after the  local  legislative
  body approves a new designation pursuant to this paragraph.
    3.  The  commission may designate areas to be special exemption areas,
  regular exemption areas, deferral areas, or excluded areas in accordance
  with the level of benefits such commission determines to be necessary to
  encourage commercial construction work in such areas, provided, however,
  that designation of areas in the city of  New  York  shall  be  made  in
  accordance  with  the  provisions  of subdivisions four and five of this
  section.
    4. (a) In the city of New York, the commission may designate any  area
  other than the area lying south of the center line of 96th Street in the
  borough  of  Manhattan,  to be a special exemption area if it determines
  that market conditions in the area are such that the availability  of  a
  special   exemption   is  required  in  order  to  encourage  commercial
  construction work in  such  area.  In  making  such  determination,  the
  commission  shall  consider,  among other factors, the existence in such
  area of  a  special  need  for  commercial  and  job  development,  high
  unemployment,  economic  distress  or unusually large numbers of vacant,
  underutilized,  unsuitable   or   substandard   structures,   or   other
  substandard,  unsanitary, deteriorated or deteriorating conditions, with
  or without tangible blight.
    (b) Any other area in such city, other than the area  lying  south  of
  the  center line of 96th Street, which the commission has not designated
  as a special exemption area shall be a regular exemption area.
    (c) In the city of New York,  on  or  after  January  first,  nineteen
  hundred  ninety-two,  the  commission shall not designate any area to be
  either a deferral area or an excluded area,  nor  shall  the  commission
  make  any  new designation in any urban renewal area designated pursuant
  to article fifteen of the general municipal law  so  as  to  reduce  the
  level of benefits available pursuant to this title in such area.
    (d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, any area in the
  city of New York designated as an empire zone in accordance with article
  eighteen-B  of  the  general municipal law, which the commission has not
  designated as a special exemption area, shall  be  a  special  exemption
  area as of July first, nineteen hundred ninety-five or as of the date of
  the designation of such area as an empire zone, whichever is later.
    5. (a) The following area in the borough of Manhattan shall, except as
  otherwise  provided  in  paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) of this subdivision
  and subdivision six of this section, be an excluded area:  the  area  in
  the  borough  of Manhattan lying south of the center line of 96th Street
  and north of the center line of 23rd Street.
    (b) The following areas in the borough of Manhattan shall,  except  as
  otherwise  provided in paragraph (d) of this subdivision and subdivision
  six of this section, be  excluded  areas  as  of  July  first,  nineteen
  hundred  ninety-two;  provided,  however,  that  if an application for a
  certificate of eligibility has been filed  for  commercial  construction
  work  in such areas on or before December thirty-first, nineteen hundred
  ninety-two and the  recipient  presents  evidence  satisfactory  to  the
  department  of  finance:  (i)  (A) for a new building or structure, that
  construction has  been  completed  on  a  foundation,  as  described  in
  approved   plans,   on   or  before  June  thirtieth,  nineteen  hundred
  ninety-three; or (B) for an existing  building  or  structure,  that  at
  least  five per centum of the minimum required expenditure has been made
  for commercial construction work, as described in approved plans, on  or
  before  June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-three; and (ii) that all
  other requirements of this title have been met; then, a deferral of  tax

  payments   pursuant   to   subdivision  four  of  section  four  hundred
  eighty-nine-bbbb of this title shall  be  granted  for  such  commercial
  construction  work,  except  that  no  deferral of tax payments shall be
  granted for commercial construction work on mixed-use property:
    (1)  the  area  delineated  by a line beginning at the point where the
  center line of 96th Street would intersect  the  Hudson  River  Pierhead
  line  and  running  easterly along the center line of 96th Street to the
  center line of Central Park West; thence  southerly  along  said  center
  line  to  the  center  line  of  59th Street; thence westerly along said
  center line to the Hudson River Pierhead line;  thence  northerly  along
  said Pierhead line to the point of beginning; and
    (2)  the  area  delineated  by  a  line beginning at a point where the
  center line of 59th Street would intersect  with  a  point  one  hundred
  fifty  feet  west  of the center line of 8th Avenue and running easterly
  along the center line of 59th Street to a point one hundred  fifty  feet
  west  of the center line of the Avenue of the Americas; thence southerly
  parallel to the Avenue of the Americas to a point which is the  midpoint
  between  the  center  line  of  42nd  Street and the center line of 41st
  Street; thence westerly parallel to 41st Street to a point  one  hundred
  fifty  feet  west  of  the  center  line of 8th Avenue; thence northerly
  parallel to 8th Avenue to the point of beginning.
    (c) The following area in the borough of Manhattan  shall,  except  as
  otherwise  provided in paragraph (d) of this subdivision and subdivision
  six of this section, be an excluded area as of January  first,  nineteen
  hundred  ninety-three;  provided,  however, that if an application for a
  certificate of eligibility has been filed  for  commercial  construction
  work  in  such area on or before December thirty-first, nineteen hundred
  ninety-two and the  recipient  presents  evidence  satisfactory  to  the
  department  of  finance:  (i)  (A) for a new building or structure, that
  construction has  been  completed  on  a  foundation,  as  described  in
  approved  plans,  on  or  before December thirty-first, nineteen hundred
  ninety-three; or (B) for an existing  building  or  structure,  that  at
  least  five per centum of the minimum required expenditure has been made
  for commercial construction work, as described in approved plans, on  or
  before  December  thirty-first,  nineteen hundred ninety-three; and (ii)
  that all other requirements  of  this  title  have  been  met,  then,  a
  deferral  of  tax  payments pursuant to subdivision four of section four
  hundred eighty-nine-bbbb  of  this  title  shall  be  granted  for  such
  commercial  construction  work,  except that no deferral of tax payments
  shall be granted for commercial construction work on mixed-use property:
  the area delineated by a line beginning at the point  where  the  center
  line of 59th Street would intersect with the Hudson River Pierhead line;
  thence  southerly along said Pierhead line to the center line of Liberty
  Street; thence easterly along said center line to  the  center  line  of
  Church  Street;  thence  northerly  along said center line to the center
  line of Fulton Street; thence easterly along said  center  line  to  the
  East River Pierhead line; thence northerly along said Pierhead line to a
  point  which  is the midpoint between the center line of 34th Street and
  the center line of 33rd Street; thence westerly parallel to 33rd  Street
  to  a point one hundred fifty feet west of the center line of the Avenue
  of the Americas; thence northerly parallel to the Avenue of the Americas
  to a point which is the midpoint between the center line of 42nd  Street
  and  the  center  line  of 41st Street; thence westerly parallel to 41st
  Street to a point one hundred fifty feet west of the center line of  8th
  Avenue;  thence  northerly  parallel to 8th Avenue to the center line of
  59th Street; thence westerly along said center  line  to  the  point  of
  beginning.

    (d)  Notwithstanding  the provisions of paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of
  this subdivision, the following areas in the borough of Manhattan  shall
  be  renovation  exemption  areas: (i) as of July first, nineteen hundred
  ninety-two and until June thirtieth, two thousand eight: the area in the
  borough of Manhattan lying south of the center line of 23rd Street; (ii)
  as  of  July  first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-two  and  until  January
  thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-five: the area in the  borough  of
  Manhattan lying south of the center line of 96th Street and north of the
  center line of 23rd Street; and (iii) as of July first, nineteen hundred
  ninety-five and until June thirtieth, two thousand eight the area in the
  borough  of  Manhattan lying south of the center line of 59th Street and
  north of the center line of 23rd Street.
    6. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision five of this section,
  the areas in the borough of Manhattan specified in paragraphs  (a),  (b)
  and  (c)  of  this subdivision, except the "Project Area" described in a
  lease held by the Battery Park City Authority as tenant  and  originally
  dated  as  of  November  twenty-fourth,  nineteen hundred sixty-nine and
  thereafter  from  time  to  time  amended,  shall  be  new  construction
  exemption  areas: (a) as of July first, nineteen hundred ninety-five and
  until December thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-six:  the  area  in
  the  borough of Manhattan lying south of the center line of 96th Street,
  excluding the area specified in paragraph (b) of this  subdivision;  and
  (b)  as  of  July  first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-five and until June
  thirtieth, two thousand three: the area  in  the  borough  of  Manhattan
  bounded  by  Murray  Street on the north starting at the intersection of
  West Street and Murray Street; running easterly along the center line of
  Murray Street; connecting through City Hall Park with the center line of
  Frankfort Street and running easterly along the center line of Frankfort
  and Dover Streets to the intersection of Dover Street and South  Street;
  running  southerly along the center line of South Street to Peter Minuit
  Plaza; connecting through Peter Minuit Plaza to the center line of State
  Street and running northwesterly along the center line of  State  Street
  to  the intersection of State Street and Battery Place; running westerly
  along the center line of Battery Place to the  intersection  of  Battery
  Place  and  West  Street; and running northerly along the center line of
  West Street to the intersection of West Street and  Murray  Street;  and
  (c)  as  of July first, two thousand three and until June thirtieth, two
  thousand eight: the area in the borough of Manhattan bounded  by  Murray
  Street  on  the  north  starting  at the intersection of West Street and
  Murray Street; running easterly along the center line of Murray  Street;
  connecting  through  City  Hall  Park  with the center line of Frankfort
  Street and running easterly along the center line of Frankfort and Dover
  Streets to the intersection of Dover Street and  South  Street;  running
  southerly  along  the center line of South Street to Peter Minuit Plaza;
  connecting through Peter Minuit Plaza to the center line of State Street
  and running northwesterly along the center line of State Street  to  the
  intersection  of  State Street and Battery Place; running westerly along
  the center line of Battery Place to the intersection  of  Battery  Place
  and  West  Street;  and  running northerly along the center line of West
  Street to the intersection of West Street and Murray Street, except  the
  area  in  the  borough of Manhattan bounded by Church Street on the east
  starting at the  intersection  of  Liberty  Street  and  Church  Street;
  running  northerly  along  the  center  line  of  Church  Street  to the
  intersection of Church Street and Vesey Street; running  westerly  along
  the  center line of Vesey Street to the intersection of Vesey Street and
  West Broadway; running northerly along the center line of West  Broadway
  to  the  intersection  of  West  Broadway  and  Barclay  Street; running
  westerly along the center line of Barclay Street to the intersection  of

  Barclay Street and Washington Street; running southerly along the center
  line  of  Washington Street to the intersection of Washington Street and
  Vesey Street; running westerly along the center line of Vesey Street  to
  the  intersection  of  Vesey  Street  and West Street; running southerly
  along the center line of West Street to the intersection of West  Street
  and  Liberty  Street;  and  running  easterly  along  the center line of
  Liberty Street to the intersection of Liberty Street and Church Street.
Eligibility for benefits. 1. A recipient of a certificate
  of eligibility with  an  effective  date  of  June  thirtieth,  nineteen
  hundred  ninety-two  or  before  must make one-half the minimum required
  expenditure within  eighteen  months  of  the  effective  date  of  such
  recipient's  certificate  of  eligibility, and make the minimum required
  expenditure within thirty-six months  of  the  effective  date  of  such
  certificate  to  be  eligible  to  receive the benefits of this title. A
  recipient of a certificate of eligibility with an effective date of July
  first, nineteen hundred ninety-two  or  after  must  make  one-half  the
  minimum  required expenditure within thirty months of the effective date
  of such recipient's certificate of eligibility,  and  make  the  minimum
  required  expenditure  within sixty months of the effective date of such
  certificate to be eligible  to  receive  the  benefits  of  this  title;
  provided,  however, that a recipient of a certificate of eligibility for
  renovation construction work for  property  located  in  the  renovation
  exemption  area  specified  in  subparagraph  (ii)  of  paragraph (d) of
  subdivision five of section four hundred eighty-nine-cccc of this  title
  must  make  one-half  the  minimum  required expenditure within eighteen
  months  of  the  effective  date  of  such  recipient's  certificate  of
  eligibility,  or by December thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-four,
  whichever is earlier, and make the minimum required  expenditure  within
  thirty-six  months  of  the  effective  date  of such certificate, or by
  December  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-five,  whichever   is
  earlier, to be eligible to receive the benefits of this title; provided,
  further,  however,  that  a  recipient  who  filed  an application for a
  certificate of eligibility for renovation construction work for property
  located in the renovation exemption area specified in subparagraph  (ii)
  of   paragraph   (d)   of  subdivision  five  of  section  four  hundred
  eighty-nine-cccc of this title on or after July first, nineteen  hundred
  ninety-four,  but  before  February first, nineteen hundred ninety-five,
  must make one-half the  minimum  required  expenditure  within  eighteen
  months   of   the  effective  date  of  such  certificate,  or  by  July
  thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-five, whichever  is  earlier,  and
  make  the  minimum  required expenditure within thirty-six months of the
  effective date of such certificate, or by  July  thirty-first,  nineteen
  hundred  ninety-six, whichever is earlier, to be eligible to receive the
  benefits of this title provided, further, however, that a recipient  who
  filed  an  application  for  a certificate of eligibility for renovation
  construction work for property located in the renovation exemption  area
  specified  in  subparagraph (i) or (iii) of paragraph (d) of subdivision
  five of section four hundred eighty-nine-cccc of this title on or  after
  July first, nineteen hundred ninety-five, must make one-half the minimum
  required  expenditure  within  eighteen  months of the effective date of
  such certificate, and  make  the  minimum  required  expenditure  within
  thirty-six  months  of  the  effective  date  of such certificate, to be
  eligible to receive the benefits of this title. Any recipient who  shall
  fail  to  make  such expenditures shall become ineligible and shall pay,
  with interest, any taxes for which an exemption or deferral was  claimed
  pursuant  to  this  section.  This  subdivision  shall  not apply to the
  recipient of a certificate of eligibility  for  construction  of  a  new
  building   or  structure  that  meets  the  requirements  set  forth  in
  subdivision nine of section four hundred eighty-nine-dddd of this  title
  in a new construction exemption area.
    2.   No   benefits  pursuant  to  this  title  shall  be  granted  for
  construction work on any condominium unit  unless  such  unit  is  in  a
  building  or  structure  which,  if  viewed as a whole and as if it were
  under single  ownership,  would  qualify  as  commercial  or  industrial
  property.  The  minimum required expenditure applicable to any recipient

  of a certificate of eligibility for construction work on  a  condominium
  unit  shall  be  equal to the minimum expenditure which would apply if a
  certificate of eligibility were issued  for  construction  work  on  the
  entire  property where such unit is located. Nothing in this subdivision
  shall be construed to prevent owners of condominium units  in  the  same
  property from forming an association to be a recipient. This subdivision
  shall  not  apply to any applicant whose property would be, or recipient
  whose property is, the subject of a certificate of eligibility  with  an
  effective date of July first, nineteen hundred ninety-two or after.
    3.  (a)  No  benefits  pursuant to this title shall be granted for any
  construction work unless the applicant filed  an  application  for  such
  benefits on or before the date of issuance of a building permit for such
  work.  The  requirements  of this subdivision may be satisfied where the
  applicant's architect, contractor or other representative authorized  to
  file  the application for such building permit files with the department
  of  finance  on  behalf  of  the  applicant  a  preliminary  application
  containing such information as the department of finance shall prescribe
  by regulation.
    (b)  Notwithstanding  paragraph  (a) of this subdivision, an applicant
  may file  an  application  for  benefits  pursuant  to  this  title  for
  renovation construction work for property located in the areas specified
  in  paragraph  (c) of this subdivision, regardless of whether a building
  permit for such work was  issued  before  such  application  was  filed,
  provided  that such permit was not issued before January first, nineteen
  hundred ninety or after June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-two, and
  provided further that a final application is filed  with,  and  accepted
  by,  the  department  of  finance,  on  or before December thirty-first,
  nineteen hundred ninety-two. The department of  finance  shall  issue  a
  certificate  of  eligibility  to such an applicant upon determining that
  the applicant satisfies  all  other  requirements  of  this  title.  The
  effective  date  of  such certificate shall be the date of acceptance by
  the department  of  finance  of  a  final  application  containing  such
  information  as  prescribed  by  rule  of  the department of finance. No
  benefits pursuant to this title shall be granted for  construction  work
  performed  before  the  effective date of the recipient's certificate of
  eligibility.
    (c) Pursuant to paragraph (b) of this subdivision,  an  applicant  may
  file  an  application for benefits pursuant to this title for renovation
  construction work for property located in the  following  areas  in  the
  borough of Manhattan lying south of 96th Street:
    (i)  the  area  delineated  by a line beginning at the point where the
  center line of 96th Street would intersect the East River Pierhead  line
  and  running westerly along the center line of 96th Street to the center
  line of Fifth Avenue; thence southerly along said  center  line  to  the
  center  line of 59th Street; thence westerly along said center line to a
  point one hundred fifty feet west of the center line of  the  Avenue  of
  the Americas; thence southerly parallel to the Avenue of the Americas to
  the  center  line of 34th Street; thence easterly along said center line
  to the East River Pierhead line; thence northerly  along  said  Pierhead
  line to the point of beginning; and
    (ii)  the  area  delineated by a line beginning at the point where the
  center line of Fulton Street would intersect  the  East  River  Pierhead
  line  and running westerly along the center line of Fulton Street to the
  center line of Church Street; thence southerly along said center line to
  the center line of Liberty Street; thence  westerly  along  said  center
  line  to the Hudson River Pierhead line; thence southerly and along said
  Pierhead line to the point of beginning.

    (d) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this  subdivision,  an  applicant
  may  file  an  application  for  benefits  pursuant  to  this  title for
  renovation construction work for  property  located  in  the  renovation
  exemption  area  specified  in  subparagraph  (iii)  of paragraph (d) of
  subdivision  five of section four hundred eighty-nine-cccc of this title
  within sixty days of the effective date of chapter six hundred sixty-one
  of the laws of nineteen hundred ninety-five,  regardless  of  whether  a
  building  permit  for  such  work was issued before such application was
  filed, provided that such permit was not issued before  February  first,
  nineteen   hundred  ninety-five,  and  provided  further  that  a  final
  application is filed with, and accepted by, the department  of  finance,
  on  or  before  December thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-five. The
  department of finance shall issue a certificate of eligibility  to  such
  an  applicant  upon  determining  that the applicant satisfies all other
  requirements of this title. The effective date of such certificate shall
  be the date of acceptance by  the  department  of  finance  of  a  final
  application  containing  such  information  as prescribed by rule of the
  department of finance. No benefits  pursuant  to  this  title  shall  be
  granted  for  construction  work  performed before the effective date of
  such certificate of eligibility.
    4. No benefits  pursuant  to  this  title  shall  be  granted  to  any
  recipient  for  construction work on property any part of which is to be
  used for a restricted activity.
    5. No benefits pursuant  to  this  title  shall  be  granted  for  any
  construction  work  unless  the  applicant shall file, together with the
  application, an affidavit setting forth the following information:
    (a) a statement that within the seven years immediately preceding  the
  date  of  application  for  a  certificate  of  eligibility, neither the
  applicant, nor any person owning a substantial interest in the  property
  as  defined  in  paragraph  (c)  of  this  subdivision, nor any officer,
  director or general partner of the applicant or such person was  finally
  adjudicated  by  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  to have violated
  section two hundred thirty-five of the real property law or any  section
  of  article  one hundred fifty of the penal law or any similar arson law
  of another state with respect  to  any  building,  or  was  an  officer,
  director  or  general  partner  of  a person at the time such person was
  finally adjudicated to have violated such law; and
    (b) a statement setting forth any pending charges  alleging  violation
  of  section  two  hundred  thirty-five  of  the real property law or any
  section of article one hundred fifty of the penal  law  or  any  similar
  arson  law  of  another jurisdiction with respect to any building by the
  applicant or any person owning a substantial interest in the property as
  defined in paragraph (c) of this subdivision, or any  officer,  director
  or general partner of the applicant or such person.
    (c)  "Substantial  interest"  as  used  in this subdivision shall mean
  ownership and control of an interest of ten per  centum  or  more  in  a
  property or any person owning a property.
    6.  If any person described in the statement required by paragraph (b)
  of subdivision five of this section is finally adjudicated by a court of
  competent jurisdiction to  be  guilty  of  any  charge  listed  in  such
  statement,  the  recipient  shall  cease  to  be  eligible  for benefits
  pursuant to this title and shall pay with interest any taxes  for  which
  an exemption, abatement or deferral was claimed pursuant to this title.
    7.  In  addition  to  any  other  qualifications for exemption from or
  abatement or deferral of payment of taxes set forth in  this  title,  an
  applicant must be:
    (a)  obligated  to  pay real property tax on the property for which an
  exemption, abatement or deferral  is  sought,  whether  such  obligation

  arises  because  of  record  ownership  of such property, or because the
  obligation to pay such tax has been assumed by contract; or
    (b)  the  record owner or lessee of property which is exempt from real
  property taxation who has entered into an agreement  to  sell  or  lease
  such  property  to  another  person. Such person shall be a co-applicant
  with such owner or lessee.
    8. A co-applicant with a public entity shall be an eligible  recipient
  pursuant  to  this  title, provided that for such period as the property
  which is the subject of the certificate of eligibility  is  exempt  from
  real  property  taxation  because  it is owned or controlled by a public
  entity no benefits shall be available to  such  recipient,  pursuant  to
  this title. Such recipient shall receive benefits pursuant to this title
  when such property ceases to be eligible for exemption pursuant to other
  provisions  of law, as follows: the recipient shall, commencing with the
  date such tax exemption ceases, and continuing until the  expiration  of
  the benefit period pursuant to this title, receive the benefits to which
  such  recipient  is  entitled  in the corresponding tax year pursuant to
  this title.
    9. (a)(i) No benefits pursuant to this  title  shall  be  granted  for
  construction  of  a  new  building  or structure in the new construction
  exemption area specified in paragraph (a) of subdivision six of  section
  four  hundred  eighty-nine-cccc of this title unless (A) construction of
  the foundation of such building or structure has been  completed  within
  twelve  months  of  the effective date of the recipient's certificate of
  eligibility, or by December thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-seven,
  whichever is earlier; and (B) construction of such building or structure
  has been completed within thirty-six months of the effective date of the
  recipient's certificate of eligibility,  or  by  December  thirty-first,
  nineteen hundred ninety-nine, whichever is earlier.
    (ii)  No  benefits  pursuant  to  this  title  shall  be  granted  for
  construction of a new building or  structure  in  the  new  construction
  exemption  area specified in paragraph (b) of subdivision six of section
  four hundred eighty-nine-cccc of this title unless: (A) construction  of
  the  foundation  of such building or structure has been completed within
  twenty-four months of the effective date of the recipient's  certificate
  of  eligibility;  and (B) construction of such building or structure has
  been completed within forty-two months of  the  effective  date  of  the
  recipient's certificate of eligibility.
    (iii)  Notwithstanding  subparagraph  (i)  of this paragraph, benefits
  pursuant to this title may be granted for construction of a new building
  or structure  in  the  new  construction  exemption  area  specified  in
  paragraph   (a)   of   subdivision   six   of   section   four   hundred
  eighty-nine-cccc of this title, provided that (A)  construction  of  the
  foundation  of such building or structure has been completed by December
  thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight; (B)  construction  of  such
  building  or  structure has been completed by December thirty-first, two
  thousand; (C) such building or structure is located in  the  portion  of
  such  new  construction exemption area lying south of the center line of
  34th  Street;  and  (D)  the  applicant  meets  all  other   eligibility
  requirements  for  benefits  pursuant  to this title, including, but not
  limited to, the requirement that an application  for  a  certificate  of
  eligibility  for  construction  of  such new building or structure shall
  have been made before January first, nineteen hundred ninety-seven.
    (iv)  No  benefits  pursuant  to  this  title  shall  be  granted  for
  construction  of  a  new  building  or structure in the new construction
  exemption area specified in paragraph (c) of subdivision six of  section
  four  hundred  eighty-nine-cccc of this title unless (A) construction of
  the foundation of such building or structure has been  completed  within

  twenty-four  months of the effective date of the recipient's certificate
  of eligibility; and (B) construction of such building or  structure  has
  been  completed  within  forty-two  months  of the effective date of the
  recipient's certificate of eligibility.
    (b)   No  benefits  pursuant  to  this  title  shall  be  granted  for
  construction of a new  building  or  structure  in  a  new  construction
  exemption  area unless such building or structure meets the requirements
  set forth in subparagraphs (i)  and  (ii)  of  this  paragraph  and,  in
  addition,  meets  at  least  two  of  the five requirements set forth in
  subparagraphs (iii) through (vii) of this paragraph.
    (i) The height of at least fifty per centum  of  the  floors  in  such
  building  or  structure  shall be not less than twelve feet, nine inches
  measured from the top of the slab comprising the floor to the bottom  of
  the  slab comprising the ceiling, provided, however, that in the case of
  a new building or structure that is eligible for  benefits  pursuant  to
  subparagraph  (iii)  of paragraph (a) of this subdivision, the height of
  at least forty per centum of the floors in such  building  or  structure
  shall be not less than twelve feet, nine inches measured from the top of
  the  slab  comprising the floor to the bottom of the slab comprising the
  ceiling;
    (ii) Such  building  or  structure  shall  be  served  by  fiber-optic
  telecommunications  wiring  and  shall contain vertical penetrations for
  the distribution of fiber optic cabling to individual  tenants  on  each
  floor;
    (iii)  The  total  square footage of such building or structure is not
  less than five hundred thousand gross square feet;
    (iv)  A  minimum  of  two  hundred  thousand  gross  square  feet   or
  twenty-five  per  centum  of  such building or structure is comprised of
  floors of not less than forty thousand gross square feet;
    (v) At least ten per centum  of  the  gross  square  footage  of  such
  building  or  structure is comprised of floors that contain no more than
  eight structural columns, excluding any columns within the  core  or  on
  the periphery of such building or structure;
    (vi) The electrical capacity of such building or structure is not less
  than six watts per net square foot;
    (vii)  Emergency  backup power sufficient to accommodate a need of six
  watts per net square foot is available in at least two hundred  thousand
  gross  square  feet  or  twenty-five  per  centum  of  such  building or
  structure.
    10.  No  benefits  pursuant  to  this  title  shall  be  granted   for
  construction  work  performed pursuant to a building permit issued after
  July thirty-first, two thousand eight, except that if a building  permit
  is  issued  on  or  before  July  thirty-first,  two  thousand eight for
  construction work on a building or structure described in an application
  for a certificate of eligibility filed on or before June thirtieth,  two
  thousand  eight,  construction  work  performed  as  described  in  such
  application pursuant to any additional  building  permit  issued  on  or
  after  August  first,  two thousand eight shall be eligible for benefits
  pursuant to this title in accordance with this subdivision.
    (a) Except as provided in  paragraph  (b)  of  this  subdivision,  all
  construction  work  performed  pursuant to any such application shall be
  completed on or before December thirty-first, two thousand thirteen.  No
  benefits  shall  be  granted  for construction work performed after such
  date, and any exemption granted pursuant to this title  in  relation  to
  property  on which such construction work was performed shall not exceed
  the amount of the exemption in effect for such property on the tax  roll
  for  which  the  taxable  status  date  is  January  fifth, two thousand
  fourteen.

    (b) All construction work performed pursuant to any  such  application
  for  the  construction  of  a  new  building  or  structure  in  the new
  construction exemption area specified in paragraph  (c)  of  subdivision
  six  of  section  four  hundred  eighty-nine-cccc of this title shall be
  completed  in  accordance  with  subparagraph  (iv)  of paragraph (a) of
  subdivision nine of this section and, if  not  completed  in  accordance
  with  such  subparagraph, shall not be eligible for benefits pursuant to
  this title.
    (c) For purposes of this subdivision, construction work  as  described
  in  an  application  for  a  certificate  of eligibility shall be deemed
  completed on the date on which the department of  buildings  of  a  city
  that  has  enacted a local law pursuant to this title issues a temporary
  or final certificate of occupancy or, if such construction work does not
  require the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the  date  on  which
  the applicant and the applicant's architect or professional engineer for
  such  construction work submit to the department of finance an affidavit
  certifying that such construction work has been completed. For  purposes
  of  this  subdivision,  a  demolition  permit  shall  be  deemed to be a
  building permit issued for construction work.
Application for certificate of eligibility. 1. Application
  for  a  certificate  of  eligibility  pursuant to this title may be made
  immediately following the effective date of a local law enacted pursuant
  to this title and continuing until June thirtieth, two  thousand  eight;
  provided, however, that application for a certificate of eligibility for
  renovation  construction  work  for  property  located in the renovation
  exemption area specified  in  subparagraph  (ii)  of  paragraph  (d)  of
  subdivision  five of section four hundred eighty-nine-cccc of this title
  may  not  be  made  after   January   thirty-first,   nineteen   hundred
  ninety-five;   provided,   further,  however,  that  application  for  a
  certificate of  eligibility  for  construction  of  a  new  building  or
  structure  that  meets the requirements set forth in subdivision nine of
  section  four  hundred  eighty-nine-dddd  of  this  title  in  the   new
  construction  exemption  area  specified in paragraph (a) of subdivision
  six of section four hundred eighty-nine-cccc of this title  may  not  be
  made after December thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-six; provided,
  further,  however, that application for a certificate of eligibility for
  construction of a new building or structure that meets the  requirements
  set  forth  in subdivision nine of section four hundred eighty-nine-dddd
  of this title in  the  new  construction  exemption  area  specified  in
  paragraph   (b)   of   subdivision   six   of   section   four   hundred
  eighty-nine-cccc of this title may not be made after June thirtieth, two
  thousand  three.  Such  application  shall  state  whether  it  is   for
  industrial,  commercial  or  renovation  construction work, and shall be
  filed  with  the  department  of  finance.  In  addition  to  any  other
  information  required  by such department, the application shall include
  cost estimates or bids for the proposed construction and an affidavit of
  a  professional  engineer  or  architect  of  the  applicant's   choice,
  certifying  that  detailed  plans  for  the  construction work have been
  submitted to the department of buildings. Such  application  shall  also
  state  that  the  applicant  agrees to comply with and be subject to the
  rules issued from time to time by the department of  finance  to  secure
  compliance  with  all  applicable  city, state and federal laws or which
  implement mayoral directives and executive  orders  designed  to  ensure
  equal  employment  opportunity.  If  required  by  local  law or rule as
  described in section four hundred eighty-nine-llll of this  title,  such
  application  shall  also  state that the applicant agrees to comply with
  the program established thereby to ensure  meaningful  participation  of
  minority  and  women-owned business enterprises in construction work for
  which the applicant  receives  benefits.  Such  application  shall  also
  certify  that all taxes currently due and owing on the property which is
  the subject of the application have been paid  or  are  currently  being
  paid  in  timely  installments  pursuant  to  written agreement with the
  department of finance.
    2. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to show by clear  and
  convincing evidence that the requirements for granting an exemption from
  or abatement or deferral of payment of taxes pursuant to this title have
  been  satisfied.  The  department of finance shall have the authority to
  require that statements in connection with the application be made under
  oath.
    3. The department of finance shall issue a certificate of  eligibility
  upon  determining  that  the  applicant  satisfies  the requirements for
  industrial, commercial or renovation construction work in an area  where
  benefits  are  available  for  such  work.  Such certificate shall state
  whether such benefits are to be granted for  industrial,  commercial  or
  renovation construction work, and in which class of area the property is
  located.  The  effective date of such certificate, except as provided in
  paragraph (b) or paragraph (d) of  subdivision  three  of  section  four

  hundred  eighty-nine-dddd of this title, shall be the earlier of (a) the
  date on which a building permit for the construction work is  issued  by
  the  department  of  buildings, or (b) the last day before the effective
  date  of  any  designation of boundaries by the commission which changes
  the class of area in which the property is located so as to  reduce  the
  level  of  benefits  for  commercial construction work on such property.
  Where the effective date of  the  certificate  of  eligibility  is  July
  first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-two or after, the benefits granted for
  industrial, commercial or renovation construction work pursuant to  this
  title  shall  be  in  accordance  with  the  provisions of this title as
  amended by chapter seven hundred eighty-one  of  the  laws  of  nineteen
  hundred  ninety-two,  chapter  seven  hundred  twenty-six of the laws of
  nineteen hundred ninety-four, chapter six hundred sixty-one of the  laws
  of  nineteen hundred ninety-five, chapter one hundred forty-three of the
  laws of nineteen hundred ninety-nine, chapter one hundred three  of  the
  laws  of  two thousand three and the chapter of the laws of two thousand
  seven which amended this subdivision. Where the effective  date  of  the
  certificate  is  June  thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-two or before,
  the benefits granted for  industrial  or  commercial  construction  work
  pursuant  to  this  title  shall be in accordance with the provisions of
  this title as it was in effect until June  thirtieth,  nineteen  hundred
  ninety-two  immediately  prior to its amendment by chapter seven hundred
  eighty-one of the laws of  nineteen  hundred  ninety-two.  No  recipient
  whose  property  is  the  subject  of  a  certificate of eligibility for
  commercial construction work in a deferral area  shall  be  eligible  to
  apply  for a certificate of eligibility for renovation construction work
  on the same property, where the renovation construction work is the same
  as, or similar to,  the  commercial  construction  work  for  which  the
  deferral  area  certificate  was  issued,  until  three  years after the
  effective date of the deferral  area  certificate.  No  recipient  shall
  receive  a  tax deferral and a tax exemption for the same expenditure on
  eligible construction work.
    4. A copy of the certificate of eligibility  shall  be  filed  by  the
  department  of finance in the manner prescribed for recording a mortgage
  pursuant to section two hundred ninety-one-d of the real property law.
    5. The department of  finance  may  provide  by  rule  for  reasonable
  administrative   charges   or  fees  necessary  to  defray  expenses  in
  administering the benefit program provided by this title.
Reporting  requirement; termination of benefits. 1. Upon
  approval by the department  of  buildings  of  the  plans  submitted  in
  connection  with  the  building permit and any amendments to such plans,
  the recipient shall file with the  department  of  finance  a  narrative
  description of such approved plans describing the industrial, commercial
  or  renovation construction work for which such recipient seeks benefits
  pursuant to this title.
    2. For the duration of the benefit period  the  recipient  shall  file
  annually with the department of finance, on or before the taxable status
  date, a certificate of continuing use stating the purposes for which the
  property  described  in the certificate of eligibility is being used and
  the net square footage allotted to each such purpose.  Such  certificate
  of  continuing  use  shall  be on a form prescribed by the department of
  finance and shall state the total number  of  workers  employed  on  the
  property  and  the  number  of  such workers who are city residents. The
  department  of  finance  shall  have  authority  to  terminate  benefits
  pursuant  to  this  title  upon  failure  of  a  recipient  to file such
  certificate by the taxable status date. The burden of proof shall be  on
  the  recipient  to establish continuing eligibility for benefits and the
  department  of  finance  shall  have  the  authority  to  require   that
  statements made in such certificate shall be made under oath.
    3.  A  recipient  shall file an amendment to the latest certificate of
  continuing use prior to (a) converting square  footage  within  property
  which  is  the  subject  of  a certificate of eligibility for industrial
  construction work from use for the manufacturing activities described in
  such certificate of continuing use where such conversion results in less
  than sixty-five per centum of total net square  footage  being  used  or
  held  out  for  use  for manufacturing activities; or (b) converting any
  portion of property which is the subject of a certificate of eligibility
  to use for any restricted activity or as residential property.
    4. Not later than eighteen  months  after  the  effective  date  of  a
  certificate  of  eligibility,  with an effective date of June thirtieth,
  nineteen hundred ninety-two  or  before,  the  recipient  shall  present
  evidence  to  the department of finance demonstrating that the recipient
  has made one-half of the minimum required expenditure.   Not later  than
  thirty-six  months  after  the  effective date of such certificate, such
  recipient shall present evidence to such department  demonstrating  that
  the  recipient has made the minimum required expenditure. Not later than
  thirty months after the effective date of a certificate  of  eligibility
  with  an  effective  date  of July first, nineteen hundred ninety-two or
  after, the recipient shall present evidence to the department of finance
  demonstrating that the  recipient  has  made  one-half  of  the  minimum
  required   expenditure;   provided,  however,  that  a  recipient  of  a
  certificate of eligibility for renovation construction work for property
  located in the renovation exemption area specified in subparagraph  (ii)
  of   paragraph   (d)   of  subdivision  five  of  section  four  hundred
  eighty-nine-cccc of this title shall present  such  evidence  not  later
  than eighteen months after the effective date of such certificate, or by
  December   thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-four,  whichever  is
  earlier; provided, further, however,  that  a  recipient  who  filed  an
  application for a certificate of eligibility for renovation construction
  work  for property located in the renovation exemption area specified in
  subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (d) of subdivision five of  section  four
  hundred  eighty-nine-cccc of this title on or after July first, nineteen
  hundred  ninety-four,  but  before  February  first,  nineteen   hundred
  ninety-five,  shall present such evidence not later than eighteen months
  after the effective date of such certificate, or by  July  thirty-first,
  nineteen  hundred  ninety-five, whichever is earlier, provided, further,

  however, that a recipient who filed an application for a certificate  of
  eligibility for renovation construction work for property located in the
  renovation  exemption  area  specified  in  subparagraph (i) or (iii) of
  paragraph   (d)   of   subdivision   five   of   section   four  hundred
  eighty-nine-cccc of this title on or after July first, nineteen  hundred
  ninety-five,  shall present such evidence not later than eighteen months
  after the effective date of such certificate.    Not  later  than  sixty
  months  after the effective date of a certificate of eligibility with an
  effective date of July first, nineteen hundred ninety-two or after,  the
  recipient  shall  present evidence to such department demonstrating that
  the recipient has  made  the  minimum  required  expenditure;  provided,
  however, that a recipient of a certificate of eligibility for renovation
  construction  work for property located in the renovation exemption area
  specified in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (d) of subdivision  five  of
  section  four  hundred eighty-nine-cccc of this title shall present such
  evidence not later than thirty-six months after the  effective  date  of
  such   certificate,   or  by  December  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred
  ninety-five, whichever is earlier; provided, further,  however,  that  a
  recipient  who filed an application for a certificate of eligibility for
  renovation construction work for  property  located  in  the  renovation
  exemption  area  specified  in  subparagraph  (ii)  of  paragraph (d) of
  subdivision five of section four hundred eighty-nine-cccc of this  title
  on  or  after  July  first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-four,  but before
  February  first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-five,  shall  present   such
  evidence  not  later  than thirty-six months after the effective date of
  such certificate, or by July thirty-first, nineteen hundred  ninety-six,
  whichever  is  earlier, provided, further, however, that a recipient who
  filed an application for a certificate  of  eligibility  for  renovation
  construction  work for property located in the renovation exemption area
  specified in subparagraph (i) or (iii) of paragraph (d)  of  subdivision
  five  of section four hundred eighty-nine-cccc of this title on or after
  July first, nineteen hundred ninety-five, shall  present  such  evidence
  not  later  than  thirty-six  months  after  the  effective date of such
  certificate.  Such evidence shall be presented in the  form  and  manner
  prescribed  by  such  department.  The  burden  of proof shall be on the
  recipient to show by clear and convincing  evidence  that  the  required
  expenditures  have  been made.   This subdivision shall not apply to the
  recipient of a certificate of eligibility  for  construction  of  a  new
  building   or  structure  that  meets  the  requirements  set  forth  in
  subdivision nine of section four hundred eighty-nine-dddd of this  title
  in a new construction exemption area.
    5.  A  recipient of a certificate of eligibility for construction of a
  new building or structure in a new  construction  exemption  area  shall
  present  evidence  to  the  department of finance demonstrating that the
  requirements   of   subdivision   nine   of   section    four    hundred
  eighty-nine-dddd  of  this  title  have been met. Such evidence shall be
  presented in the form and manner and at  the  time  prescribed  by  such
  department.  The  burden  of  proof shall be on the recipient to show by
  clear and convincing evidence that such requirements have been met.
Conversion of property. 1. Any recipient whose property is
  the subject of a certificate of eligibility for commercial or renovation
  construction  work,  and  who,  prior  to  the expiration of the benefit
  period, uses such property as industrial  property,  shall  continue  to
  receive  benefits  for commercial or renovation construction work as the
  case may be.
    2. Any recipient whose property is the subject  of  a  certificate  of
  eligibility  for  industrial  construction  work,  and who, prior to the
  expiration of the benefit  period,  uses  such  property  as  commercial
  property,  shall cease to be eligible for further exemption or abatement
  for industrial construction work as of  the  last  date  to  which  such
  recipient proves by clear and convincing evidence that such property was
  used  as  industrial property, and shall pay with interest any taxes for
  which an exemption or abatement was  claimed  after  such  date,  except
  that:
    (a)  a  recipient  of  a  certificate  of  eligibility  for industrial
  construction work in a  special  exemption  area  who  would  have  been
  eligible   to  receive  a  certificate  of  eligibility  for  commercial
  construction work at the time such recipient applied for benefits  shall
  continue to receive an exemption for industrial construction; and
    (b)  a  recipient  of  a  certificate  of  eligibility  for industrial
  construction work in a  regular  exemption  area  who  would  have  been
  eligible   to  receive  a  certificate  of  eligibility  for  commercial
  construction work at the time such recipient applied for benefits shall,
  commencing with the  date  of  conversion  to  commercial  property  and
  continuing  until  the  expiration  of the benefit period for commercial
  construction work, receive any exemption which such recipient would have
  received in the corresponding tax year  pursuant  to  a  certificate  of
  eligibility for commercial construction work; and
    (c)  a  recipient  of  a  certificate  of  eligibility  for industrial
  construction work in any area of the city on  whose  property  at  least
  sixty-five  per centum of the net square footage continues to be used or
  held out for  use  for  manufacturing  activities  after  conversion  to
  commercial  property, shall not be required to pay the pro rata share of
  tax for which an exemption was claimed during the tax year in which such
  conversion occurred.
    3. Except as  provided  in  subdivision  four  of  this  section,  any
  recipient  whose property is the subject of a certificate of eligibility
  for commercial, industrial or renovation construction work, and who uses
  such property as residential property or  for  any  restricted  activity
  prior  to  the  expiration  of  the  benefit  period,  shall cease to be
  eligible for further exemption, abatement or deferral  as  of  the  date
  such  property  was  first  used  as  residential  property  or  for any
  restricted activity. In the  case  of  property  in  an  area  that  was
  designated  as  an  exemption  area  at  the  time  the  certificate  of
  eligibility was issued, such recipient shall pay with interest any taxes
  for which an exemption was claimed after such date,  including  the  pro
  rata  share  of  tax  for which any exemption was claimed during the tax
  year in which such use occurred. In the  case  of  industrial  property,
  such  recipient shall pay with interest any taxes for which an exemption
  or abatement was claimed after such date, including the pro  rata  share
  of  tax  for which any exemption or abatement was claimed during the tax
  year in which such use occurred. In the case of property in an area that
  was designated as a  deferral  area  at  the  time  the  certificate  of
  eligibility  was issued, all deferred tax payments on the property shall
  become due and payable immediately.
    4. Notwithstanding subdivision three of this  section,  any  recipient
  whose  property  is  the  subject  of  a  certificate of eligibility for

  commercial or renovation construction work with  an  effective  date  of
  July  first, nineteen hundred ninety-two or after, and who, prior to the
  expiration of the benefit period, uses a portion  of  such  property  as
  residential  property,  shall cease to be eligible for further exemption
  for commercial or renovation construction work for that portion of  such
  property used as residential property as of the date such portion of the
  property  was  first  used as residential property. Such recipient shall
  pay, with interest, any taxes for which an exemption was  claimed  after
  such  date  attributable  to  that  portion  of  the  property  used  as
  residential property, including the pro rata share of tax for which such
  exemption was claimed during the tax year in which  such  use  occurred.
  Such  recipient shall continue to receive an exemption for commercial or
  renovation construction work for that  portion  of  the  property  which
  continues to be used as commercial property.
Administration of the benefit program. 1. The department
  of finance of any city enacting a local law  pursuant  to  section  four
  hundred  eighty-nine-bbbb  of  this title shall have, in addition to any
  other functions, powers and duties which have been or may  be  conferred
  on it by law, the following functions, powers and duties:
    (a)  To  publicize the availability of benefits pursuant to this title
  for industrial, commercial and renovation construction work.
    (b)  To  receive  and  review   applications   for   certificates   of
  eligibility,  issue  such  certificates  where  authorized  pursuant  to
  section four hundred eighty-nine-eeee of  this  title,  and  record  the
  issuance of such certificates as prescribed in such section.
    (c)  To  receive  evidence  of expenditures made for construction, and
  where such expenditures do not equal the amount required to qualify  for
  exemption  from  or  abatement  or  deferral  of  tax  payments  to take
  appropriate action, including but  not  limited  to  denying,  reducing,
  suspending, terminating or revoking benefits pursuant to this title.
    (d)  To  enter  and  inspect  property  to  determine  whether  it  is
  industrial or commercial or mixed-use and to determine whether  (i)  any
  such property is being used for any restricted use, or (ii) any property
  which  is  the  subject  of  a certificate of eligibility for industrial
  construction work is being used as commercial  property,  or  (iii)  any
  industrial  or  commercial  property  is  being  used  as residential or
  mixed-use property, or (iv) all or part of the nonresidential portion of
  mixed-use property is being used as residential property.
    (e) To collect all real property taxes for which payment  is  deferred
  pursuant to this title.
    (f)  To  collect all real property taxes, with interest, due and owing
  as a result of reduction, suspension, termination or revocation  of  any
  exemption  from  or  abatement  or deferral of taxes granted pursuant to
  this title.
    (g) To make and promulgate regulations to carry out  the  purposes  of
  this  title,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  regulations  requiring
  applicants  to  publish   notice   of   their   applications,   defining
  manufacturing  and  commercial  activities  and specifying the nature of
  work for  which  expenses  may  be  included  in  the  minimum  required
  expenditure,  provided,  however,  that  any  regulation  increasing the
  minimum required expenditure shall not apply to  any  person  who  is  a
  recipient  on  the  effective  date of such regulation. Such regulations
  shall include a requirement that with respect to the  construction  work
  recipients  and  their  contractors shall be equal opportunity employers
  and may also provide that persons  employed  in  the  construction  work
  shall  implement  a  training  program  for  economically  disadvantaged
  persons enrolled  or  eligible  to  be  enrolled  in  training  programs
  approved by the department of labor.
Code violations; suspension or termination of benefits. A
  local law enacted pursuant to  this  title  may  provide  that  benefits
  pursuant to this title shall be suspended or terminated if the recipient
  is  found  to have failed to cure violations of the applicable building,
  fire, or air pollution control  codes  on  the  property  which  is  the
  subject  of  the certificate of eligibility. Such local law shall define
  the circumstances under which benefits may be suspended or  revoked  for
  such   violations  and  provide  procedures  whereby  determinations  to
  suspend, terminate or reinstate such benefits shall be made.
Tax  lien;  interest  rate.  1.  All taxes plus interest
  required  to  be  paid  retroactively  pursuant  to  this  title   shall
  constitute  a  tax  lien  as of the date it is determined such taxes and
  interest are owed.  All interest shall be calculated from the  date  the
  taxes  would  have been due but for the exemption, abatement or deferral
  claimed pursuant to this title at three per centum above the  applicable
  rate  of interest imposed by such city generally for non-payment of real
  property tax on such date.
    2. All taxes for which payment is deferred pursuant  to  section  four
  hundred eighty-nine bbbb of this title shall constitute a tax lien as of
  the  date  they are due and payable in accordance with the provisions of
  that section.
Penalties  for  non-compliance,  false  statements  and
  omissions. 1. The department  of  finance  may  deny,  reduce,  suspend,
  revoke  or  terminate any exemption from or abatement or deferral of tax
  payments pursuant to this title whenever (a) a recipient fails to comply
  with the requirements of this title or  the  rules  promulgated  by  the
  department   of   finance  pursuant  thereto;  or  (b)  an  application,
  certificate, report or other  document  delivered  by  an  applicant  or
  recipient  hereunder  contains  a  false or misleading statement as to a
  material fact or omits to state any material fact necessary in order  to
  make the statements therein not false or misleading, and may declare any
  applicant  or  recipient who makes such false or misleading statement or
  omission to be ineligible for future exemption,  abatement  or  deferral
  pursuant to this title for the same or other property.
    2. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, a recipient shall be
  personally  liable  for  any  taxes owed pursuant to this title whenever
  such recipient fails to comply with such law and  rules  or  makes  such
  false or misleading statement or omission, and the department of finance
  determines  that such act was due to the recipient's willful neglect, or
  that under the  circumstances  such  act  constituted  a  fraud  on  the
  department  of  finance or a buyer or prospective buyer of the property.
  The remedy provided herein  for  an  action  in  personam  shall  be  in
  addition  to  any  other  remedy  or  procedure  for  the enforcement of
  collection of delinquent taxes provided by any general, special or local
  law. Any lease provision which obligates a tenant  to  pay  taxes  which
  become  due  because  of  willful  neglect or fraud by the recipient, or
  otherwise relieve or indemnify the recipient from any personal liability
  arising hereunder, shall be void as against public policy  except  where
  the  imposition  of  such taxes or liability is occasioned by actions of
  the tenant in violation of the lease.
Participation  of  minority  and  women-owned  business
  enterprises. A city enacting a local law  pursuant  to  this  title  may
  provide for a program to ensure meaningful participation of minority and
  woman-owned  business  enterprises  in  construction  work  for which an
  applicant receives  benefits.  Such  program  may  be  established,  and
  amended from time to time, by local law, or by rule of the department of
  finance not inconsistent with any such local law.

Definitions.  When used in this title:
    1.  "Aggregate  floor  area"  means  the sum of the gross areas of the
  several floors of a building or structure, measured  from  the  exterior
  faces of exterior walls or from the center lines of walls separating two
  buildings or structures.
    2.  "Applicant"  means any person obligated to pay real property taxes
  on the property for which an exemption from real  property  taxes  under
  this title is sought or in the case of exempt property, the record owner
  or lessee thereof.
    3.  "Approved  plans"  means  plans  submitted  to and approved by the
  department of buildings  in  connection  with  an  applicant's  building
  permit,  including  any  amendments  to  such  plans  approved  by  such
  department before final inspection of the work for which such permit was
  issued.
    4. "Benefit period" means the period  of  time  when  a  recipient  is
  eligible to receive benefits pursuant to this title.
    5.  "Certificate  of  eligibility"  means  the  document issued by the
  department of finance pursuant to section four hundred eighty-nine-ddddd
  of this title.
    6.   "Commercial   construction   work"   means   the   modernization,
  rehabilitation,  expansion  or  other  improvement  of  the  portion  of
  mixed-use property to be used for commercial purposes.
    7. "Commercial purpose or use" means the buying, selling or  otherwise
  providing  of  goods  or  services,  including  hotel services, or other
  lawful  business  or  commercial  activities  permitted   in   mixed-use
  property.
    8.  "Exemption  base."  For  the  purpose  of  computing the exemption
  pursuant to  section  four  hundred  eighty-nine-bbbbb  of  this  title,
  "exemption  base"  shall  mean:  (a) for the first through fifth taxable
  years following the effective date of a certificate of eligibility,  the
  assessed  value  of  improvements  made since the effective date of such
  certificate  which   are   attributable   exclusively   to   residential
  construction  work or a combination of residential construction work and
  commercial construction work described in approved plans;  and  (b)  for
  all other years, the assessed value of such improvements which have been
  made  before  the sixth taxable status date following the effective date
  of such certificate.
    9. "Initial assessed value"  means  the  lesser  of  (a)  the  taxable
  assessed  value  of  real  property appearing on the books of the annual
  record of the assessed valuation of real property on the effective  date
  of a recipient's certificate of eligibility or (b) the assessed value to
  which  such  assessment is thereafter reduced pursuant to application to
  the tax commission or court order.
    10. "Minimum required expenditure" means expenditure  for  residential
  construction  work or a combination of residential construction work and
  commercial construction work in an amount equal to twenty per centum  of
  the initial assessed value; provided, however, that if the department of
  finance,  after  consultation  with  the  deputy  mayor  for finance and
  economic development, determines that a greater expenditure is  required
  to  encourage  significant  development  of  mixed-use  property, it may
  establish by rule a higher percentage of initial assessed value, not  to
  exceed fifty per centum thereof, as the minimum required expenditure.
    11.  "Mixed-use  property"  means  property on which will exist, after
  completion  of  residential  construction  work  or  a  combination   of
  residential  construction  work  and  commercial  construction  work,  a
  building or structure used for both residential and commercial purposes,
  provided that after completion of  such  construction  work,  more  than
  twenty-five  per  centum of the aggregate floor area of such building or

  structure is used or held out for use as commercial, community  facility
  or accessory use space.
    12.  "Mixed-use  construction exemption area" means any area of a city
  having a population of one million or more persons, in which, subject to
  the applicable law governing zoning in such city, mixed-use property  is
  permitted,  provided,  however, that in the city of New York, subject to
  the applicable law governing zoning in such city, mixed-use construction
  exemption area shall mean: the area in the borough of Manhattan  bounded
  by  Murray  Street  on  the  north  starting at the intersection of West
  Street and Murray Street; running easterly  along  the  center  line  of
  Murray Street; connecting through City Hall Park with the center line of
  Frankfort  Street  and  running  easterly  along  the  center  lines  of
  Frankfort and Dover Streets to the  intersection  of  Dover  Street  and
  South Street; running southerly along the center line of South Street to
  Peter  Minuit Plaza; connecting through Peter Minuit Plaza to the center
  line of State Street and running northwesterly along the center line  of
  State  Street  to  the  intersection  of State Street and Battery Place;
  running  westerly  along  the  center  line  of  Battery  Place  to  the
  intersection  of  Battery  Place  and West Street; and running northerly
  along the center line of West Street to the intersection of West  Street
  and Murray Street.
    13.  "Person"  means  an  individual,  corporation,  limited liability
  company, partnership, association, agency,  trust,  estate,  foreign  or
  domestic government or subdivision thereof, or other entity.
    14.   "Recipient"   means  an  applicant  to  whom  a  certificate  of
  eligibility has been issued pursuant to this title, or the successor  in
  interest of such applicant, provided that where a person who has entered
  into  a  lease  or purchase agreement with the owner or lessee of exempt
  property has been a  co-applicant,  such  person  or  the  successor  in
  interest of such person shall be the recipient.
    15. "Residential construction work" means the creation, modernization,
  rehabilitation,  expansion or other improvement of dwelling units, other
  than dwelling units in a hotel, in the portion of mixed-use property  to
  be used for residential purposes.
    16.  "Restricted  activity" means any entertainment activity which the
  department of finance has identified in rules as an activity  which,  in
  the  public  interest,  should not be encouraged through the benefits of
  this title.
 Real  property tax exemption.   1. Within the mixed-use
  construction exemption area specified in subdivision twelve  of  section
  489-aaaaa  of  this  title, the following benefits shall be available to
  qualified recipients:  A recipient who, following the effective date  of
  a  certificate  of  eligibility,  has performed residential construction
  work or both residential construction work and  commercial  construction
  work  on mixed-use property shall be eligible for an exemption from real
  property taxes as follows: For the first eight tax years, the  recipient
  shall be exempt from taxation on one hundred per centum of the exemption
  base. During the ninth year, the recipient shall be exempt from taxation
  on  eighty  per centum of the exemption base; during the tenth year, the
  recipient shall be exempt from taxation  on  sixty  per  centum  of  the
  exemption  base; during the eleventh year, the recipient shall be exempt
  from taxation on forty per centum of the exemption base; and during  the
  twelfth  year, the recipient shall be exempt from taxation on twenty per
  centum of the exemption base.
    The following table shall illustrate the computation of the  exemption
  pursuant to this subdivision:
 
  Tax year following effective
  date of certificate of
  eligibility:                        Amount of exemption:
 
         1 through 8                  100% of exemption base
         9                            80% of exemption base
        10                            60% of exemption base
        11                            40% of exemption base
        12                            20% of exemption base
 
    2.  Notwithstanding  subdivision  one of this section, a recipient who
  has  performed  residential  construction  work  or   both   residential
  construction work and commercial construction work on mixed-use property
  that,  in  accordance  with  procedures  set  forth  in  local  law, was
  designated as a landmark before the  date  by  which  the  recipient  is
  required  to complete the minimum required expenditure shall be eligible
  for an exemption from real property taxes as follows: For the first nine
  tax years, the recipient shall be exempt from taxation  on  one  hundred
  per  centum  of the exemption base. During the tenth year, the recipient
  shall be exempt from taxation on eighty  per  centum  of  the  exemption
  base;  during  the  eleventh  year,  the  recipient shall be exempt from
  taxation on sixty per centum of the exemption base; during  the  twelfth
  year, the recipient shall be exempt from taxation on forty per centum of
  the  exemption base; and during the thirteenth year, the recipient shall
  be exempt from taxation on twenty per centum of the exemption base.
    The following table shall illustrate the computation of the  exemption
  pursuant to this subdivision:
 
  Tax year following effective
  date of certificate of
  eligibility:                        Amount of exemption:
 
         1 through 9                  100% of exemption base
        10                             80% of exemption base
        11                             60% of exemption base
        12                             40% of exemption base
        13                             20% of exemption base

Eligibility  for  benefits.    1.  A  recipient  of  a
  certificate of  eligibility  with  an  effective  date  of  July  first,
  nineteen  hundred  ninety-five  or  after must make one-half the minimum
  required expenditure within eighteen months of  the  effective  date  of
  such  certificate,  and  make  the  minimum  required expenditure within
  thirty-six months of the  effective  date  of  such  certificate  to  be
  eligible  to receive the benefits of this title. Any recipient who shall
  fail to make such expenditures shall cease to be eligible  for  benefits
  pursuant to this title and shall pay, with interest, any taxes for which
  an exemption was claimed pursuant to this title.
    2.   No   benefits  pursuant  to  this  title  shall  be  granted  for
  construction work on any condominium unit  unless  such  unit  is  in  a
  building  or  structure  which,  if  viewed as a whole and as if it were
  under single ownership,  would  qualify  as  mixed-use  property.    The
  minimum   required   expenditure   applicable  to  any  recipient  of  a
  certificate of eligibility for construction work on a  condominium  unit
  shall  be equal to the minimum required expenditure which would apply if
  a certificate of eligibility were issued for construction  work  on  the
  entire  property where such unit is located. Nothing in this subdivision
  shall be construed to prevent owners of condominium units  in  the  same
  property from forming an association to be a recipient.
    3.  No  benefits  pursuant  to  this  title  shall  be granted for any
  construction work unless the applicant filed  an  application  for  such
  benefits on or before the date of issuance of a building permit for such
  work.  The  requirements  of this subdivision may be satisfied where the
  applicant's architect, contractor or other representative authorized  to
  file  the application for such building permit files with the department
  of  finance  on  behalf  of  the  applicant  a  preliminary  application
  containing such information as the department of finance shall prescribe
  by rule.
    4.  No  benefits  pursuant  to  this  title  shall  be granted for any
  construction work on property any part of which is used or is to be used
  for a restricted activity.
    5.  No  benefits  pursuant  to  this  title  shall  be   granted   for
  construction  work  which is the subject of a certificate of eligibility
  issued pursuant to title  two,  title  two-C  or  title  two-D  of  this
  article.
    6.  The  benefits  of  this  title  shall  be  granted exclusively for
  residential    construction  work  or  a  combination   of   residential
  construction work and commercial construction work described in approved
  plans.  The  benefits  of  this  title  shall be granted exclusively for
  residential  construction  work  or   a   combination   of   residential
  construction work and commercial construction work on existing buildings
  or  structures  which,  after completion of such construction work, will
  qualify as mixed-use property. No benefits pursuant to this title  shall
  be granted for construction of a new building or structure.
    7.   Any  tax  lot  which  is  partly  located  inside  the  mixed-use
  construction exemption area shall  be  deemed  to  be  entirely  located
  inside such area.
    8.  No  benefits  pursuant  to  this  title  shall  be granted for any
  residential construction work or combination of residential construction
  work and commercial construction work unless the applicant  shall  file,
  together  with the application, an affidavit setting forth the following
  information:
    (a) a statement that within the seven years immediately preceding  the
  date  of  application  for  a  certificate  of  eligibility, neither the
  applicant, nor any person owning a substantial interest in the  property
  as  defined  in  paragraph  (c)  of  this  subdivision, nor any officer,

  director or general partner of the applicant or such person was  finally
  adjudicated  by  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  to have violated
  section two hundred thirty-five of the real property law or any  section
  of  article  one hundred fifty of the penal law or any similar arson law
  of another jurisdiction with respect to any building, or was an officer,
  director or general partner of a person at  the  time  such  person  was
  finally adjudicated to have violated such law; and
    (b)  a  statement setting forth any pending charges alleging violation
  of section two hundred thirty-five of  the  real  property  law  or  any
  section  of  article  one  hundred fifty of the penal law or any similar
  arson law of another jurisdiction with respect to any  building  by  the
  applicant or any person owning a substantial interest in the property as
  defined  in  paragraph (c) of this subdivision, or any officer, director
  or general partner of the applicant or such person, or  any  person  for
  whom  the  applicant  or  person  owning  a  substantial interest in the
  property is an officer, director or general partner.
    (c) "Substantial interest" as used in this subdivision and subdivision
  nine of this section shall mean ownership and control of an interest  of
  ten per centum or more in a property or any person owning a property.
    9.  (a) If any person described in the statement required by paragraph
  (b) of subdivision eight of  this  section  or  paragraph  (b)  of  this
  subdivision  is finally adjudicated by a court of competent jurisdiction
  to be guilty of any charge listed in such statement, the recipient shall
  cease to be eligible for benefits pursuant to this title and shall  pay,
  with  interest, any taxes for which an exemption was claimed pursuant to
  this title.
    (b) The recipient shall, on the certificate of continuing  use,  state
  whether  any  charges  alleging violation by the recipient or any person
  owning a substantial interest in the property, or any officer,  director
  or  general  partner  of  the  recipient  or person owning a substantial
  interest in the property, or any person for whom the recipient or person
  owning a substantial interest in the property is an officer, director or
  general partner, of section two hundred thirty-five of the real property
  law or any section of article one hundred fifty of the penal law or  any
  similar  arson law of another jurisdiction, are pending. For purposes of
  this paragraph, "substantial interest" shall have the  same  meaning  as
  set forth in paragraph (c) of subdivision eight of this section.
    10. In addition to any other qualifications for exemption from payment
  of taxes set forth in this title, an applicant must be:
    (a)  obligated  to  pay real property tax on the property for which an
  exemption is sought, whether such obligation arises  because  of  record
  ownership  of  such  property, or because the obligation to pay such tax
  has been assumed by contract; or
    (b) the record owner or lessee of property which is exempt  from  real
  property  taxation  who  has  entered into an agreement to sell or lease
  such property to another person. Such person  shall  be  a  co-applicant
  with such owner or lessee.
    11. A co-applicant with a public entity shall be an eligible recipient
  pursuant  to  this  title, provided that for such period as the property
  which is the subject of the certificate of eligibility  is  exempt  from
  real  property  taxation  because  it is owned or controlled by a public
  entity no benefits shall be available to such recipient pursuant to this
  title. Such recipient shall receive benefits pursuant to this title when
  such property ceases to be eligible  for  exemption  pursuant  to  other
  provisions  of law, as follows: the recipient shall, commencing with the
  date such tax exemption ceases, and continuing until the  expiration  of
  the benefit period pursuant to this title, receive the benefits to which

  such  recipient  is  entitled  in the corresponding tax year pursuant to
  this title.
    12.   Notwithstanding   the  provisions  of  any  local  law  for  the
  stabilization of rents in multiple dwellings  or  the  emergency  tenant
  protection act of nineteen seventy-four, the rents of a dwelling unit in
  property  which  is the subject of a certificate of eligibility pursuant
  to this title shall be fully subject to control under  such  local  law,
  unless  exempt  under  such  local  law  from  control  by reason of the
  cooperative or condominium status of the dwelling unit, for  the  entire
  period  for  which  such property is receiving benefits pursuant to this
  title, provided, however, that  for  purposes  of  this  subdivision,  a
  property  receiving  benefits  pursuant to this title whose benefits are
  suspended, terminated or revoked by the department of finance  shall  be
  deemed  to  be  receiving  benefits for the length of time such benefits
  would have been received  if  such  benefits  had  not  been  suspended,
  terminated  or  revoked,  or for the period such local law is in effect,
  whichever is shorter.  Thereafter,  such  rents  shall  continue  to  be
  subject to such control, except that such rents that would not have been
  subject  to such control but for this subdivision, shall be decontrolled
  if the landlord has included in each lease and renewal thereof for  such
  unit  for the tenant in residence at the time of such decontrol a notice
  in at least twelve point type informing such tenant that the unit  shall
  become  subject  to  such  decontrol  upon  the  expiration  of benefits
  pursuant to this title.
Application  for  certificate  of  eligibility.    1.
  Application for a certificate of eligibility pursuant to this title  may
  be  made  on  or  after  July  first,  nineteen  hundred ninety-five and
  continuing until June thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-nine, provided,
  however, that no benefits pursuant to this title shall  be  granted  for
  construction  work  performed pursuant to a building permit issued after
  July thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine. Such application  shall
  state  whether  it is for residential construction work or a combination
  of residential construction work and commercial construction  work,  and
  shall  be filed with the department of finance. In addition to any other
  information required by such department, the application  shall  include
  cost estimates or bids for the proposed construction and an affidavit of
  a   professional  engineer  or  architect  of  the  applicant's  choice,
  certifying that detailed plans  for  the  construction  work  have  been
  submitted  to  the  department of buildings. Such application shall also
  state that the applicant agrees to comply with and be subject  to  rules
  issued  from  time  to  time  by  the  department  of  finance to secure
  compliance with this title and all applicable local, state  and  federal
  laws.  Such application shall also certify that all taxes, water charges
  and sewer rents currently due and owing on the  property  which  is  the
  subject of the application have been paid or are currently being paid in
  timely installments pursuant to written agreement with the department of
  finance or other appropriate agency.
    2.  The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to show by clear and
  convincing evidence that the requirements for granting an exemption from
  payment of taxes  pursuant  to  this  title  have  been  satisfied.  The
  department   of  finance  shall  have  the  authority  to  require  that
  statements in connection with the application shall be made under oath.
    3. The department of finance shall issue a certificate of  eligibility
  upon  determining  that the applicant satisfies the requirements of this
  title. Such  certificate  shall  state  whether  the  benefits  are  for
  residential   construction   work   or   a  combination  of  residential
  construction work and commercial construction work.  The effective  date
  of such certificate shall be the date on which a building permit for the
  construction work is issued by the department of buildings.
Reporting requirement; termination of benefits.  1. Upon
  approval of the department  of  buildings  of  the  plans  submitted  in
  connection  with  the  building permit and any amendments to such plans,
  the recipient shall file with the  department  of  finance  a  narrative
  description   of   such   approved   plans  describing  the  residential
  construction work or combination of residential  construction  work  and
  commercial  construction  work  for  which  the recipient seeks benefits
  pursuant to this title.
    2. For the duration of the benefit period, the  recipient  shall  file
  annually with the department of finance, on or before the taxable status
  date,  a  certificate  of continuing use. Such certificate of continuing
  use shall be on a form prescribed by  the  department  of  finance.  The
  department   of  finance  shall  have  the  authority  to  require  such
  information as it deems necessary to enable it to determine whether  the
  recipient  has  established  continuing  eligibility  for  benefits. The
  department of finance shall have the  authority  to  terminate  benefits
  pursuant  to  this  title  upon  failure  of  the recipient to file such
  certificate by the taxable status date. The burden of proof shall be  on
  the  recipient  to establish continuing eligibility for benefits and the
  department  of  finance  shall  have  the  authority  to  require   that
  statements made in such certificate shall be made under oath.
    3.  A  recipient  shall file an amendment to the latest certificate of
  continuing use prior to (a) converting square  footage  within  property
  which   is  the  subject  of  a  certificate  of  eligibility  from  the
  residential  and  commercial  uses  described  in  such  certificate  of
  continuing  use  where such conversion results in twenty-five per centum
  or less of the aggregate floor area being used or held out  for  use  as
  commercial, community facility or accessory use space; or (b) converting
  any  portion  of  property  which  is  the  subject  of a certificate of
  eligibility to use for any restricted activity.
    4. Not later than eighteen  months  after  the  effective  date  of  a
  certificate  of  eligibility,  with  an  effective  date  of July first,
  nineteen hundred ninety-five  or  after,  the  recipient  shall  present
  evidence  to  the department of finance demonstrating that the recipient
  has made one-half the  minimum  required  expenditure.  Not  later  than
  thirty-six  months  after  the  effective date of such certificate, such
  recipient shall present evidence to such department  demonstrating  that
  the  recipient  has made the minimum required expenditure. Such evidence
  shall be presented in the form and manner prescribed by such department.
  The burden of proof shall be on the  recipient  to  show  by  clear  and
  convincing evidence that the required expenditures have been made.
Reporting requirement; termination of benefits.  1. Upon
  approval of the department  of  buildings  of  the  plans  submitted  in
  connection  with  the  building permit and any amendments to such plans,
  the recipient shall file with the  department  of  finance  a  narrative
  description   of   such   approved   plans  describing  the  residential
  construction work or combination of residential  construction  work  and
  commercial  construction  work  for  which  the recipient seeks benefits
  pursuant to this title.
    2. For the duration of the benefit period, the  recipient  shall  file
  annually with the department of finance, on or before the taxable status
  date,  a  certificate  of continuing use. Such certificate of continuing
  use shall be on a form prescribed by  the  department  of  finance.  The
  department   of  finance  shall  have  the  authority  to  require  such
  information as it deems necessary to enable it to determine whether  the
  recipient  has  established  continuing  eligibility  for  benefits. The
  department of finance shall have the  authority  to  terminate  benefits
  pursuant  to  this  title  upon  failure  of  the recipient to file such
  certificate by the taxable status date. The burden of proof shall be  on
  the  recipient  to establish continuing eligibility for benefits and the
  department  of  finance  shall  have  the  authority  to  require   that
  statements made in such certificate shall be made under oath.
    3.  A  recipient  shall file an amendment to the latest certificate of
  continuing use prior to (a) converting square  footage  within  property
  which   is  the  subject  of  a  certificate  of  eligibility  from  the
  residential  and  commercial  uses  described  in  such  certificate  of
  continuing  use  where such conversion results in twenty-five per centum
  or less of the aggregate floor area being used or held out  for  use  as
  commercial, community facility or accessory use space; or (b) converting
  any  portion  of  property  which  is  the  subject  of a certificate of
  eligibility to use for any restricted activity.
    4. Not later than eighteen  months  after  the  effective  date  of  a
  certificate  of  eligibility,  with  an  effective  date  of July first,
  nineteen hundred ninety-five  or  after,  the  recipient  shall  present
  evidence  to  the department of finance demonstrating that the recipient
  has made one-half the  minimum  required  expenditure.  Not  later  than
  thirty-six  months  after  the  effective date of such certificate, such
  recipient shall present evidence to such department  demonstrating  that
  the  recipient  has made the minimum required expenditure. Such evidence
  shall be presented in the form and manner prescribed by such department.
  The burden of proof shall be on the  recipient  to  show  by  clear  and
  convincing evidence that the required expenditures have been made.
Reporting requirement; termination of benefits.  1. Upon
  approval of the department  of  buildings  of  the  plans  submitted  in
  connection  with  the  building permit and any amendments to such plans,
  the recipient shall file with the  department  of  finance  a  narrative
  description   of   such   approved   plans  describing  the  residential
  construction work or combination of residential  construction  work  and
  commercial  construction  work  for  which  the recipient seeks benefits
  pursuant to this title.
    2. For the duration of the benefit period, the  recipient  shall  file
  annually with the department of finance, on or before the taxable status
  date,  a  certificate  of continuing use. Such certificate of continuing
  use shall be on a form prescribed by  the  department  of  finance.  The
  department   of  finance  shall  have  the  authority  to  require  such
  information as it deems necessary to enable it to determine whether  the
  recipient  has  established  continuing  eligibility  for  benefits. The
  department of finance shall have the  authority  to  terminate  benefits
  pursuant  to  this  title  upon  failure  of  the recipient to file such
  certificate by the taxable status date. The burden of proof shall be  on
  the  recipient  to establish continuing eligibility for benefits and the
  department  of  finance  shall  have  the  authority  to  require   that
  statements made in such certificate shall be made under oath.
    3.  A  recipient  shall file an amendment to the latest certificate of
  continuing use prior to (a) converting square  footage  within  property
  which   is  the  subject  of  a  certificate  of  eligibility  from  the
  residential  and  commercial  uses  described  in  such  certificate  of
  continuing  use  where such conversion results in twenty-five per centum
  or less of the aggregate floor area being used or held out  for  use  as
  commercial, community facility or accessory use space; or (b) converting
  any  portion  of  property  which  is  the  subject  of a certificate of
  eligibility to use for any restricted activity.
    4. Not later than eighteen  months  after  the  effective  date  of  a
  certificate  of  eligibility,  with  an  effective  date  of July first,
  nineteen hundred ninety-five  or  after,  the  recipient  shall  present
  evidence  to  the department of finance demonstrating that the recipient
  has made one-half the  minimum  required  expenditure.  Not  later  than
  thirty-six  months  after  the  effective date of such certificate, such
  recipient shall present evidence to such department  demonstrating  that
  the  recipient  has made the minimum required expenditure. Such evidence
  shall be presented in the form and manner prescribed by such department.
  The burden of proof shall be on the  recipient  to  show  by  clear  and
  convincing evidence that the required expenditures have been made.
Conversion of property.  1. Any recipient whose property
  is the subject of a certificate of eligibility pursuant to  this  title,
  and   who   converts  square  footage  within  such  property  from  the
  residential and commercial uses authorized pursuant to this title  where
  such  conversion  results  in  twenty-five  per  centum  or  less of the
  aggregate floor area of such property being used or held out for use  as
  commercial, community facility or accessory use space, shall cease to be
  eligible  for  further  exemption  as  of  the  last  date to which such
  recipient proves  by  clear  and  convincing  evidence  that  more  than
  twenty-five  per centum of the aggregate floor area of such property was
  used or held out for use as commercial, community facility or  accessory
  use  space,  and  shall  pay,  with  interest,  any  taxes  for which an
  exemption was claimed after such date, including the pro rata  share  of
  tax  for  which  any  exemption was claimed during the tax year in which
  twenty-five per centum or less of  the  aggregate  floor  area  of  such
  property  was used or held out for use as commercial, community facility
  or accessory use space.
    2. Any recipient whose property is the subject  of  a  certificate  of
  eligibility  pursuant  to this title, and who uses such property, or any
  portion of such property, for  any  restricted  activity  prior  to  the
  expiration of the benefit period, shall cease to be eligible for further
  exemption  as  of  the last date to which such recipient proves by clear
  and convincing evidence that such  property,  or  any  portion  of  such
  property,  was  not  used  for any restricted activity.   Such recipient
  shall pay, with interest, any taxes for which an exemption  was  claimed
  after  such  date,  including  the  pro  rata share of tax for which any
  exemption was claimed during the tax year in which such use occurred.
Administration of the benefit program.  The department of
  finance  of  any city having a population of one million or more persons
  shall have, in addition to any other functions, powers and duties  which
  have  been  or  may  be conferred on it by law, the following functions,
  powers and duties:
    1. to publicize the availability of benefits pursuant  to  this  title
  for  residential  construction  work  or  a  combination  of residential
  construction work and commercial construction work;
    2. to receive and review applications for certificates of  eligibility
  and  issue  such  certificates where authorized pursuant to section four
  hundred eighty-nine-ddddd of this title;
    3. to receive evidence of  expenditures  made  for  construction,  and
  where  such expenditures do not equal the amount required to qualify for
  exemption from tax payments, to take appropriate action, including,  but
  not limited to, revoking benefits pursuant to this title;
    4.  to enter and inspect property to determine whether it is mixed-use
  and to take appropriate action, including, but not limited to,  revoking
  benefits  received  pursuant to this title, whenever (a) twenty-five per
  centum or less of the aggregate floor area of  such  property  is  being
  used  or held out for use as commercial, community facility or accessory
  use space, or (b) such property, or any portion  of  such  property,  is
  being used for a restricted activity;
    5. to collect all real property taxes, with interest, due and owing as
  a  result  of  reduction,  suspension,  termination or revocation of any
  exemption from taxes granted pursuant to this title;
    6. to make and promulgate rules to carry  out  the  purposes  of  this
  title,  including,  but  not  limited  to, rules requiring applicants to
  publish notice of their applications, further defining  aggregate  floor
  area,  commercial  purpose  or  use  and  residential  purpose  or  use,
  specifying the nature of work for which expenses may be included in  the
  minimum   required   expenditure,   increasing   the   minimum  required
  expenditure, provided, however, that any  rule  increasing  the  minimum
  required expenditure shall not apply to any person who is a recipient on
  the  effective  date  of such rule. Such rules may provide that benefits
  pursuant to this  title  shall  be  reduced,  suspended,  terminated  or
  revoked  if  the recipient is found to have failed to cure violations of
  the applicable building, fire, or air pollution  control  codes  on  the
  property  which  is the subject of the certificate of eligibility.  Such
  rules shall  define  the  circumstances  under  which  benefits  may  be
  reduced,  suspended,  terminated  or  revoked  for  such  violations and
  provide procedures whereby determinations to reduce, suspend, terminate,
  revoke or reinstate such benefits shall be made. Such rules may  provide
  for  reasonable  administrative  charges  or  fees  necessary  to defray
  expenses in administering the benefit program provided by this title;
    7. if, during the benefit period, any real property tax  or  water  or
  sewer  charges  due  and  payable  with respect to property receiving an
  exemption pursuant to this title shall remain unpaid for  at  least  one
  year  following  the  date  upon which such tax or charge became due and
  payable, all exemptions granted pursuant to this title with  respect  to
  such  property  shall  be  revoked  unless  within  thirty days from the
  mailing  of  a  notice  of  revocation  by  the  department  of  finance
  satisfactory  proof  is  presented to the department of finance that any
  and all delinquent taxes and charges owing with respect to such property
  as of the date of such notice have been paid in full  or  are  currently
  being  paid  in timely installments pursuant to a written agreement with
  the department of finance or other appropriate  agency.  Any  revocation
  pursuant  to  this  subdivision  shall be effective with respect to real
  property tax which became due and payable following  the  date  of  such
  revocation.
Tax  lien;  interest  rate.    All  taxes plus interest
  required  to  be  paid  retroactively  pursuant  to  this  title   shall
  constitute  a  tax  lien  as of the date it is determined such taxes and
  interest are owed. All interest shall be calculated from  the  date  the
  taxes would have been due but for the exemption claimed pursuant to this
  title  at three per centum above the applicable rate of interest imposed
  by such city generally for non-payment of real property tax with respect
  to such property for the period in question.
Penalties  for  non-compliance,  false  statements  and
  omissions.   1. The department of finance  may  deny,  reduce,  suspend,
  terminate  or  revoke  any  exemption from tax payments pursuant to this
  title whenever (a) a recipient fails to comply with the requirements  of
  this  title  or  the rules promulgated hereunder; or (b) an application,
  certificate or other document submitted by  an  applicant  or  recipient
  pursuant  to  the  requirements  of  this title or the rules promulgated
  hereunder contains a false or misleading statement as to a material fact
  or omits to state any material fact  necessary  in  order  to  make  the
  statements  therein  not  false or misleading. The department of finance
  may declare any applicant or recipient referred to in paragraph  (a)  or
  (b)  of  this subdivision to be ineligible for future exemption pursuant
  to this title for the same or other property.
    2. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, a recipient shall be
  personally liable for any taxes owed pursuant  to  this  title  whenever
  such  recipient fails to comply with this title or the rules promulgated
  hereunder or makes such false or misleading statement or  omission,  and
  the  department  of  finance  determines  that  such  act was due to the
  recipient's willful neglect, or that under the  circumstances  such  act
  constituted  a  fraud  on  the  department  of  finance  or  a  buyer or
  prospective buyer of the property. The remedy  provided  herein  for  an
  action in personam shall be in addition to any other remedy or procedure
  for  the  enforcement  of collection of delinquent taxes provided by any
  general, special or local law. Any lease  provision  which  obligates  a
  tenant to pay taxes which become due because of willful neglect or fraud
  by  the  recipient,  or  otherwise relieves or indemnifies the recipient
  from any personal liability arising hereunder, shall be void as  against
  public  policy except where the imposition of such taxes or liability is
  occasioned by actions of the tenant in violation of the lease.

Definitions. When used in this title:
    1.  "Commercial  construction  work"  means  the construction of a new
  building or structure or the modernization, rehabilitation, expansion or
  improvement of an existing building or structure for use  as  commercial
  property.
    2. "Commercial exclusion area" means an area as defined in subdivision
  four of section four hundred eighty-nine-gggggg of this title.
    3.  "Commercial  property" means nonresidential property on which will
  exist after completion of commercial construction  work  a  building  or
  structure, or portion thereof, used for the buying, selling or otherwise
  providing  of  goods  or services including hotel services, or for other
  lawful business, commercial or manufacturing activities;  provided  that
  property or portions of property dedicated to utility property shall not
  be considered commercial property for purposes of this title.
    4. "Commissioner" means the commissioner of finance of a city that has
  enacted a local law pursuant to this title.
    5. "Completion of construction," or "completion," when relating to new
  construction,  means  the earlier of the date on which the department of
  buildings of a city that has enacted a local law pursuant to this  title
  issues  a  final  certificate  of  occupancy,  or when the department of
  finance has otherwise determined that construction is complete.
    6. "Department" means the department of finance of  a  city  that  has
  enacted a local law pursuant to this title.
    7.  "Industrial  construction  work"  means  the construction of a new
  building or structure or the modernization, rehabilitation, expansion or
  improvement of an existing building or structure for use  as  industrial
  property.
    8.  "Industrial  property" means nonresidential property on which will
  exist after completion of industrial construction  work  a  building  or
  structure, or portion thereof, with at least seventy-five percent of the
  total  net  square footage of the property used or immediately available
  and held out for manufacturing activities involving assembling goods  or
  the  fabrication  or processing of raw materials; provided that property
  or portions of property dedicated  to  utility  property  shall  not  be
  considered industrial property for purposes of this title.
    9.  "Manufacturing  activity" means an activity involving the assembly
  of goods or the fabrication or processing of raw  materials,  but  shall
  not  include: (a) such activity when conducted for the purpose of retail
  sale on the premises; or (b) utility services.
    10. "Minimum required expenditure" means the amount that an  applicant
  must  expend  on construction work for a project in order to qualify for
  benefits as provided in this title.
    11. "Mixed-use property" means property on which exists, or will exist
  upon completion of construction work, a building or structure  used  for
  both residential and nonresidential purposes.
    12.   "Renovation   construction   work"   means   the  modernization,
  rehabilitation, expansion or improvement  of  an  existing  building  or
  structure   where   such  modernization,  rehabilitation,  expansion  or
  improvement is physically and functionally integrated with the  existing
  building or structure, or portion thereof, does not increase the bulk of
  the existing building or structure by more than thirty percent, and does
  not  increase  the  height of the existing building or structure by more
  than thirty percent.
    13.  "Residential   construction   work"   means   any   construction,
  modernization,  rehabilitation,  expansion  or  improvement  of dwelling
  units other than dwelling units in a hotel.
    14. "Restricted activity" means any entertainment  activity  that  the
  department  has  identified in rules promulgated pursuant to a local law

  enacted pursuant to this title as  an  activity  which,  in  the  public
  interest, should not be encouraged through the benefits of this title.
    15.  "Retail  purposes" means any activity that consists predominately
  of (a) the final sale of tangible personal property  or  services  by  a
  vendor  as defined in section eleven hundred one of the tax law, (b) the
  sale of services that generally involve  the  physical,  mental,  and/or
  spiritual  care  of  individuals  or  the  physical care of the personal
  property of individuals, (c) retail banking services, or (d)  the  final
  sale  of  food  and/or beverage by a vendor as defined in section eleven
  hundred one of the  tax  law,  including  the  assembly,  processing  or
  packaging  of  goods,  provided  that  sales  of  such tangible personal
  property or services are  predominantly  to  purchasers  who  personally
  visit  the  facilities at which such sales are made or such property and
  services are provided. "Retail purposes" shall not include hotel uses as
  described in subdivision four of section four hundred eighty-nine-cccccc
  of this title.
    16. "Temporary commercial incentive area boundary commission" means  a
  commission as defined in section four hundred eighty-nine-gggggg of this
  title.
    17.  "Utility  property"  means property and equipment as described in
  paragraphs (c), (d), (e), (f) and (i) of subdivision twelve  of  section
  one  hundred  two of this chapter that is used in the ordinary course of
  business by its owner or any other entity or property  as  described  in
  paragraphs  (a) and (b) of subdivision twelve of section one hundred two
  of this chapter that is owned by any entity that uses  in  the  ordinary
  course  of  business  property  and equipment as described in paragraphs
  (c), (d), (e), (f) and (i) of subdivision twelve of section one  hundred
  two  of  this  chapter,  without  regard  to  the classification of such
  property and equipment  for  real  property  tax  purposes  pursuant  to
  section  eighteen  hundred  two  of  this  chapter, except that any such
  property and equipment used solely to serve the building to  which  they
  are  attached  shall not be deemed utility property. Notwithstanding any
  provision of this title to the contrary,  peaking  units  shall  not  be
  considered  utility property. For purposes of this title, "peaking unit"
  shall mean a generating unit that: (a) is determined  by  the  New  York
  independent  system  operator  or  a  federal  or  New York state energy
  regulatory commission to constitute a  peaking  unit  as  set  forth  in
  section  5.14.1.2  of  the New York independent system operator's market
  administration and control area services tariff, as such term existed as
  of April first, two thousand  eleven;  or  (b)  has  an  annual  average
  operation,  during  the calendar year preceding the taxable status date,
  of less than eighteen hours  following  each  start  of  the  unit;  for
  purposes of calculating the annual average, operations during any period
  covered  by  any  major  emergency  declaration  issued  by the New York
  independent system operator, northeast power  coordinating  council,  or
  other  similar  entity  shall  be  excluded. A "peaking unit" under this
  title shall include all  real  property  used  in  connection  with  the
  generation  of  electricity, and any facilities used to interconnect the
  peaking unit with the electric transmission or distribution system,  but
  shall  not  include  any  facilities  that  are  part  of  the  electric
  transmission or distribution system; it may be  comprised  of  a  single
  turbine and generator or multiple turbines and generators located at the
  same  site. Notwithstanding any provision of this title to the contrary,
  a peaking unit shall be considered industrial property, provided however
  that the benefit period for a peaking unit shall  be  as  set  forth  in
  paragraph   (b-1)   of   subdivision   three  of  section  four  hundred
  eighty-nine-bbbbbb of this title.

Power to enact local law; industrial and commercial real
  property tax abatement. 1. Authority to enact local law. Any city having
  a   population  of  one  million  or  more,  acting  through  its  local
  legislative  body,  is  authorized  and  empowered  to  determine   that
  incentives in the form of abatement of real property taxes are necessary
  to  encourage  industrial and commercial development in such city and to
  enact a local law providing that such benefits shall be provided in  the
  manner set forth in this title.
    2. Amount of abatement base. (a) Calculation of abatement base. Except
  as  provided  in paragraph (e) of subdivision three of this section, the
  abatement base used to determine the amount of  the  abatement  provided
  under this title shall be the amount by which the post-completion tax on
  a  building  or  structure  exceeds  one  hundred fifteen percent of the
  initial tax levied on a building or structure.
    (b) Initial tax on building or structure. (i) Determination of initial
  tax. The initial tax  shall  be  determined  by  multiplying  the  final
  taxable  assessed  value, without regard to any exemptions, shown on the
  assessment roll with a taxable status  date  immediately  preceding  the
  issuance  of  the  first  building  permit  by the initial tax rate. For
  purposes of this subdivision, the initial tax rate shall  be  the  final
  tax  rate  applicable  to the assessment roll with a taxable status date
  immediately preceding the issuance of the first building permit.  If  no
  permit  was  required, the initial tax and the initial tax rate shall be
  determined based on the assessment  roll  with  a  taxable  status  date
  immediately preceding the commencement of construction.
    (ii)  Effect  of tax lot apportionment or merger. For a property as to
  which an applicant has applied for benefits pursuant to this  title,  if
  such  property is apportioned or merged and such apportionment or merger
  is not reflected in the assessment roll described in subparagraph (i) of
  this paragraph, the initial tax for the newly created tax  lot  or  lots
  shall  be  based  on  the initial tax of the lot or lots from which they
  have been created, which shall be apportioned among  the  newly  created
  tax lot or lots in the manner established by the department for purposes
  of assessed valuation of real property.
    (c)  Post-completion  tax  on  building  or structure. For purposes of
  calculating  the  abatement  base  only,  the  post-completion  tax   is
  determined  by  multiplying  the  initial  tax rate by the final taxable
  assessed value, without regard to any exemptions, that would be shown on
  the assessment roll but for the abatement, on the assessment roll with a
  taxable status date immediately following the earlier of:
    (i) completion of construction; or
    (ii) four years from the  date  of  issuance  of  the  first  building
  permit, or if no permit was required, the commencement of construction.
    (d)  (i)  If  the  taxable  assessed value is later reduced by a court
  order or application to the tax commission, then the initial tax or  the
  post-completion tax shall be the tax as reduced.
    (ii)  The  taxable  assessed  value  used for the calculations in this
  subdivision shall be the lower of the actual and transitional  value  as
  provided  in  subdivision three of section eighteen hundred five of this
  chapter.
    (e) Mixed-use property. For a mixed-use property, the initial tax  and
  post-completion  tax  shall  be  apportioned between the residential and
  nonresidential  portions.  The  department  may  promulgate   rules   to
  determine the method of apportionment.
    (f)  Initial  taxes not to be reduced by abatement. Except as provided
  in paragraph (e) of subdivision three of  this  section,  the  abatement
  provided  under  this  title  shall not be applicable in any year of the
  benefit period to the initial tax or to the tax on the  portion  of  the

  assessment  attributable  to land. Additionally, the abatement shall not
  result in any credit or refund of real property taxes.
    3.  Industrial and commercial abatements. (a) Abatement for commercial
  construction  work.  Upon  approval  by  the  department  of   a   final
  application  for  benefits,  an  applicant  who has performed commercial
  construction work outside of a special  commercial  abatement  area,  as
  designated   pursuant   to  subdivision  two  of  section  four  hundred
  eighty-nine-gggggg of this title, or a renovation area,  as  defined  by
  subdivision  three  of  section  four hundred eighty-nine-gggggg of this
  title, shall be eligible for an abatement of  real  property  taxes,  as
  follows:
    (i)  Amount of abatement. The first year of the abatement shall be the
  tax year with the first taxable status date that follows the  sooner  of
  (A)  completion  of  construction;  or  (B) four years from the date the
  first building permit was issued, or if  no  permit  was  required,  the
  commencement   of  construction.  For  years  one  through  eleven,  the
  abatement shall be the amount of the abatement base.  For  years  twelve
  through  fifteen,  the  abatement  shall decrease by twenty percent each
  year. The following table illustrates the abatement computation:
  Tax year during benefit period:        Amount of abatement:
    Years 1 through 11                  100% of abatement base
         12                              80% of abatement base
         13                              60% of abatement base
         14                              40% of abatement base
         15                              20% of abatement base
    (ii) Minimum required expenditure. For commercial  construction  work,
  the  minimum  required  expenditure  is thirty percent of the property's
  taxable assessed value in the  tax  year  with  a  taxable  status  date
  immediately  preceding  the issuance of the first building permit, or if
  no permit was required, the commencement of  construction.  Expenditures
  for  residential  construction  work or construction work on portions of
  property to be used for restricted activities shall not be  included  in
  the minimum required expenditure.
    (b)   Abatement   for   industrial  construction  work  or  commercial
  construction work in special commercial  abatement  areas  on  buildings
  where not more than ten percent of the building or structure is used for
  retail  purposes. Upon approval by the department of a final application
  for benefits, an applicant who  has  performed  industrial  construction
  work  in  any  area,  where not more than ten percent of the building or
  structure on which such work has  been  performed  is  used  for  retail
  purposes,  or  commercial  construction  work  in  a  special commercial
  abatement area, as designated pursuant to  subdivision  two  of  section
  four  hundred  eighty-nine-gggggg of this title, where not more than ten
  percent of the building  or  structure  on  which  such  work  has  been
  performed  is  used  for  retail  purposes,  shall  be  eligible  for an
  abatement of real property taxes, as follows:
    (i) Amount of abatement. The first year of the abatement shall be  the
  tax  year  with the first taxable status date that follows the sooner of
  (A) completion of construction; or (B) four  years  from  the  date  the
  first  building  permit  was  issued,  or if no permit was required, the
  commencement  of  construction.  For  years  one  through  sixteen,  the
  abatement shall be the amount of the abatement base. The abatement shall
  be adjusted for inflation protection as provided in subparagraph (ii) of
  this  paragraph.  For years seventeen through twenty-five, the abatement
  shall decrease by ten percent each year. The following table illustrates
  the abatement computation:
  Tax year during benefit period:       Amount of abatement:
    Years 1 through 16                  100% of abatement base

         17                              90% of abatement base
         18                              80% of abatement base
         19                              70% of abatement base
         20                              60% of abatement base
         21                              50% of abatement base
         22                              40% of abatement base
         23                              30% of abatement base
         24                              20% of abatement base
         25                              10% of abatement base
    (ii)  Inflation  protection.  (A)  Industrial  construction  work. (I)
  Effect of assessed valuation increases. For years two  through  thirteen
  of  the  benefit period, except as provided in item (II) of this clause,
  if there is any increase in tax  in  that  year  that  is  based  on  an
  increase  of  taxable assessed valuation since the immediately prior tax
  year, such excess tax liability shall be added  to  the  amount  of  the
  abatement base.  Such addition to the amount of the abatement base shall
  be determined using the initial tax rate.
    (II) Physical increases. Notwithstanding the provisions of item (I) of
  this  clause,  if  in  any  of years two through thirteen of the benefit
  period, a physical change to the property results in an increase in  the
  taxable  assessed  value  of  the property of more than five percent for
  that year, then any increase in taxes for that year shall not  be  added
  to the amount of the abatement base in any year.
    (III)  If  the  taxable assessed value upon which an adjustment to the
  abatement under this paragraph is based is  later  reduced  by  a  court
  order  or  application  to  the  tax  commission,  then  the appropriate
  adjustment to the abatement base shall be made in  accordance  with  the
  reduced taxable assessed value.
    (B) Commercial construction work in special commercial abatement areas
  on  buildings  where  not  more  than  ten  percent  of  the building or
  structure is used for retail purposes. (I) Effect of assessed  valuation
  increases.  For years two through thirteen of the benefit period, except
  as provided in item (II) of this clause, if there is any increase in tax
  in that year that is based on an increase of taxable assessed  valuation
  since  the  immediately  prior  tax year that exceeds five percent, such
  excess tax liability shall be added to the amount of the abatement base.
  Such addition to the amount of the abatement base  shall  be  determined
  using the initial tax rate.
    (II) Physical increases. Notwithstanding the provisions of item (I) of
  this  clause,  if  in  any  of years two through thirteen of the benefit
  period, a physical change to the property results in an increase in  the
  taxable  assessed  value  of  the property of more than five percent for
  that year, then any increase in taxes for that year shall not  be  added
  to the amount of the abatement base in any year.
    (III)  If  the  taxable assessed value upon which an adjustment to the
  abatement under this paragraph is based is  later  reduced  by  a  court
  order  or  application  to  the  tax  commission,  then  the appropriate
  adjustment to the abatement base shall be made in  accordance  with  the
  reduced taxable assessed value.
    (C)  Mixed-use property. For a property as to which benefits are given
  for  both  industrial  and  commercial   construction,   the   inflation
  protection  provided  under  this  subparagraph  shall  be  based on the
  predominant use of the property as determined by the department.
    (iii) Minimum required expenditure. For industrial  construction  work
  or  commercial construction work in a special commercial abatement area,
  the minimum required expenditure is thirty  percent  of  the  property's
  taxable  assessed  value  in  the  tax  year  with a taxable status date
  immediately preceding the issuance of the first building permit,  or  if

  no  permit  was required, the commencement of construction. Expenditures
  for residential construction work or construction work  on  portions  of
  property  to  be used for restricted activities shall not be included in
  the minimum required expenditure.
    (b-1)  Abatement  for  industrial construction work on a peaking unit.
  Upon approval by the department of a final application for benefits,  an
  applicant  who has performed industrial construction work in any area on
  a peaking unit, shall be eligible for  an  abatement  of  real  property
  taxes, as follows:
    (i)  Amount of abatement. The first year of the abatement shall be the
  tax year with the first taxable status date that follows the  sooner  of
  (A)  completion  of  construction;  or  (B) four years from the date the
  first building permit was issued, or if  no  permit  was  required,  the
  commencement  of  construction.  For  years  one  through  fifteen,  the
  abatement shall be the amount of the abatement base. The abatement shall
  be adjusted for inflation protection as provided in subparagraph (ii) of
  this  paragraph.  The  following   table   illustrates   the   abatement
  computation:
  Tax year during benefit period:         Amount of abatement:
  Years 1 through 15                      100% of abatement base
    (ii) Inflation protection. (A) Industrial construction work, effect of
  assessed  valuation  increases.  For  years  two through thirteen of the
  benefit period, except as provided in clause (B) of  this  subparagraph,
  if  there  is  any  increase  in  tax  in  that year that is based on an
  increase of taxable assessed valuation since the immediately  prior  tax
  year,  such  excess  tax  liability  shall be added to the amount of the
  abatement base. Such addition to the amount of the abatement base  shall
  be determined using the initial tax rate.
    (B)  Physical  increases. Notwithstanding the provisions of clause (A)
  of this subparagraph, if in any of years two  through  thirteen  of  the
  benefit period, a physical change to the property results in an increase
  in  the taxable assessed value of the property of more than five percent
  for that year, then any increase in taxes for that  year  shall  not  be
  added to the amount of the abatement base in any year.
    (C)  If  the  taxable  assessed  value upon which an adjustment to the
  abatement under this paragraph is based is  later  reduced  by  a  court
  order  or  application  to  the  tax  commission,  then  the appropriate
  adjustment to the abatement base shall be made in  accordance  with  the
  reduced taxable assessed value.
    (iii)  Minimum  required expenditure. For industrial construction work
  on a peaking unit, the minimum required expenditure is thirty percent of
  the property's taxable assessed value in the tax  year  with  a  taxable
  status  date  immediately  preceding  the issuance of the first building
  permit, or if no permit was required, the commencement of  construction.
  Expenditures  for  residential construction work or construction work on
  portions of property to be used for restricted activities shall  not  be
  included in the minimum required expenditure.
    (c)   Abatement   for   industrial  construction  work  or  commercial
  construction work in special commercial  abatement  areas  on  buildings
  where  more  than  ten  percent of the building or structure is used for
  retail purposes. Upon approval by the department of a final  application
  for  benefits,  an  applicant  who has performed industrial construction
  work in any area, where  more  than  ten  percent  of  the  building  or
  structure  on  which  such  work  has  been performed is used for retail
  purposes, or  commercial  construction  work  in  a  special  commercial
  abatement  area,  as  designated  pursuant to subdivision two of section
  four hundred eighty-nine-gggggg of  this  title,  where  more  than  ten
  percent  of  the  building  or  structure  on  which  such work has been

  performed is  used  for  retail  purposes,  shall  be  eligible  for  an
  abatement  of  real  property  taxes  on  the non-retail portion of such
  building or structure  and  up  to  ten  percent  of  such  building  or
  structure  used for retail purposes, in accordance with paragraph (b) of
  this subdivision, and  shall  be  eligible  for  an  abatement  of  real
  property  taxes  on  the  remaining  retail  portion of such building or
  structure, as follows:
    (i) Amount of abatement. The first year of the abatement shall be  the
  tax  year  with the first taxable status date that follows the sooner of
  (A) completion of construction; or (B) four  years  from  the  date  the
  first  building  permit  was  issued,  or if no permit was required, the
  commencement  of  construction.  For  years  one  through  eleven,   the
  abatement  shall  be  the amount of the abatement base. For years twelve
  through fifteen, the abatement shall decrease  by  twenty  percent  each
  year.  The  abatement  shall  be  adjusted  for  inflation protection as
  provided in subparagraph (ii) of this  paragraph.  The  following  table
  illustrates the abatement computation:
  Tax year during benefit period:       Amount of abatement:
    Years 1 through 11                  100% of abatement base
         12                              80% of abatement base
         13                              60% of abatement base
         14                              40% of abatement base
         15                              20% of abatement base
    (ii)  Inflation  protection.  (A)  Industrial  construction  work. (I)
  Effect of assessed valuation increases. For years two  through  thirteen
  of  the  benefit period, except as provided in item (II) of this clause,
  if there is any increase in tax  in  that  year  that  is  based  on  an
  increase  of  taxable assessed valuation since the immediately prior tax
  year, such excess tax liability shall be added  to  the  amount  of  the
  abatement  base.   Such addition to the amount of the abatement shall be
  determined using the initial tax rate.
    (II) Physical increases. Notwithstanding the provisions of item (I) of
  this clause, if in any of years two  through  thirteen  of  the  benefit
  period,  a physical change to the property results in an increase in the
  taxable assessed value of the property of more  than  five  percent  for
  that  year,  then any increase in taxes for that year shall not be added
  to the amount of the abatement base in any year.
    (III) If the taxable assessed value upon which an  adjustment  to  the
  abatement  under  this  paragraph  is  based is later reduced by a court
  order or  application  to  the  tax  commission,  then  the  appropriate
  adjustment  to  the  abatement base shall be made in accordance with the
  reduced taxable assessed value.
    (B) Commercial construction work in special commercial abatement areas
  on buildings where more than ten percent of the building or structure is
  used for retail purposes. (I) Effect of  assessed  valuation  increases.
  For years two through thirteen of the benefit period, except as provided
  in  item  (II)  of  this clause, if there is any increase in tax in that
  year that is based on an increase of taxable  assessed  valuation  since
  the  immediately  prior  tax year that exceeds five percent, such excess
  tax liability shall be added to the amount of the abatement  base.  Such
  addition  to  the amount of the abatement base shall be determined using
  the initial tax rate.
    (II) Physical increases. Notwithstanding the provisions of item (I) of
  this clause, if in any of years two  through  thirteen  of  the  benefit
  period,  a physical change to the property results in an increase in the
  taxable assessed value of the property of more  than  five  percent  for
  that  year,  then any increase in taxes for that year shall not be added
  to the amount of the abatement base in any year.

    (III) If the taxable assessed value upon which an  adjustment  to  the
  abatement  under  this  paragraph  is  based is later reduced by a court
  order or  application  to  the  tax  commission,  then  the  appropriate
  adjustment  to  the  abatement base shall be made in accordance with the
  reduced taxable assessed value.
    (C)  Mixed-use property. For a property as to which benefits are given
  for  both  industrial  and  commercial   construction,   the   inflation
  protection  provided  under  this  subparagraph  shall  be  based on the
  predominant use of the property as determined by the department.
    (iii) Minimum required expenditure. For industrial  construction  work
  or  commercial construction work in a special commercial abatement area,
  the minimum required expenditure is thirty  percent  of  the  property's
  taxable  assessed  value  in  the  tax  year  with a taxable status date
  immediately preceding the issuance of the first building permit,  or  if
  no  permit  was required, the commencement of construction. Expenditures
  for residential construction work or construction work  on  portions  of
  property  to  be used for restricted activities shall not be included in
  the minimum required expenditure.
    (d) Abatement for renovation construction work  in  renovation  areas.
  Subject  to the provisions of subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, upon
  approval by the department of  a  final  application  for  benefits,  an
  applicant who has performed renovation construction work in a renovation
  area,   as   defined  by  subdivision  three  of  section  four  hundred
  eighty-nine-gggggg of this title, shall be eligible for an abatement  of
  real property taxes, as follows:
    (i)   Amount  of  abatement.  For  the  renovation  areas  defined  in
  paragraphs (a) and (b) of subdivision  three  of  section  four  hundred
  eighty-nine-gggggg  of this title, the first year of the abatement shall
  be the tax year with the first taxable  status  date  that  follows  the
  sooner  of  (A)  completion  of construction; or (B) four years from the
  date the first building permit was issued, or if no permit was required,
  the commencement of construction.  For  years  one  through  eight,  the
  abatement  shall  be  the  amount  of the abatement base. For years nine
  through twelve, the abatement shall  decrease  by  twenty  percent  each
  year. The following table illustrates the abatement computation:
  Tax year during benefit period:       Amount of abatement:
    Years 1 through 8                   100% of abatement base
          9                              80% of abatement base
         10                              60% of abatement base
         11                              40% of abatement base
         12                              20% of abatement base
    (ii) Amount of abatement. For the renovation area defined in paragraph
  (c)  of  subdivision three of section four hundred eighty-nine-gggggg of
  this title, the first year of the abatement shall be the tax  year  with
  the  first taxable status date that follows the sooner of (A) completion
  of construction; or (B) four years from  the  date  the  first  building
  permit  was  issued,  or  if no permit was required, the commencement of
  construction. For years one through five, the  abatement  shall  be  the
  amount  of the abatement base. For years six through nine, the abatement
  shall decrease by twenty percent each year. In year ten,  the  abatement
  shall  be  twenty  percent  of  the  abatement base. The following table
  illustrates the abatement computation:
  Tax year during benefit period:       Amount of abatement:
    Years 1 through 5                   100% of abatement base
          6                              80% of abatement base
          7                              60% of abatement base
          8                              40% of abatement base
          9                              20% of abatement base

         10                              20% of abatement base
    (iii)  If  more  than  five  percent of any building or structure upon
  which renovation construction work  is  performed  is  used  for  retail
  purposes,  no abatement shall be granted for the retail portions of such
  building or structure in excess of five percent,  but  five  percent  of
  such  building  or  structure used for retail purposes shall be eligible
  for an abatement of real property taxes in accordance with  subparagraph
  (i)  or  subparagraph  (ii)  of this paragraph, as applicable; provided,
  however, that notwithstanding any other provision  of  this  title,  any
  building  or  structure  located  in  the  renovation  area  defined  in
  paragraph  (a)  of   subdivision   three   of   section   four   hundred
  eighty-nine-gggggg  of  this title shall be eligible for an abatement in
  accordance with subparagraph (i) of this  paragraph  regardless  of  the
  amount of the building or structure used for retail purposes.
    (iv) Minimum required expenditure. For renovation construction work in
  renovation  areas, the minimum required expenditure is thirty percent of
  the property's taxable assessed value in the tax  year  with  a  taxable
  status  date  immediately  preceding  the issuance of the first building
  permit, or if no permit was required, the commencement of  construction.
  Expenditures  for  construction  work  on portions of the property to be
  used for retail purposes that exceed five percent  of  the  building  or
  structure  in  renovation  areas  defined  in  paragraphs (b) and (c) of
  subdivision three of section four  hundred  eighty-nine-gggggg  of  this
  title,  for  residential  construction work, or for construction work on
  portions of the property to be used for restricted activities, shall not
  be included in the minimum required expenditure.
    (e) Additional industrial abatement. In addition to the abatement  for
  industrial   construction   work  provided  in  paragraph  (b)  of  this
  subdivision, an applicant who performs industrial construction work that
  meets the eligibility requirements set forth  in  this  title  shall  be
  eligible  for an additional abatement, calculated as a percentage of the
  initial tax, as follows:
    (i) Amount of abatement. The first year of the abatement shall be  the
  tax  year  with the first taxable status date that follows the sooner of
  (A) completion of construction; or (B) four  years  from  the  date  the
  first  building  permit  was  issued,  or if no permit was required, the
  commencement of construction. The amount of  the  additional  industrial
  abatement shall be as follows:
  Tax year during benefit period:       Amount of additional abatement:
    1 through 4                          50% of the initial tax amount
         5                               40% of the initial tax amount
         6                               40% of the initial tax amount
         7                               30% of the initial tax amount
         8                               30% of the initial tax amount
         9                               20% of the initial tax amount
        10                               20% of the initial tax amount
        11                               10% of the initial tax amount
        12                               10% of the initial tax amount
    (ii)  Minimum  required  expenditure.  For  the  additional industrial
  abatement, the minimum required expenditure  is  forty  percent  of  the
  property's  taxable assessed value in the tax year with a taxable status
  date immediately preceding the issuance of the first building permit, or
  if  no  permit  was  required,   the   commencement   of   construction.
  Expenditures  for  residential construction work or construction work on
  portions of property to be used for restricted activities shall  not  be
  included in the minimum required expenditure.
    (f)  Abatement for commercial construction work on new construction in
  certain areas of the borough of  Manhattan.  Notwithstanding  any  other

  provision of law, upon approval by the department of a final application
  for  benefits,  an  applicant  who has performed commercial construction
  work on a new  building  or  structure,  in  the  geographical  area  as
  specified  in subparagraph (iv) of this paragraph, shall be eligible for
  an abatement of real property taxes, as follows:
    (i) Amount of abatement. The first year of the abatement shall be  the
  tax  year  with the first taxable status date that follows the sooner of
  (A) completion of construction; or (B) four  years  from  the  date  the
  first  building  permit  was  issued,  or if no permit was required, the
  commencement of construction. For years one through four, the  abatement
  shall be the amount of the abatement base. For years five through eight,
  the  abatement shall decrease by twenty percent each year. The following
  table illustrates the abatement computation:
  Tax year during benefit period:       Amount of abatement:
    Years 1 through 4                   100% of abatement base
          5                              80% of abatement base
          6                              60% of abatement base
          7                              40% of abatement base
          8                              20% of abatement base
    (ii) Minimum required expenditure. The minimum required expenditure is
  thirty percent of the property's taxable assessed value in the tax  year
  with  a  taxable  status  date immediately preceding the issuance of the
  first building permit, or if no permit was required, the commencement of
  construction.  Expenditures  for  residential   construction   work   or
  construction  work  on  portions  of  property to be used for restricted
  activities shall not be included in the minimum required expenditure.
    (iii) Special  eligibility  requirements.  Notwithstanding  any  other
  provision  of  this title, no benefits shall be granted pursuant to this
  paragraph unless the building or structure  meets  the  requirements  of
  clauses (A) and (B) of this subparagraph, and further meets at least two
  of  the  requirements  set  forth  in  clauses  (C)  through (G) of this
  subparagraph:
    (A) The height of at  least  forty  percent  of  the  floors  in  such
  building  or  structure  shall be not less than twelve feet, nine inches
  measured from the top of the slab comprising the floor to the bottom  of
  the slab comprising the ceiling;
    (B)  Such  building  or  structure  shall  be  served  by  fiber-optic
  telecommunications wiring and shall contain  vertical  penetrations  for
  the  distribution  of  fiber optic cabling to individual tenants on each
  floor;
    (C) The total square footage of such building or structure is not less
  than five hundred thousand gross square feet;
    (D) A minimum of two hundred thousand gross square feet or twenty-five
  per centum of such building or structure is comprised of floors  of  not
  less than forty thousand gross square feet;
    (E)  At  least  ten  per  centum  of  the gross square footage of such
  building or structure is comprised of floors that contain no  more  than
  eight  structural  columns,  excluding any columns within the core or on
  the periphery of such building or structure;
    (F) The electrical capacity of such building or structure is not  less
  than six watts per net square foot;
    (G)  Emergency  backup  power  sufficient to accommodate a need of six
  watts per net square foot is available in at least two hundred  thousand
  gross  square  feet  or  twenty-five  per  centum  of  such  building or
  structure.
    (iv) Geographical area.  Abatements  will  only  be  granted  for  new
  construction   work   pursuant   to  this  paragraph  in  the  following
  geographical area: the area in  the  borough  of  Manhattan  bounded  by

  Murray  Street  on the north starting at the intersection of West Street
  and Murray Street; running easterly along  the  center  line  of  Murray
  Street;  connecting  through  City  Hall  Park  with  the center line of
  Frankfort Street and running easterly along the center line of Frankfort
  and  Dover Streets to the intersection of Dover Street and South Street;
  running southerly along the center line of South Street to Peter  Minuit
  Plaza; connecting through Peter Minuit Plaza to the center line of State
  Street  and  running northwesterly along the center line of State Street
  to the intersection of State Street and Battery Place; running  westerly
  along  the  center  line of Battery Place to the intersection of Battery
  Place and West Street; and running northerly along the  center  line  of
  West Street to the intersection of West Street and Murray Street, except
  the  area  in  the  borough of Manhattan bounded by Church Street on the
  east starting at the intersection of Liberty Street and  Church  Street;
  running  northerly  along  the  center  line  of  Church  Street  to the
  intersection of Church Street and Vesey Street; running  westerly  along
  the  center line of Vesey Street to the intersection of Vesey Street and
  West Broadway; running northerly along the center line of West  Broadway
  to  the  intersection  of  West  Broadway  and  Barclay  Street; running
  westerly along the center line of Barclay Street to the intersection  of
  Barclay Street and Washington Street; running southerly along the center
  line  of  Washington Street to the intersection of Washington Street and
  Vesey Street; running westerly along the center line of Vesey Street  to
  the  intersection  of  Vesey  Street  and West Street; running southerly
  along the center line of West Street to the intersection of West  Street
  and  Liberty  Street;  and  running  easterly  along  the center line of
  Liberty Street to the intersection of Liberty Street and Church Street.
    4. Limitations on abatement. (a) Subsequent abatement. With respect to
  any property that has received or is receiving abatement benefits  under
  this  title,  an  applicant shall not file a preliminary application for
  new abatement benefits under this title for an  additional  construction
  project  on the same portion of the property for which construction work
  is the subject of abatement benefits under this  title  until  at  least
  four  years  have  elapsed  since the first day of the first tax year of
  such abatement benefits under the prior abatement,  and,  in  the  event
  that  such  new  benefits  are  granted,  then notwithstanding any other
  provision of this title or any other law, the initial tax for  any  such
  new  abatement  will be determined without regard to the prior abatement
  and any other abatement or exemption granted to the property.
    (b) Abatement benefits granted under this title shall not in any  year
  exceed the real property taxes imposed on such property.
    (c)  Once  an abatement is granted, no additional benefits pursuant to
  this title shall be granted for construction work that is  substantively
  a  part  of  eligible  construction  work  for  which benefits have been
  approved or granted.
    (d) No benefits shall be granted for residential construction work.
    (e) Any parcel partly located in an excluded area shall be  deemed  to
  be entirely located in such area.
    (f)  Where  a  tax  lot contains multiple structures or buildings with
  eligible and non-eligible uses, the initial  tax  shall  be  apportioned
  under   rules   promulgated   by  the  commissioner  and  only  the  tax
  attributable to the eligible portion of the property shall be abated.
    (g) (i) No benefits under this title may be  received  by  a  property
  that  is  concurrently receiving exemption or abatement of real property
  taxes under any other law, except for an  exemption  under  (A)  section
  four   hundred   twenty-a,   four   hundred  twenty-b  or  four  hundred
  fifty-nine-b of this chapter; or (B) any section of this chapter  as  to
  which  a  city  that  has enacted a local law pursuant to this title has

  also enacted a local law to implement such exemption  and  as  to  which
  exemption  is  granted  only  if  the  property  is the primary or legal
  residence of one or more of the owners of the property,  including  such
  sections  in  which  exemption may be granted if an owner is absent from
  the residence while receiving medical benefits; or (C)  title  two-D  of
  this  article  for  a  separate  project involving separate parts of the
  building or structure that was completed prior to  the  application  for
  benefits.
    (ii)  For  purposes  of  this  paragraph,  "property"  means  the real
  property contained by an individual tax lot.
    (iii) Notwithstanding subparagraph (ii) of  this  paragraph,  where  a
  property  is  owned in condominium form, and an application for benefits
  under this title includes more than one tax lot in the same condominium,
  then for purposes of this paragraph, "property" shall include any or all
  such tax lots that are included in the application.

Eligibility  for  benefits.  1. Time limit for meeting
  minimum required  expenditure.  Applicants  must  meet  the  appropriate
  minimum required expenditure as provided in subdivision three of section
  four  hundred eighty-nine-bbbbbb of this title relating to the abatement
  for which such project qualifies as follows:
    (a) No later than four years from the date of issuance  of  the  first
  building  permit,  or  if  no  permit  was required, the commencement of
  construction.
    (b) Mixed use properties. Expenditures for construction  work  related
  to  the  common  areas  and  systems of such property shall be allocated
  under rules promulgated  by  the  department  between  the  residential,
  nonresidential and retail, if any, portions of the property.
    2.   Time  limit  for  completion  of  construction.  Construction  of
  buildings or structures for which benefits have been approved  shall  be
  completed  no  later  than  five  years from the date of issuance of the
  first building permit, or if no permit was required, the commencement of
  construction.    Failure  to  meet  this  requirement  shall  result  in
  termination of any inflation protection provided under subdivision three
  of  section  four  hundred  eighty-nine-bbbbbb of this title for any tax
  year that begins following the date by which completion of  construction
  is required under this paragraph.
    3. Non-permissible uses. To be eligible for benefits, the property may
  not  be  used  for  a non-permissible purpose. Accordingly, no abatement
  benefits under this title shall be granted for work to be  performed  on
  property to be used for the following purposes:
    (a)  Residential.  No  abatement  benefits  under  this title shall be
  granted for construction work for residential purposes, or for work on a
  structure or building where twenty percent or more of the total rentable
  square footage of such property is or will be dedicated  to  residential
  purposes,  provided  however  that  where  less  than  five percent of a
  property's  rentable  square  footage  is  or  will  be   dedicated   to
  residential  purposes, that use shall be considered de minimus and shall
  not be considered in determining benefits under this title.
    (i) For purposes of this paragraph, "property" means the real property
  contained by an individual tax lot.
    (ii) Notwithstanding subparagraph  (i)  of  this  paragraph,  where  a
  building  or  structure is owned in condominium form, and an application
  for benefits under this title includes more than  one  property  in  the
  same  condominium, then for purposes of this paragraph, the five percent
  and twenty percent of the rentable square footage  shall  be  determined
  based on the aggregate usage of all such properties.
    (iii)  Hotel  uses,  as described in subdivision four of this section,
  shall not be considered residential.
    (b) Utility property. No abatement benefits under this title shall  be
  provided for utility property.
    (c)  Restricted  activity. No benefits pursuant to this title shall be
  granted for construction work on property any part of  which  is  to  be
  used for a restricted activity.
    (d) Self-storage facilities. For purposes of this title, "self-storage
  facility"  shall  mean  any  real  property or a portion thereof that is
  designed and  used  for  the  purpose  of  occupying  storage  space  by
  occupants  who are to have access thereto for the purpose of storing and
  removing personal property, pursuant to subdivision one of  section  one
  hundred  eighty-two  of  the  lien  law.  No  benefits  shall be granted
  pursuant to this title for construction work on real property where  any
  portion of such property is to be used as a self-storage facility.
    4. Hotel uses. Benefits shall be available for commercial construction
  work  or renovation construction work on a building or structure for the

  property's square footage used to provide lodging and  support  services
  for   transient   guests,   provided  the  applicant  is  not  otherwise
  disqualified pursuant to paragraph  (c)  of  subdivision  five  of  this
  section,  or  section  four  hundred  eighty-nine-eeeeee or four hundred
  eighty-nine-iiiiii of this title.
    5. Filing requirements. (a) Time to file. (i) Preliminary application.
  (A) Building permit. No benefits pursuant to this title shall be granted
  for any construction work  unless  the  applicant  filed  a  preliminary
  application  for  such benefits on or before the date of issuance of the
  first building permit for such work. This requirement may  be  satisfied
  where  the  applicant's  architect,  contractor  or other representative
  authorized to file the application for such building permit  files  with
  the  department  on  behalf  of  the applicant a preliminary application
  containing such information as the department shall prescribe by rule.
    (B) No building permit required.  Where  construction  work  does  not
  require  a  building  permit,  a  notarized  letter  from  the project's
  architect or engineer notifying the department of  this  fact  shall  be
  filed  within  thirty calendar days of the commencement of construction.
  In such circumstance, such letter shall also satisfy the requirement  of
  a  preliminary application if the letter contains all of the information
  required for a preliminary application under  rules  prescribed  by  the
  department.
    (ii)  Final application. Applicants shall file a final application for
  benefits no later than one year from the date of issuance of  the  first
  building  permit for construction work, or, where construction work does
  not require a building permit, no later than one year from the  date  of
  commencement  of  construction.  Abatement benefits shall not be granted
  until  the  applicant  files  the  final  application.  If   the   final
  application is not filed within such one year period, abatement benefits
  shall not be granted until such application is filed, and the department
  may delay the granting of such benefits, at the department's discretion,
  to investigate the reason for the late filing.
    (iii)  Notwithstanding  any provision of law to the contrary, the time
  limit  to  file  a  final  application  for  benefits  as  specified  in
  subparagraph  (ii)  of  this  paragraph  shall  not  apply  to brand-new
  construction from the ground up located on property purchased  from  the
  city  of  New  York  where  such  property  which is the site of the new
  construction was purchased from the city of New York for the purposes of
  an eligible development pursuant to this article  and  where  the  sales
  agreement  with  the  city  of  New  York  for  such property includes a
  restriction preventing the sale or  transfer  of  such  property  for  a
  period  of  five  years  or  more  and  where  the  first  valuation and
  assessment for the purposes  of  property  taxes  occurred  within  that
  period  of  restriction  from sale, provided the project meets the other
  requirements of this title.
    (b) Who may file for benefits. An applicant shall be:
    (i) obligated to pay real property tax  on  the  property,  either  by
  virtue of ownership or contract; or
    (ii)  the  record owner or lessee of property that is exempt from real
  property taxation who has entered into an agreement  to  sell  or  lease
  such  property to another person. Such applicant shall be a co-applicant
  with such owner or lessee.
    (c) Applicant affidavit. No benefits pursuant to this title  shall  be
  granted  for  any  construction  work  unless  the  applicant  provides,
  together with the final application,  an  affidavit  setting  forth  the
  following information:
    (i)  a statement that within the seven years immediately preceding the
  date of the preliminary application for benefits, neither the applicant,

  nor any person owning a substantial interest in the property as  defined
  in  subparagraph  (iii)  of this paragraph, nor any officer, director or
  general partner of the applicant or such person was finally  adjudicated
  by  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  to  have violated section two
  hundred thirty-five of the real property law or any section  of  article
  one  hundred  fifty of the penal law or any similar arson law of another
  state with  respect  to  any  building,  or  finally  adjudicated  by  a
  competent  authority,  agency,  or  a court of competent jurisdiction to
  have violated any state, city,  or  municipal  business  regulations  or
  ordinances  related to payment of taxes, payment of wages, or fraudulent
  representation to governmental entities, or was an officer, director  or
  general  partner  of  a  person  at  the  time  such  person was finally
  adjudicated to have  violated  such  state,  city,  or  municipal  laws,
  business  regulations,  and  ordinances  related  to  payment  of taxes,
  payment of wages, or fraudulent representation to governmental entities;
  and
    (ii) a statement setting forth any pending charges alleging  violation
  of  section  two  hundred  thirty-five  of  the real property law or any
  section of article one hundred fifty of the penal  law  or  any  similar
  arson  law  of  another  jurisdiction  with  respect to any building and
  pending charges alleging violation of state, city, or municipal business
  regulations or ordinances related to payment of taxes, payment of wages,
  or fraudulent representation to governmental entities by  the  applicant
  or  any  person owning a substantial interest in the property as defined
  in subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, or  any  officer,  director  or
  general partner of the applicant or such person.
    (iii)  "Substantial  interest"  as used in this subdivision shall mean
  ownership and control of an  interest  of  ten  percent  or  more  in  a
  property or any person owning a property.
    (iv) If any person described in the statement required by subparagraph
  (ii)  of  this  paragraph is finally adjudicated by a court of competent
  jurisdiction to be guilty of any charge listed in  such  statement,  the
  recipient shall cease to be eligible for benefits pursuant to this title
  and shall pay with interest any taxes for which an abatement was claimed
  pursuant to this title.
    6.  Requirement  to  file  income  and expense statements. No benefits
  pursuant to this title shall be granted for any property in a city  that
  requires  income and expense statements to be filed for income producing
  property, unless  income  and  expense  statements  are  filed  for  the
  property  with  respect  to the tax year as to which the assessment roll
  described in paragraph (b) of subdivision two of  section  four  hundred
  eighty-nine-bbbbbb  of  this title applies, and all subsequent tax years
  up to and including the tax year on which the assessment roll  described
  in   paragraph   (c)   of   subdivision  two  of  section  four  hundred
  eighty-nine-bbbbbb of this title applies.
    7. Co-application with public entity. A  co-applicant  with  a  public
  entity  may  be  eligible  for abatement benefits, provided that for any
  period for which the property is exempt from real property  tax  because
  it  is  owned  or  controlled  by  a public entity, no benefits shall be
  available to such recipient under this title. Such recipient may receive
  benefits under this title when the property is no longer eligible for an
  exemption as follows: (a) No benefits under this title shall be provided
  during the period of exemption; (b) during such period of exemption, the
  years of the benefit  period  applicable  to  the  project  provided  in
  subdivision  three  of  section  four hundred eighty-nine-bbbbbb of this
  title shall not  be  tolled,  but  shall  run  in  accordance  with  the
  applicable  schedule  provided  therein;  and  (c)  the recipient shall,
  starting with the date the exemption ceases, and  continuing  until  the

  abatement  benefit  period  expires,  receive  the abatement benefits to
  which such recipient is entitled in the tax year that corresponds to the
  year of the benefit period provided in subdivision three of section four
  hundred eighty-nine-bbbbbb of this title.

Applying for benefits. 1. Application.  (a) Application
  for benefits pursuant to this title may be  made  immediately  following
  the  effective  date  of  a local law enacted pursuant to this title and
  continuing until March first, two thousand twenty-five.
    (b) Application content. The preliminary and final applications  shall
  be  in  any  format designated by the commissioner, including electronic
  format. The applications shall require, and  applicants  shall  provide,
  information  and  documentation  sufficient to determine eligibility for
  abatement benefits. The required information and documentation for  both
  applications  shall  be  prescribed  by  the  department  by  rule. Such
  information and documentation may include, but need not be  limited  to,
  certified statements related to the project, project costs, filings with
  other  governmental  entities,  and work performed or to be performed on
  such project. At the department's sole discretion, an applicant  may  be
  required  to  furnish  certified  statements  made  by  the  applicant's
  architect or engineer or both.
    (c) Compliance. The application shall also state  that  the  applicant
  agrees  to  comply  with and be subject to the rules issued from time to
  time by the department to secure compliance with  all  applicable  city,
  state  and  federal  laws  or  which  implement  mayoral  directives and
  executive orders designed to ensure  equal  employment  opportunity.  If
  required  by  local  law  or  rule  as described in section four hundred
  eighty-nine-kkkkkk of this title, such application shall also state that
  the applicant agrees to comply with the program established  thereby  to
  ensure  meaningful  participation  of  minority and women-owned business
  enterprises in  construction  work  for  which  the  applicant  receives
  benefits.
    (d)  Affidavit  of  no  violations. No benefits pursuant to this title
  shall be granted for any construction work unless  the  applicant  shall
  file with the application, the affidavit required under paragraph (c) of
  subdivision  five  of  section  four  hundred eighty-nine-cccccc of this
  title.
    (e) Electronic filing of application. The commissioner may,  by  rule,
  require  any  application  for benefits under this title to be submitted
  electronically  in  such  form  and  manner  as  the  commissioner   may
  determine. For good cause, the commissioner may waive any rule requiring
  electronic  filing  and may permit an application to be filed in another
  manner.
    2.  Fees.  The  department  may  provide  by   rule   for   reasonable
  administrative   charges   or  fees  necessary  to  defray  expenses  in
  administering this benefit program.
    3. (a) No benefits  pursuant  to  this  title  shall  be  granted  for
  construction  work  performed pursuant to a building permit issued after
  April first, two thousand twenty-five.
    (b) If no building permit was required, then no benefits  pursuant  to
  this  title  shall  be  granted  for construction work that is commenced
  after April first, two thousand twenty-five.

Reporting  requirement.  1.  Continuing  use.  For the
  duration of the benefit period, the recipient  of  benefits  shall  file
  biennially  with  the  department,  on or before the appropriate taxable
  status date, a statement of the continuing use of such property and  any
  changes in use that have occurred, provided, however, that any recipient
  of  benefits  receiving  benefits for property defined as a peaking unit
  shall file such statement  biannually.  Such  filings  shall  include  a
  statement  that  the  recipient  has  not  been  found  by  a  competent
  authority, agency or court to have violated state,  city,  or  municipal
  business  regulations or ordinances related to payment of taxes, payment
  of wages, or fraudulent representation to  governmental  entities.  This
  statement  shall be in a form determined by the department and may be in
  any format the department determines, in its discretion, is appropriate,
  including electronic format. The  department  shall  have  authority  to
  terminate  such  benefits  upon  failure  of  a  recipient  to file such
  statement by the appropriate taxable status date. The  burden  of  proof
  shall  be  on  the  recipient  to  establish  continuing eligibility for
  benefits and the department shall have the  authority  to  require  that
  statements filed under this subdivision be certified.
    2.  Conversion of construction. A recipient shall file an amendment to
  the latest statement of continuing use prior to:
    (a) converting square footage within property that is the  subject  of
  benefits for industrial construction work from use for the manufacturing
  activities  described  in  such  statement  of continuing use where such
  conversion would result in less than sixty-five  percent  of  total  net
  square  footage  being  used  or  held  out  for  use  for manufacturing
  activities; or
    (b) converting any portion of property that is the subject of benefits
  for industrial construction work for use for any restricted activity  or
  as residential property.
    (c) For all other use conversions, applicants shall immediately notify
  the  department  of a change in use, in a manner that the department may
  determine.
    3. Minimum required expenditure. No later than sixty  days  after  the
  minimum  required  expenditure  must  be  made  under subdivision one of
  section four hundred eighty-nine-cccccc of  this  title,  the  applicant
  shall  submit to the department a certified statement that the applicant
  has made the minimum required expenditure as required by this title.
    4. Business operation data. A recipient shall biennially file a report
  with the department, on or before the appropriate taxable  status  date,
  regarding  certain  business  operation data relating to the recipient's
  economic impact and outcomes for the duration  of  the  benefit  period,
  provided,  however,  that any recipient of benefits for property defined
  as a peaking unit shall file  such  statement  biannually.  Such  report
  shall  contain  information including, but not limited to, tenancy data,
  information regarding employment creation  and  job  retention  and  any
  other information deemed relevant by the department.

Conversion of property. 1. Conversion from commercial to
  industrial   use.  Where  a  property  has  been  granted  benefits  for
  commercial or renovation construction work, but such property is used as
  industrial property before the benefits period  expires,  such  property
  shall   continue  to  receive  benefits  for  commercial  or  renovation
  construction work.
    2. Conversion from industrial use to commercial use. Where a  property
  has  been  granted benefits for industrial construction work, and where,
  before the benefit period expires, less than seventy-five percent of the
  total net square footage is used or held out for use  for  manufacturing
  activities,  no  further benefits for industrial construction work shall
  be provided except as provided in this subdivision. Taxes, together with
  interest, shall become due and owing after such  date  of  the  use  for
  purposes other than industrial, except as provided in this subdivision.
    (a)  Any  applicant  whose  property  has been granted a tax abatement
  under  this  title  for  industrial  construction  work  in  a   special
  commercial  abatement  area  who  would  have  been  eligible to receive
  benefits for commercial construction work at  the  time  such  applicant
  applied  for  benefits  shall  continue  to  receive  an  abatement  for
  industrial construction work.
    (b) Any applicant whose property has been granted benefits under  this
  title   for  industrial  construction  work  other  than  in  a  special
  commercial abatement area  who  would  have  been  eligible  to  receive
  benefits  for  commercial  construction  work at the time such applicant
  applied for benefits shall, commencing with the date  of  conversion  to
  commercial  property  and continuing until the expiration of the benefit
  period for commercial construction work,  receive  any  abatement  which
  such  applicant  would  have  received  in  the  corresponding  tax year
  pursuant to the benefits granted for commercial construction work.
    (c) Any applicant whose property has been granted benefits under  this
  title  for industrial construction work in any area of the city on whose
  property at least sixty-five percent of the net square footage continues
  to be used or held  out  for  use  for  manufacturing  activities  after
  conversion  to commercial property, shall not be required to pay the pro
  rata share of tax for which an abatement was claimed during the tax year
  in which such conversion occurred.
    (d)  Where  the  property  is  receiving  the  additional   industrial
  abatement pursuant to paragraph (e) of subdivision three of section four
  hundred  eighty-nine-bbbbbb  of  this  title, such additional industrial
  abatement  shall  cease  from  the  date  of  conversion  to  commercial
  property.
    3. Conversion to restricted use. Any applicant whose property has been
  granted  benefits  for commercial, industrial or renovation construction
  work, and who uses such property for any restricted  activity  prior  to
  the  expiration  of  the  benefit period, shall cease to be eligible for
  further abatement as of the date such property was first  used  for  any
  restricted  activity.  Such  recipient of benefits that cease under this
  subdivision shall pay with interest any taxes for which an abatement was
  claimed after such date, including the pro rata share of tax  for  which
  any  abatement  was  claimed  during  the  tax  year  in  which such use
  occurred.
    4. Conversion to residential use. (a) Any applicant whose property has
  been  granted  benefits  for  commercial,   industrial   or   renovation
  construction  work  and who, before the benefit period expires, uses the
  property or a portion of the property  as  residential  property,  shall
  cease to be eligible for further abatement for commercial, industrial or
  renovation construction work as of the date such property was first used
  as residential property, as follows:

    (i)  if  twenty  percent or more of the rentable square footage of the
  property is used as residential property, then the entire building shall
  cease to be eligible for further abatement;
    (ii) if less than twenty percent of the rentable square footage of the
  property  is  used  as  residential  property, then that portion of such
  property used as residential property shall cease  to  be  eligible  for
  further abatement;
    (iii)  notwithstanding subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, where less
  than five percent of a property's rentable square  footage  is  used  as
  residential  property,  that  use will be considered de minimus and will
  not be a basis for benefits to cease under this subdivision; and
    (iv) such recipient of benefits  that  cease  under  this  subdivision
  shall  pay,  with interest, any taxes for which an abatement was claimed
  after the conversion of the property as described in  this  subdivision,
  including the pro rata share of tax for which such abatement was claimed
  during  the  tax  year  in  which such use occurred. The abatement shall
  continue for the commercial, industrial or renovation construction  work
  for the portion of the property that continues to be used for commercial
  purposes.
    (b)  For  purposes  of  paragraph  (a) of this subdivision, "property"
  means the real property contained by an individual tax lot.
    (c)  Notwithstanding  paragraph  (b)  of  this  subdivision,  where  a
  building  or  structure is owned in condominium form, and an application
  for benefits under this title includes more than  one  property  in  the
  same  condominium,  then  for  purposes  of  this  subdivision, the five
  percent and twenty percent of  the  rentable  square  footage  shall  be
  determined based on the aggregate usage of all such properties.
    5.  Conversion  to  retail  use. (a) Where a property has been granted
  benefits for industrial  or  commercial  construction  work  in  special
  commercial  abatement areas on buildings where not more than ten percent
  of the building or structure is used  for  retail  purposes  and  where,
  before  the benefit period expires, the property or a portion thereof is
  converted so that ten percent or more of the building  or  structure  is
  used for retail purposes, the department shall recalculate the abatement
  upon conversion as provided in subdivision six of this section.
    (b)  Where  a  property  has  been  granted  benefits  for  renovation
  construction work in renovation areas  and  where,  before  the  benefit
  period  expires,  the property or a portion of the property is converted
  so that more than five percent of the building or structure is used  for
  retail  purposes,  the  department  shall recalculate the abatement upon
  conversion as provided in subdivision six of this section.
    5-a. Conversion of use by peaking units. Any applicant whose  property
  has  been  granted benefits under this title for industrial construction
  work as a peaking unit and who converts such property in any tax year to
  a use that no longer qualifies it as a peaking unit, or  who  uses  such
  property in a manner inconsistent with the definition of a peaking unit,
  shall be ineligible for abatement benefits during any such tax year. Any
  such  recipient  of  benefits shall pay with interest taxes for which an
  abatement was claimed during any portion of such tax year.
    6. Recalculation of abatement upon conversion. If, during the  benefit
  period,  a  recipient  converts  square  footage  within any building or
  structure, the department may recalculate the benefit  granted  pursuant
  to  this  title  to  reflect  the  benefit  for which the current use is
  eligible under this title and rules  that  may  be  promulgated  by  the
  department.
    7. The burden shall at all times be on the recipient to demonstrate by
  clear  and  convincing  evidence that property subject to benefits under

  this title is used as stated in the preliminary and  final  applications
  for benefits filed by the recipient with the department.

Conversion of property. 1. Conversion from commercial to
  industrial   use.  Where  a  property  has  been  granted  benefits  for
  commercial or renovation construction work, but such property is used as
  industrial property before the benefits period  expires,  such  property
  shall   continue  to  receive  benefits  for  commercial  or  renovation
  construction work.
    2. Conversion from industrial use to commercial use. Where a  property
  has  been  granted benefits for industrial construction work, and where,
  before the benefit period expires, less than seventy-five percent of the
  total net square footage is used or held out for use  for  manufacturing
  activities,  no  further benefits for industrial construction work shall
  be provided except as provided in this subdivision. Taxes, together with
  interest, shall become due and owing after such  date  of  the  use  for
  purposes other than industrial, except as provided in this subdivision.
    (a)  Any  applicant  whose  property  has been granted a tax abatement
  under  this  title  for  industrial  construction  work  in  a   special
  commercial  abatement  area  who  would  have  been  eligible to receive
  benefits for commercial construction work at  the  time  such  applicant
  applied  for  benefits  shall  continue  to  receive  an  abatement  for
  industrial construction work.
    (b) Any applicant whose property has been granted benefits under  this
  title   for  industrial  construction  work  other  than  in  a  special
  commercial abatement area  who  would  have  been  eligible  to  receive
  benefits  for  commercial  construction  work at the time such applicant
  applied for benefits shall, commencing with the date  of  conversion  to
  commercial  property  and continuing until the expiration of the benefit
  period for commercial construction work,  receive  any  abatement  which
  such  applicant  would  have  received  in  the  corresponding  tax year
  pursuant to the benefits granted for commercial construction work.
    (c) Any applicant whose property has been granted benefits under  this
  title  for industrial construction work in any area of the city on whose
  property at least sixty-five percent of the net square footage continues
  to be used or held  out  for  use  for  manufacturing  activities  after
  conversion  to commercial property, shall not be required to pay the pro
  rata share of tax for which an abatement was claimed during the tax year
  in which such conversion occurred.
    (d)  Where  the  property  is  receiving  the  additional   industrial
  abatement pursuant to paragraph (e) of subdivision three of section four
  hundred  eighty-nine-bbbbbb  of  this  title, such additional industrial
  abatement  shall  cease  from  the  date  of  conversion  to  commercial
  property.
    3. Conversion to restricted use. Any applicant whose property has been
  granted  benefits  for commercial, industrial or renovation construction
  work, and who uses such property for any restricted  activity  prior  to
  the  expiration  of  the  benefit period, shall cease to be eligible for
  further abatement as of the date such property was first  used  for  any
  restricted  activity.  Such  recipient of benefits that cease under this
  subdivision shall pay with interest any taxes for which an abatement was
  claimed after such date, including the pro rata share of tax  for  which
  any  abatement  was  claimed  during  the  tax  year  in  which such use
  occurred.
    4. Conversion to residential use. (a) Any applicant whose property has
  been  granted  benefits  for  commercial,   industrial   or   renovation
  construction  work  and who, before the benefit period expires, uses the
  property or a portion of the property  as  residential  property,  shall
  cease to be eligible for further abatement for commercial, industrial or
  renovation construction work as of the date such property was first used
  as residential property, as follows:

    (i)  if  twenty  percent or more of the rentable square footage of the
  property is used as residential property, then the entire building shall
  cease to be eligible for further abatement;
    (ii) if less than twenty percent of the rentable square footage of the
  property  is  used  as  residential  property, then that portion of such
  property used as residential property shall cease  to  be  eligible  for
  further abatement;
    (iii)  notwithstanding subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, where less
  than five percent of a property's rentable square  footage  is  used  as
  residential  property,  that  use will be considered de minimus and will
  not be a basis for benefits to cease under this subdivision; and
    (iv) such recipient of benefits  that  cease  under  this  subdivision
  shall  pay,  with interest, any taxes for which an abatement was claimed
  after the conversion of the property as described in  this  subdivision,
  including the pro rata share of tax for which such abatement was claimed
  during  the  tax  year  in  which such use occurred. The abatement shall
  continue for the commercial, industrial or renovation construction  work
  for the portion of the property that continues to be used for commercial
  purposes.
    (b)  For  purposes  of  paragraph  (a) of this subdivision, "property"
  means the real property contained by an individual tax lot.
    (c)  Notwithstanding  paragraph  (b)  of  this  subdivision,  where  a
  building  or  structure is owned in condominium form, and an application
  for benefits under this title includes more than  one  property  in  the
  same  condominium,  then  for  purposes  of  this  subdivision, the five
  percent and twenty percent of  the  rentable  square  footage  shall  be
  determined based on the aggregate usage of all such properties.
    5.  Conversion  to  retail  use. (a) Where a property has been granted
  benefits for industrial  or  commercial  construction  work  in  special
  commercial  abatement areas on buildings where not more than ten percent
  of the building or structure is used  for  retail  purposes  and  where,
  before  the benefit period expires, the property or a portion thereof is
  converted so that ten percent or more of the building  or  structure  is
  used for retail purposes, the department shall recalculate the abatement
  upon conversion as provided in subdivision six of this section.
    (b)  Where  a  property  has  been  granted  benefits  for  renovation
  construction work in renovation areas  and  where,  before  the  benefit
  period  expires,  the property or a portion of the property is converted
  so that more than five percent of the building or structure is used  for
  retail  purposes,  the  department  shall recalculate the abatement upon
  conversion as provided in subdivision six of this section.
    5-a. Conversion of use by peaking units. Any applicant whose  property
  has  been  granted benefits under this title for industrial construction
  work as a peaking unit and who converts such property in any tax year to
  a use that no longer qualifies it as a peaking unit, or  who  uses  such
  property in a manner inconsistent with the definition of a peaking unit,
  shall be ineligible for abatement benefits during any such tax year. Any
  such  recipient  of  benefits shall pay with interest taxes for which an
  abatement was claimed during any portion of such tax year.
    6. Recalculation of abatement upon conversion. If, during the  benefit
  period,  a  recipient  converts  square  footage  within any building or
  structure, the department may recalculate the benefit  granted  pursuant
  to  this  title  to  reflect  the  benefit  for which the current use is
  eligible under this title and rules  that  may  be  promulgated  by  the
  department.
    7. The burden shall at all times be on the recipient to demonstrate by
  clear  and  convincing  evidence that property subject to benefits under

  this title is used as stated in the preliminary and  final  applications
  for benefits filed by the recipient with the department.

Temporary commercial incentive area boundary commission;
  designation   of   special  commercial  abatement  areas;  excluded  and
  renovation areas. 1. Commission members. Any city enacting a  local  law
  pursuant  to section four hundred eighty-nine-bbbbbb of this title shall
  establish a temporary commercial incentive area boundary  commission  to
  consist  of  a deputy mayor designated by the mayor, the commissioner of
  finance, the chair of the city  planning  commission,  the  director  of
  management  and  budget, the borough presidents, the speaker of the city
  council and a public member appointed by  the  mayor  to  serve  at  the
  mayor's  pleasure.  Each  member except the public member shall have the
  power to designate an alternate to represent him or  her  at  commission
  meetings to exercise all the rights and powers of such member, including
  the  right to vote, provided that such designation be made in writing to
  the chair of the commission. The deputy mayor designated  by  the  mayor
  shall  serve  as  commission  chair.  Each  borough  president  shall be
  entitled to vote only on the designation of  areas  within  his  or  her
  borough.  Commission  members who shall be officers or employees of such
  city shall serve  without  compensation  but  shall  be  reimbursed  for
  expenses  necessarily  incurred  in the performance of their duties. Any
  other commission member shall receive as exclusive compensation for  his
  or  her  services  one  hundred  dollars per diem, or another reasonable
  amount as determined by  the  deputy  mayor  designated  by  the  mayor,
  provided,  however,  that the total compensation paid to any such member
  shall not exceed twelve  hundred  dollars  for  any  calendar  year,  or
  another  reasonable  amount determined by the deputy mayor designated by
  the mayor. A majority of members of such commission entitled to vote  on
  a  matter  shall  constitute a quorum for such issue. Decisions shall be
  made by majority vote of those present entitled to  vote  on  a  matter.
  Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, no officer or employee of
  the  state  or any of its subdivisions or any public benefit corporation
  shall be deemed to have forfeited his or her office or employment or any
  benefits provided under the retirement and social security law or  under
  any  public  retirement  system  maintained  by  the state or any of its
  subdivisions by reason of accepting membership on such commission.
    2.  Designation  of  special  commercial  abatement  areas.  (a)   The
  commission  shall  meet in two thousand nine or two thousand fifteen and
  at least once every five years thereafter to determine the boundaries of
  special commercial abatement areas  which  it  is  authorized,  but  not
  required, to designate pursuant to this section. The areas designated by
  the  commission  established  pursuant to title two-D of this article in
  effect as of June thirtieth, two thousand eight shall remain  in  effect
  until  the  first  taxable  status date after the local legislative body
  approves a new designation pursuant to paragraph (d) of this subdivision
  or, if the local legislative body does not  approve  a  new  designation
  before  January  first,  two  thousand  sixteen,  then,  for purposes of
  applications for special commercial abatement area benefits,  the  areas
  designated by the commission established pursuant to title two-D of this
  article  in effect as of June thirtieth, two thousand eight shall remain
  in effect until December thirty-first, two thousand fifteen.
    (b) In years  when  special  commercial  abatement  areas  are  to  be
  designated,  no  later  than October first, the commission shall provide
  public notice of such designation by publishing a notice at  least  once
  in  a  newspaper  of  general  circulation  setting  forth  the proposed
  boundaries.  Notice  may  also  be  provided  electronically  or  in  an
  electronic  medium,  such  as  a  website,  in  a  manner the commission
  determines to be appropriate. Notice must be provided not  earlier  than
  five  nor  later  than  fifteen days before the date of the commission's
  public hearing to hear all persons interested in the designation of  the

  areas.  A copy of the notice shall be forwarded to the local legislative
  body and each community board of the city.
    (c)  The  commission shall make such designation, and notify the local
  legislative body of such designation, not later than November  first  of
  each year when special commercial abatement areas are to be designated.
    (d)  Within  thirty  days  after the first stated meeting of the local
  legislative body following the receipt of notice  of  such  designation,
  the  local  legislative  body  may,  by  majority  vote, disapprove such
  designation. If, within such thirty-day period,  the  local  legislative
  body  fails  to  act  or  fails  to  act by the required vote, the local
  legislative body shall be deemed to have approved such designation. Such
  designation shall take effect on the first taxable status date after the
  local legislative body approves such designation  and  shall  remain  in
  effect  until  the first taxable status date after the local legislative
  body approves such new designation.
    (e) In the city of New York, the commission  may  designate  any  area
  other than the area lying south of the center line of 96th Street in the
  borough  of  Manhattan,  to be a special commercial abatement area if it
  determines that  market  conditions  in  the  area  are  such  that  the
  availability  of  a  special abatement is required in order to encourage
  commercial construction work in such area. In making such determination,
  the commission shall consider, among other  factors,  the  existence  in
  such  area  of  a  special need for commercial and job development, high
  unemployment, economic distress or unusually large  numbers  of  vacant,
  underutilized,   unsuitable   or   substandard   structures,   or  other
  substandard, unsanitary, deteriorated or deteriorating conditions,  with
  or without tangible blight.
    (f)  If  the commission fails to meet in two thousand fifteen, all new
  applications for special commercial abatement area  benefits  postmarked
  after  December  thirty-first,  two  thousand  fifteen  shall  be deemed
  applications for regular area benefits.
    3. Renovation areas. In the city of New York, the following  areas  of
  Manhattan shall be designated as renovation areas. Except as provided in
  paragraph   (f)   of   subdivision   three   of   section  four  hundred
  eighty-nine-bbbbbb of this  title,  new  commercial  construction  in  a
  renovation area shall not be eligible for abatement benefits. Renovation
  areas shall be limited to:
    (a)  the  area in the borough of Manhattan bounded by Murray Street on
  the north starting at the intersection of West Street and Murray Street;
  running easterly along the center  line  of  Murray  Street;  connecting
  through  City  Hall  Park  with  the center line of Frankfort Street and
  running easterly along the center line of Frankfort and Dover Streets to
  the intersection of Dover Street and  South  Street;  running  southerly
  along  the center line of South Street to Peter Minuit Plaza; connecting
  through Peter Minuit Plaza to  the  center  line  of  State  Street  and
  running  northwesterly  along  the  center  line  of State Street to the
  intersection of State Street and Battery Place; running  westerly  along
  the  center  line  of Battery Place to the intersection of Battery Place
  and West Street; and running northerly along the  center  line  of  West
  Street to the intersection of West Street and Murray Street;
    (b)  the  area  in  the  borough  of  Manhattan defined as the special
  garment center district by chapter one of  article  XII  of  the  zoning
  resolution of the city of New York; and
    (c)  the  area in the borough of Manhattan south of the center line of
  59th street,  other  than  the  areas  designated  renovation  areas  by
  paragraphs (a) and (b) of this subdivision.
    4.  Commercial  exclusion area. Except as provided in paragraph (f) of
  subdivision three of section four  hundred  eighty-nine-bbbbbb  of  this

  title,  any  area  in the borough of Manhattan lying south of the center
  line of 96th Street, other than the areas designated renovation areas by
  subdivision three of this section, shall be a commercial exclusion area.
  Commercial  construction projects in the commercial exclusion area shall
  not be eligible to receive tax abatements pursuant to this title.
    5.  Eligible  industrial  construction  projects   may   receive   tax
  abatements  pursuant  to  paragraphs (b) and (e) of subdivision three of
  section four hundred eighty-nine-bbbbbb of this title in any area of the
  city of New York.

Administration  of the benefit program. The department
  shall have the following additional functions, powers and duties:
    1. To require that any documents submitted in support of or as part of
  an application be certified;
    2. To audit documents  submitted  by  an  applicant,  to  require  the
  production  of  books, records and documents with respect to information
  relating to any application made pursuant to, or whether  the  applicant
  has complied with, the requirements of this title;
    3.  To revoke or suspend benefits due to non-compliance with a request
  made under this section;
    4. To enter and inspect property to determine a property's use and  to
  determine whether (a) any such property is being used for any restricted
  use, or
    (b)  any  property for which benefits have been granted for industrial
  construction work is being used  as  commercial  property,  or  (c)  any
  industrial  or  commercial  property  is  being  used  as residential or
  mixed-use property, or (d) all or part of the nonresidential portion  of
  mixed-use property is being used as residential property;
    5.  To  make  and promulgate a rule that increases up to fifty percent
  the amount of the  minimum  required  expenditure  required  under  this
  title,  if,  after  consultation  with  the  deputy  mayor  for economic
  development and planning, the commissioner  determines  that  a  greater
  minimum  required  expenditure  is  required  to  encourage  significant
  industrial and commercial development; and
    6. To make and promulgate any other rules to carry out the purposes of
  this title.  Such  rules  shall  provide  that  for  construction  work,
  recipients  of benefits and their contractors shall be equal opportunity
  employers and may also provide that persons employed in the construction
  work shall implement a training program for  economically  disadvantaged
  persons  enrolled  or  eligible  to  be  enrolled  in  training programs
  approved by the department of labor.

Administration  of the benefit program. The department
  shall have the following additional functions, powers and duties:
    1. To require that any documents submitted in support of or as part of
  an application be certified;
    2. To audit documents  submitted  by  an  applicant,  to  require  the
  production  of  books, records and documents with respect to information
  relating to any application made pursuant to, or whether  the  applicant
  has complied with, the requirements of this title;
    3.  To revoke or suspend benefits due to non-compliance with a request
  made under this section;
    4. To enter and inspect property to determine a property's use and  to
  determine whether (a) any such property is being used for any restricted
  use, or
    (b)  any  property for which benefits have been granted for industrial
  construction work is being used  as  commercial  property,  or  (c)  any
  industrial  or  commercial  property  is  being  used  as residential or
  mixed-use property, or (d) all or part of the nonresidential portion  of
  mixed-use property is being used as residential property;
    5.  To  make  and promulgate a rule that increases up to fifty percent
  the amount of the  minimum  required  expenditure  required  under  this
  title,  if,  after  consultation  with  the  deputy  mayor  for economic
  development and planning, the commissioner  determines  that  a  greater
  minimum  required  expenditure  is  required  to  encourage  significant
  industrial and commercial development; and
    6. To make and promulgate any other rules to carry out the purposes of
  this title.  Such  rules  shall  provide  that  for  construction  work,
  recipients  of benefits and their contractors shall be equal opportunity
  employers and may also provide that persons employed in the construction
  work shall implement a training program for  economically  disadvantaged
  persons  enrolled  or  eligible  to  be  enrolled  in  training programs
  approved by the department of labor.

Code violations; suspension, termination or revocation
  of benefits. 1. Abatement benefits shall  be  suspended,  terminated  or
  revoked  if  the recipient is found to have failed to cure violations of
  applicable building,  fire,  or  air  pollution  control  codes  on  the
  property  for  which  benefits  have been granted or any state, city, or
  municipal business regulations or ordinances in a  manner  specified  by
  local law or ordinance related to payment of taxes, payment of wages, or
  fraudulent representation to governmental entities.
    2. Abatement benefits shall be suspended, terminated or revoked if the
  recipient  is found to have violated any provision of article fifteen of
  the executive law by a competent authority, agency or court.
    3. All taxes plus interest required to be paid retroactively  pursuant
  to  this  title  shall  constitute  a  tax  lien  as  of  the date it is
  determined  such  taxes  and  interest  are  owed.  Interest  shall   be
  calculated  from  the  date  the  taxes  would have been due but for the
  abatement claimed pursuant to this title at the interest rate imposed by
  such city for non-payment of property tax.

Penalties  for  non-compliance,  false  statements and
  omissions. Denial, reduction, suspension, termination or revocation. The
  department may deny, reduce, suspend, terminate or revoke any  abatement
  benefits where:
    1.  A recipient fails to comply with the requirements of this title or
  the related rules promulgated by the department; or
    2. An application, certificate, report or other document delivered  by
  an  applicant  or  recipient  hereunder  contains  a false or misleading
  statement as to a material fact or omits  to  state  any  material  fact
  necessary  to  make  the  statements  not  false  or misleading, and may
  declare any applicant or recipient who makes such  false  or  misleading
  statement  or  omission  ineligible  for  future tax abatements for this
  property or another property; or
    3. A recipient is found to have failed to cure any violation of state,
  city, or municipal business regulations or ordinances related to payment
  of taxes, payment of wages, or fraudulent representation to governmental
  entities.

Participation  of  minority  and  women-owned business
  enterprises. A city enacting a local law  pursuant  to  this  title  may
  provide for a program to ensure meaningful participation of minority and
  women-owned  business  enterprises  in  construction  work  for which an
  applicant receives  benefits.  Such  program  may  be  established,  and
  amended  from  time  to time, by local law, or by rule of the department
  not inconsistent with any such local law.

Exemption  from  special  ad  valorem  levies  and  special
  assessments.  Real property exempt from taxation pursuant to subdivision
  two of section four hundred, subdivision one  of  section  four  hundred
  four, subdivision one of section four hundred six, sections four hundred
  eight,  four  hundred  ten, four hundred ten-a, four hundred ten-b, four
  hundred eighteen, four hundred twenty-a,  four  hundred  twenty-b,  four
  hundred  twenty-two, four hundred twenty-six, four hundred twenty-seven,
  four hundred twenty-eight, four hundred thirty, four hundred thirty-two,
  four  hundred  thirty-four,  four  hundred  thirty-six,   four   hundred
  thirty-eight,  four  hundred fifty, four hundred fifty-two, four hundred
  fifty-four,  four  hundred  fifty-six,  four  hundred  sixty-four,  four
  hundred seventy-two, four hundred seventy-four, four hundred eighty-five
  and subdivision ten of section four hundred eighty-seven of this chapter
  shall  also  be  exempt  from  special  ad  valorem  levies  and special
  assessments against real property located outside  cities  and  villages
  for  a  special improvement or service or a special district improvement
  or service and special ad valorem levies and special assessments imposed
  by a county improvement district  or  district  corporation  except  (1)
  those levied to pay for the costs, including interest and incidental and
  preliminary  costs,  of  the  acquisition,  installation,  construction,
  reconstruction  and  enlargement  of  or  additions  to  the   following
  improvements,  including  original  equipment, furnishings, machinery or
  apparatus, and the replacements thereof: water supply  and  distribution
  systems;  sewer  systems  (either  sanitary or surface drainage or both,
  including purification, treatment  or  disposal  plants  or  buildings);
  waterways  and  drainage improvements; street, highway, road and parkway
  improvements   (including   sidewalks,   curbs,    gutters,    drainage,
  landscaping,  grading  or  improving  the  right of way) and (2) special
  assessments  payable  in  installments  on  an  indebtedness   including
  interest  contracted  prior to July first, nineteen hundred fifty-three,
  pursuant to section two hundred forty-two of the town law or pursuant to
  any other comparable provision of law.

Conservation easement agreement exemption; certain towns. 1.
  Applicability. (a) In a town having a population of not less than eleven
  thousand three hundred and not more than eleven thousand  four  hundred,
  that  is  located  in a county having a population of not less then nine
  hundred  fifty  thousand  and  not  more  than  nine  hundred  fifty-one
  thousand,  based  upon  the  latest  decennial federal census, is hereby
  authorized to adopt a local law to provide  that,  real  property  whose
  interests   or  rights  have  been  acquired  for  the  purpose  of  the
  preservation of an open space or an open area, as authorized in  section
  two  hundred  forty-seven of the general municipal law, may be partially
  exempt from local real property taxation, provided  that  the  owner  or
  owners  of  such  real  property  enter  into  a  conservation  easement
  agreement with  the  municipality  in  accordance  with  the  procedures
  specified  in  subdivision  three  of  this  section.  A county having a
  population of not less than nine hundred fifty  thousand  and  not  more
  than  nine  hundred  fifty-one  thousand based upon the latest decennial
  federal census may, by local law, and any school district, all  or  part
  of  which  is  located  in  a  town having a population of not less than
  eleven thousand three hundred and not more  than  eleven  thousand  four
  hundred that is located in a county having a population of not less than
  nine  hundred  fifty  thousand  and not more than nine hundred fifty-one
  thousand, may, by resolution, exempt such property from its taxation  in
  the same manner and to the same extent as such town has done.
    (b)  A town having a population of not less than eleven thousand three
  hundred and not more than eleven thousand four hundred that  is  located
  in  a  county  having  a  population of not less than nine hundred fifty
  thousand and not more than nine hundred fifty-one thousand,  based  upon
  the  latest  decennial  federal census may, by a vote of the town board,
  opt out of this exemption at any time.
    2. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the  following  terms
  shall have the following meanings: "open space" or "open area" means any
  space  or  area characterized by natural scenic beauty or whose existing
  openness, natural condition or present state of use, if retained,  would
  enhance  the present or potential value of abutting or surrounding urban
  development or would maintain or enhance the conservation of natural  or
  scenic   resources.  For  the  purposes  of  this  definition,  "natural
  resources" shall include, but not  be  limited  to,  agricultural  lands
  defined   as   open  lands  actually  used  in  bona  fide  agricultural
  production.
    3. Procedures for obtaining a conservation easement agreement. (a) Any
  owner or owners of land may submit a proposal to the  town  board  of  a
  town  having a population of not less than eleven thousand three hundred
  and not more than eleven thousand four hundred  that  is  located  in  a
  county  having a population of not less than nine hundred fifty thousand
  and not more than nine hundred fifty-one thousand, based upon the latest
  decennial federal census, for the granting of interest or rights in real
  property for the preservation of open  space  or  areas.  Such  proposal
  shall be submitted in such a manner and form as may be prescribed by the
  conservation board of such town.
    (b)  Upon  receipt  of  such proposal, the town board shall convey the
  proposal to the conservation board of such town. Such conservation board
  shall investigate the area to determine if  the  proposal  would  be  of
  benefit  to  the  people  of  the  town  and may negotiate the terms and
  conditions of the offer. If the conservation board determines that it is
  in the public interest to accept such proposal, it  shall  recommend  to
  the  town  board  that  it  hold  a  public  hearing  for the purpose of
  determining whether or not the town should accept such proposal.

    (c) The town board shall,  within  thirty  days  of  receipt  of  such
  advisory  opinion,  hold  a public hearing concerning such proposal at a
  place within the town. At least ten days notice of the time and place of
  such hearing shall be published in a paper  of  general  circulation  in
  such  town,  and a written notice of such proposal shall be given to all
  adjacent property owners and to any municipality  whose  boundaries  are
  within five hundred feet of the boundaries of said proposed area, and to
  the school district in which it is located.
    (d)  The  town  board, after receiving the reports of the conservation
  board of a town having a population of not  less  than  eleven  thousand
  three  hundred  and  not  more than eleven thousand four hundred that is
  located in a county having a population of not less  than  nine  hundred
  fifty  thousand and not more than nine hundred fifty-one thousand, based
  upon the latest decennial federal census, and after such public hearing,
  may adopt the proposal or any modification thereof it deems  appropriate
  or may reject it in its entirety.
    (e)  If  such  proposal  is  adopted  by  the  town board, it shall be
  executed by the owner or owners in written form and in a  form  suitable
  for recording in the county clerk's office.
    (f)  Such  agreement may not be canceled by either party. However, the
  owner or owners thereof may petition the  town  board  for  cancellation
  upon  good  cause  shown, and such cancellation may be granted only upon
  payment of the penalties provided in this section.
    4. Computation. (a) An exemption  granted  pursuant  to  this  section
  shall  commence  as  of  the effective date of the conservation easement
  agreement, and shall terminate upon the  expiration  or  termination  of
  such conservation easement agreement.
    (b)  The  following  table  shall  illustrate  the  computation of the
  exemption:
       Commitment        Percentage of Exemption
       15 to 29 years              50%
       30 to 49 years              75%
       50 to 75 years              85%
       Perpetual                   90%
  Such exemption shall be granted only upon application by  the  owner  or
  owners  of  such real property on a form prescribed by the commissioner.
  Such application shall be filed with the assessor  of  the  town  on  or
  before the taxable status date of such town.
    (c)  If  satisfied  that  the  applicant  is  entitled to an exemption
  pursuant to this section, the assessor shall approve the application and
  such real property shall thereafter be exempt from taxation and  special
  ad  valorem  levies  as  provided  in  this  section commencing with the
  assessment roll prepared on the basis of the taxable  status  date.  The
  assessed  value  of any exemption granted pursuant to this section shall
  be entered by the assessor on  the  assessment  roll  with  the  taxable
  property, with the amount of the exemption shown in a separate column.
    (d)  Whenever  a  conservation  easement encumbers only a portion of a
  parcel, the assessor shall henceforth enter that portion of  the  parcel
  encumbered  by  such  easement  as  a  separate parcel on all subsequent
  assessment rolls.
    5. Penalties for offenses. If there is a violation of  the  terms  and
  conditions   of   the   conservation   easement  agreement  or  if  such
  conservation easement agreement is  canceled  by  the  town  board  upon
  petition, then the owner or owners of such property must pay to the town
  the following amounts:
    (a)  All taxes abated pursuant to the conservation easement agreement,
  as limited by the remainder of this section, including,  if  applicable,
  those  taxes  imposed  by  the  county,  town,  school districts and all

  special improvement districts  and  other  taxing  units  to  which  the
  property  is subject. Repayment of the aforementioned abated taxes shall
  be equal to five times the taxes saved in the last  year  in  which  the
  land  benefited  from  a conservation easement agreement exemption, plus
  interest of six percent per year compounded annually for  each  year  in
  which an exemption was granted, not exceeding five years.
    (b)   Payments  shall  be  added  by  or  on  behalf  of  each  taxing
  jurisdiction to the taxes levied on the assessment roll prepared on  the
  basis of the first taxable status date after there is a violation of the
  terms  and  conditions of the conservation easement or such conservation
  easement agreement is canceled.
Ascertainment  of  amount  of special assessment in certain
  cases.  If a portion of a parcel of real property is subject to taxation
  pursuant to section four hundred twenty-a, four hundred  twenty-b,  four
  hundred  twenty-four, four hundred twenty-six, four hundred thirty, four
  hundred thirty-six or four hundred thirty-eight  of  this  article,  the
  amount  of  any special assessment to be levied on such portion shall be
  ascertained by considering the benefit to the property to be in the same
  proportion as the assessed valuation  of  the  taxable  portion  of  the
  property bears to the assessed valuation of the property.
Taxation  of  exempt  property  upon  transfer  of title or
  possession in certain instances.   1.   The provisions of  this  section
  shall apply only in a city having a population of one million or more.
    2.  Whenever any person, association or corporation not entitled to an
  exemption  from  taxation  acquires  title  to or possession of property
  which is exempt from taxation, such property  shall  immediately  become
  subject  to  taxation  and  shall  be  taxed  pro rata for the unexpired
  portion of the taxable year.  However, if the United States or the state
  of New York, through  the  exercise  of  the  power  of  eminent  domain
  acquires  or  shall have acquired temporarily the possession, occupation
  or use of real  property  which  was  previously  exempt  from  taxation
  pursuant  to former section four of the tax law, such previous exemption
  shall be deemed to continue unbroken and to resume from  the  date  when
  the  possession shall have been restored to the owner and the previously
  exempt use resumed, despite the fact that such property may  be  or  may
  have been deemed taxable during the period when the United States or the
  state  of  New  York  acquired  or  shall  have  acquired such temporary
  possession, occupation or use.
    3.  If taxes on any such property  become  due  and  payable  for  the
  entire  taxable  year  on a single date, and any such change in title or
  possession takes place prior to such due date, the pro rata  portion  of
  taxes  imposed  upon such property pursuant to this section shall become
  due and payable and shall become a lien upon such property upon such due
  date, but if such change in title or possession takes place  after  such
  due  date,  such  pro rata portion of taxes shall become due and payable
  and shall become a lien upon such property on the date when such  change
  in  title  or  possession takes place.  If taxes embracing such property
  become due and payable on two dates in equal installments, and any  such
  change  in  title or possession takes place prior to the earlier of such
  due dates, the pro rata portion of the first  installment  shall  become
  due and payable and shall become a lien on such property on such earlier
  due date, and the entire second installment shall become due and payable
  and shall become a lien on such property on the later of such due dates;
  if  any  such change in title or possession takes place between such due
  dates, the entire pro rata portion of the taxes to which  such  property
  is  subject  for  the taxable year pursuant to this section shall become
  due and payable and shall become a lien on such property upon such later
  due date; if any such transfer of title or possession takes place  after
  the later of such due dates, the pro rata portion of taxes to which such
  property  is subject for the taxable year pursuant to this section shall
  become due and payable and shall become a lien on such property upon the
  date of such transfer of title or possession.  If taxes  embracing  such
  property  become  due  and  payable  on  more  than  two  dates in equal
  installments, and any such change in title  or  possession  takes  place
  prior  to the first due date, or between due dates, the pro rata portion
  of the first installment or of a subsequent installment affected by such
  change, as the case may be, shall  become  due  and  payable  and  shall
  become  a  lien  on  such  property  on the due date next following such
  change in title or possession,  and  the  remaining  installments  shall
  become due and payable and shall become a lien on such property on their
  respective  due dates; if any such transfer of title or possession takes
  place after the last due date in a taxable year, the pro rata portion of
  tax to which such property is subject for the taxable year  pursuant  to
  this  section  shall  become  due and payable and shall become a lien on
  such property upon the date of such transfer of title or possession.
    4.  No right granted by this article to  any  person,  association  or
  corporation  to lease or otherwise use for income-producing purposes any
  property of such person, association or corporation, without terminating

  the tax exemption of such  property  in  whole  or  in  part,  shall  be
  impaired  or  diminished  by this section, but if any change of title or
  possession of any property, shall, by virtue of the provisions  of  this
  article,  terminate  the  tax exemption of such property, in whole or in
  part, the provisions of this section shall apply  with  full  force  and
  effect  to the extent that such property shall cease to be tax exempt by
  virtue of the provisions of such article.
Exemption from taxation of property upon transfer of title in
  certain instances. 1. The provisions of this section shall apply only in
  a city having a population of one million or more.
    2.  Whenever any corporation or association entitled to exemption from
  taxation pursuant to paragraph (a) of subdivision one  of  section  four
  hundred  twenty-a  or  paragraph  (a) of subdivision one of section four
  hundred twenty-b of this chapter, or any local law adopted  pursuant  to
  such  provisions, acquires title to real property that is not exempt, in
  whole or in part from taxation, such property  shall,  if  it  otherwise
  qualifies  for  exemption  pursuant  to  such provisions, be immediately
  subject to exemption upon the date of transfer of title of such property
  to such corporation or association.
    3. Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  law  to  the  contrary,
  applications  for exemption pursuant to this section for fiscal years as
  to which the applicable taxable status date has passed may be  filed  at
  any  time  after  the  transfer  of  title  of  such  property  to  such
  corporation or association. The city department of finance shall make  a
  determination  as to the qualification of the property for exemption and
  shall notify the applicant and the city tax  commission  of  the  exempt
  amount,  if  any,  and  the  right  of  the  owner  to  a  review of the
  determination of the city department of finance by filing an application
  for correction of assessment. Notwithstanding the  foregoing  provision,
  an  application  for  exemption  shall  be  deemed  to  be denied on the
  ninetieth day after the submission of such application  where  the  city
  department  of  finance has not made a determination on such application
  prior to such ninetieth day.
    4. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the  contrary,  where
  determinations  on  such  applications  for exemption are made after the
  filing of the tentative assessment roll, the commissioner of finance  of
  such  city  is authorized to reduce the amount of taxes accordingly and,
  if such taxes have been paid, to refund or credit the amount of any such
  reduction. An applicant  may  seek  review  of  a  determination  on  an
  application  for  exemption  by  filing an application for correction of
  assessment in the manner provided in the charter  of  such  city  except
  that where a determination on an application for exemption is made after
  the  filing  of  the  tentative  assessment  roll, an applicant may seek
  review of such determination by filing an application for correction  of
  assessment  within  thirty  days  after  notice of such determination is
  mailed to the applicant or, if applicable, within thirty days after  the
  application for exemption is deemed to be denied pursuant to subdivision
  three of this section.
    5. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, where a
  determination  on  an application for exemption pursuant to this section
  is made after the filing of the tentative assessment roll, a  proceeding
  for  review of such assessment pursuant to article seven of this chapter
  shall be commenced within thirty days after notice of the  determination
  of the city tax commission is mailed to the applicant.
Exemption reports. 1. Whenever a county, city, town, village or
  school  district  is  required to prepare an annual budget, the official
  required to prepare a tentative or preliminary version  of  that  budget
  shall  annex thereto an exemption report. This report shall be on a form
  prescribed by the commissioner and shall show  how  much  of  the  total
  assessed  value  on  the  final  assessment  roll  or rolls used in that
  budgetary process is exempt from taxation. This report shall list  every
  type  of exemption granted, identified by statutory authority, and shall
  show (a) the cumulative impact  of  each  type  of  exemption  expressed
  either  as  a  dollar amount of assessed value or as a percentage of the
  total assessed value on the roll, (b) the cumulative amount expected  to
  be  received  from  recipients  of each type of exemption as payments in
  lieu of taxes or other payments for  municipal  services,  and  (c)  the
  cumulative  impact  of all exemptions granted. Exemptions that result in
  an impact of less than one percent may be aggregated as a single  entry.
  In  no  case  shall  an  individual  exemption recipient be named in the
  report.
    2. Notice of this report shall  be  included  in  any  notice  of  the
  preparation of the budget otherwise required by law. The report shall be
  posted  on  any bulletin board maintained by the budgeting authority for
  public notices and on any website maintained by the budgeting authority.
  This report shall be annexed to any tentative or preliminary budget  and
  shall become part of the final budget.
Exemption reports. 1. Whenever a county, city, town, village or
  school  district  is  required to prepare an annual budget, the official
  required to prepare a tentative or preliminary version  of  that  budget
  shall  annex thereto an exemption report. This report shall be on a form
  prescribed by the commissioner and shall show  how  much  of  the  total
  assessed  value  on  the  final  assessment  roll  or rolls used in that
  budgetary process is exempt from taxation. This report shall list  every
  type  of exemption granted, identified by statutory authority, and shall
  show (a) the cumulative impact  of  each  type  of  exemption  expressed
  either  as  a  dollar amount of assessed value or as a percentage of the
  total assessed value on the roll, (b) the cumulative amount expected  to
  be  received  from  recipients  of each type of exemption as payments in
  lieu of taxes or other payments for  municipal  services,  and  (c)  the
  cumulative  impact  of all exemptions granted. Exemptions that result in
  an impact of less than one percent may be aggregated as a single  entry.
  In  no  case  shall  an  individual  exemption recipient be named in the
  report.
    2. Notice of this report shall  be  included  in  any  notice  of  the
  preparation of the budget otherwise required by law. The report shall be
  posted  on  any bulletin board maintained by the budgeting authority for
  public notices and on any website maintained by the budgeting authority.
  This report shall be annexed to any tentative or preliminary budget  and
  shall become part of the final budget.
Voluntary renunciation of an exemption. 1. A property owner who
  wishes  to  give  up  his  or  her  claim to an exemption on one or more
  preceding assessment rolls may renounce  the  exemption  in  the  manner
  provided by this section.
    2.  An  application  to  renounce an exemption shall be made on a form
  prescribed by the commissioner  and  shall  be  filed  with  the  county
  director of real property tax services no later than ten years after the
  levy  of taxes upon the assessment roll on which the renounced exemption
  appears. The county director, after  consulting  with  the  assessor  as
  appropriate,  shall  compute  the  total  amount  owed on account of the
  renounced exemption as follows:
    (a) For each assessment roll on which the renounced exemption appears,
  the assessed value that was exempted shall be multiplied by the tax rate
  or rates that were applied to that assessment roll, or in the case of  a
  renounced  STAR  exemption,  the  tax  savings  calculated  pursuant  to
  subdivision two of section  thirteen  hundred  six-a  of  this  chapter.
  Interest shall then be added to each such product at the rate prescribed
  by  section nine hundred twenty-four-a of this chapter or such other law
  as may be applicable for each month or portion thereon since the levy of
  taxes upon such assessment roll.
    (b) The sum of the calculations made pursuant to paragraph (a) of this
  subdivision with respect to all of  the  assessment  rolls  in  question
  shall be determined.
    (c) A processing fee of five hundred dollars shall be added to the sum
  determined  pursuant  to  paragraph  (b) of this subdivision, unless the
  provisions of paragraph (d) of this subdivision are applicable.
    (d) If the applicant is  renouncing  a  STAR  exemption  in  order  to
  qualify  for  the  personal  income  tax credit authorized by subsection
  (eee) of section six hundred six of the tax law, and no other exemptions
  are being renounced on the same application,  or  if  the  applicant  is
  renouncing  a STAR exemption before school taxes have been levied on the
  assessment roll upon which that exemption  appears,  no  processing  fee
  shall be applicable.
    3.  After  computing  the total amount due on account of the renounced
  exemption, the county director shall return the form  to  the  applicant
  with  the  total  amount due noted thereon. A copy of such form shall be
  provided to the assessor, and in the case of the STAR exemption, to  the
  commissioner.  Within  fifteen  days after the mailing of such form, the
  applicant shall pay the total amount due as shown thereon to the  county
  treasurer,  who  shall issue a receipt for such payment. After deducting
  the processing fee, the county treasurer  shall  distribute  the  amount
  collected  among  the  affected  municipal corporations according to the
  taxes and interest owing to each, provided that in the case of the  STAR
  exemption  authorized  by  section  four  hundred  twenty-five  of  this
  article, the amount collected, including interest, shall be paid to  the
  state in the manner directed by the commissioner.
    4. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, in a city
  with  a population of one million or more, an exemption may be renounced
  on a form prescribed by the commissioner  of  finance,  and  the  duties
  imposed  by this section upon the county treasurer shall be performed by
  the commissioner of finance.
Construction  of certain local option provisions in exemption
  statutes. 1. Population restrictions. When an  exemption  statute  makes
  one  or  more  options  available  to  municipal  corporations  having a
  population within a  specified  range,  and  the  governing  body  of  a
  municipal  corporation  adopts a local law or resolution exercising such
  an option  while  its  population  is  within  the  specified  range,  a
  subsequent  change  in  the population of the municipal corporation that
  places it outside the specified range shall not render such local law or
  resolution ineffective or invalid, nor shall it impair  the  ability  of
  the  governing  body  to amend or repeal such local law or resolution to
  the same extent as if its population were  still  within  the  specified
  range.  Provided,  however, that this subdivision shall not apply to any
  exemption statute that expressly provides that a local law or resolution
  adopted thereunder shall become ineffective or invalid if the population
  of the municipal corporation  subsequently  experiences  a  change  that
  places it outside the specified range.
    2.  Filing  provisions.  When  an  exemption statute makes one or more
  options available to some or all  municipal  corporations,  and  further
  provides that a municipal corporation adopting a local law or resolution
  exercising  such  an  option  shall file a copy thereof with one or more
  state agencies other than the department of state, but if  such  statute
  does  not  expressly  provide  that a local law or resolution exercising
  such an option shall not take effect until a copy thereof is filed  with
  the  specified  state  agency or agencies, then a failure to comply with
  such filing provision shall not render  such  local  law  or  resolution
  ineffective or invalid.

Definitions.  When  used in this title, the following terms
  shall mean or include:
    1. "Abatement base." The lesser of (a) two dollars and fifty cents  of
  the  tax  liability  per  square foot or (b) fifty per centum of the tax
  liability per square foot; provided, however, that  with  respect  to  a
  lease commencing on or after April first, nineteen hundred ninety-seven,
  the abatement base shall equal the tax liability per square foot subject
  to a maximum of two dollars and fifty cents per square foot.
    2.  "Abatement  zone."  Any  area of a city having a population of one
  million or more, provided that in the city of  New  York  the  abatement
  zone  shall  be  the  area in the borough of Manhattan bounded by Murray
  Street on the north starting at the  intersection  of  West  Street  and
  Murray  Street; running easterly along the center line of Murray Street,
  connecting through City Hall Park with  the  center  line  of  Frankfort
  Street  and  running  easterly  along  the center lines of Frankfort and
  Dover Streets to the intersection of  Dover  Street  and  South  Street;
  running  southerly along the center line of South Street to Peter Minuit
  Plaza; connecting through Peter Minuit Plaza to the center line of State
  Street and running northwesterly along the center line of  State  Street
  to  the intersection of State Street and Battery Place; running westerly
  along the center line of Battery Place to the  intersection  of  Battery
  Place  and  West  Street; and running northerly along the center line of
  West Street to the intersection of West Street and  Murray  Street.  Any
  tax  lot  which  is  partly  located  inside the abatement zone shall be
  deemed to be entirely located inside such area.
    3. "Aggregate floor area." The sum of the gross areas of  the  several
  floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls
  or from the center lines of walls separating two buildings.
    4. "Applicant." The landlord and the tenant.
    5.  "Benefit  period." The period commencing with the first day of the
  month immediately following the rent commencement date  and  terminating
  no  later  than  sixty  months  thereafter, provided, however, that with
  respect to a lease commencing on or after April first, nineteen  hundred
  ninety-seven with an initial lease term of less than five years, but not
  less  than  three years, the period commencing with the first day of the
  month immediately following the rent commencement date  and  terminating
  no   later   than  thirty-six  months  thereafter.  Notwithstanding  the
  foregoing sentence, a benefit period shall expire no  later  than  March
  thirty-first, two thousand thirty-four.
    6.  "Billable  assessed value." The lesser of the taxable transitional
  or the taxable actual assessed value of the eligible  building  and  the
  land  on  which  the eligible building is located for the fiscal year in
  which the benefit period commences, as computed pursuant to  subdivision
  three of section one thousand eight hundred five of this chapter.
    7.  "Department  of  finance."  The  department of finance of any city
  having a population of one million or more.
    8.  "Eligible  building."  A  non-residential  or  mixed-use  building
  located  in the abatement zone which received its initial certificate of
  occupancy or initial temporary certificate of occupancy prior to January
  first, nineteen hundred seventy-five; provided that if no certificate of
  occupancy was required at the time the building was  constructed,  other
  proof  acceptable  to  the  department  of  finance  is  submitted which
  demonstrates that the building was constructed prior to  January  first,
  nineteen  hundred  seventy-five;  and  provided  further  that  eligible
  building shall not include any building owned by a governmental  agency.
  Each condominium unit in a building which meets the requirements of this
  subdivision shall be considered a separate eligible building.

    9.  "Eligibility  period." The period commencing April first, nineteen
  hundred ninety-five and terminating  March  thirty-first,  two  thousand
  twenty-eight.
    10.  "Eligible  premises."  Premises  located  in an eligible building
  which (a) are (i) occupied  or  used  as  offices  (including  ancillary
  uses);  or  (ii)  occupied or used as retail space; or (iii) occupied or
  used as a private elementary or secondary school and (b) are occupied or
  used by a tenant under a lease which meets the eligibility  requirements
  of section four hundred ninety-nine-c of this title.
    11.  "Expansion  premises."  Eligible  premises leased by an expansion
  tenant to accommodate additional employees.
    12. "Expansion tenant." A person  who  (a)  occupies  premises  in  an
  eligible  building  under  a  lease  which  does  not  expire during the
  eligibility period and (b) executes a lease for  expansion  premises  in
  such eligible building or in another eligible building which lease meets
  the  eligibility  requirements  of section four hundred ninety-nine-c of
  this title. For purposes of determining whether expansion  premises  are
  located  in  the same or in another eligible building, the last sentence
  of subdivision eight of this section shall not be applicable.
    13. "Fiscal year." The fiscal year of any city having a population  of
  one million or more.
    14.  "Governmental agency." The United States of America or any agency
  or instrumentality thereof, the state of New York, the city of New York,
  any public corporation (including a body corporate and  politic  created
  pursuant  to  agreement or compact between the state of New York and any
  other state), public benefit  corporation,  public  authority  or  other
  political subdivision of the state.
    15.  "Landlord."  Any  person  who  (a)  controls  all non-residential
  portions of an eligible building,  including,  without  limitation,  the
  record  owner,  the  lessee  under  a  ground  lease,  any  mortgagee in
  possession or any receiver, and (b) who  grants  the  right  to  use  or
  occupy eligible premises to any tenant, provided that landlord shall not
  include  any  lessee  who  at any time during the lease term occupied or
  used or occupies or uses any part of  the  non-residential  portions  of
  such  eligible  building,  other  than premises occupied or used by such
  lessee to provide rental or management services to such building.
    16. "Lease commencement date." The date set  forth  in  the  lease  on
  which the term of the lease commences.
    17.  "Mixed-use  building."  A  building used for both residential and
  commercial purposes, provided that more than twenty-five per  centum  of
  the aggregate floor area of such building is used or held out for use as
  commercial, community facility or accessory use space.
    18. "New tenant." A person who (a) (i) is relocating or expanding from
  premises  in  a  relocation  area to eligible premises, or (ii) occupies
  premises in an eligible building under a lease which expires during  the
  eligibility  period and is relocating or expanding to eligible premises,
  or (iii) occupies premises in the abatement zone in a building which  is
  not  an  eligible  building  and  is relocating or expanding to eligible
  premises, or (iv) does not occupy  any  premises  immediately  prior  to
  executing  a  lease  for  eligible  premises,  or  (v)  is an owner of a
  building in the  abatement  zone  who  is  relocating  or  expanding  to
  eligible  premises, and (b) executes a lease which meets the eligibility
  requirements of section four hundred ninety-nine-c of this title.
    19. "Person." An individual, corporation, limited  liability  company,
  partnership,  association,  agency,  trust,  estate, foreign or domestic
  government or subdivision thereof, or other entity.

    20. "Relocation area." The area in the borough of Manhattan  south  of
  the center line of 96th Street or any area outside the city of New York;
  provided that the abatement zone shall not be a relocation area.
    21.  "Renewal  tenant."  A  person  who  (a)  occupies  premises in an
  eligible building under a lease which  expires  during  the  eligibility
  period  and  (b)  executes a lease for the continued occupancy of all or
  part of such premises or all or part of  such  premises  and  additional
  premises  in such eligible building, provided such premises are eligible
  premises and such lease meets the eligibility  requirements  of  section
  four hundred ninety-nine-c of this title.
    22. "Rent commencement date." The date set forth in the lease on which
  the obligation to pay basic fixed rent shall commence.
    23.  "Subtenant."  A person whose right to occupy and use the eligible
  premises is not derived from a lease with the landlord.
    24. "Tax  commission."  The  tax  commission  in  any  city  having  a
  population of one million or more.
    25.  "Tax liability." The product obtained by multiplying the billable
  assessed value for the fiscal year in which the benefit period commences
  by the tax rate applicable to the eligible building for such fiscal year
  as set by the local legislative body of any city having a population  of
  one million or more.
    26.  "Tax liability per square foot." The tax liability divided by the
  total number of square feet in the eligible building, as listed  on  the
  records of the department of finance.
    27.  "Tenant."  A  person  (including  any successors in interest) who
  executes a lease with the landlord for the right to occupy  or  use  the
  eligible  premises  and  who  occupies  or  uses  the  eligible premises
  pursuant to such lease. Tenant shall not  include  any  subtenant.  When
  used  in  this title, "tenant" includes "expansion tenant," "new tenant"
  and "renewal tenant."
    28. "Tenant's  percentage  share."  The  percentage  of  the  eligible
  building's  aggregate  floor  area  allocated  to the eligible premises,
  which shall be presumed to be such percentage as set forth in the  lease
  for  the  eligible  premises;  provided that where the eligible premises
  includes expansion premises, the "tenant's percentage  share"  shall  be
  calculated  on  the  basis  of the percentage of the eligible building's
  aggregate floor area allocated solely to the expansion premises.

Real  property  tax  abatement.  1.  Except  as provided in
  subdivision one-a of this section, within a city having a population  of
  one  million  or  more,  eligible buildings containing eligible premises
  shall receive an abatement of real property  taxes  during  the  benefit
  period as follows:
    (a)  for  each  of  the  first  three years of the benefit period, the
  abatement shall be equal to the product obtained by (i) multiplying  the
  tenant's  percentage  share by the number of square feet in the eligible
  building, as listed on the records of the department of finance and (ii)
  multiplying the product obtained in subparagraph (i) of  this  paragraph
  by the abatement base;
    (b)  for the fourth year of the benefit period, the abatement shall be
  equal to two-thirds of the abatement in the first year  of  the  benefit
  period; and
    (c)  for  the fifth year of the benefit period, the abatement shall be
  equal to one-third of the abatement in the first  year  of  the  benefit
  period.
    1-a.  Within  a  city  having  a  population  of  one million or more,
  eligible buildings containing eligible premises occupied or  used  by  a
  tenant  pursuant to a lease having a lease commencement date on or after
  April first, nineteen hundred ninety-seven with an initial lease term of
  less than five years, but not less than three years,  shall  receive  an
  abatement of real property taxes during the benefit period as follows:
    (a)  for  the first year of the benefit period, the abatement shall be
  equal to the product obtained by (i) multiplying the tenant's percentage
  share by the number of square feet in the eligible building,  as  listed
  on  the  records  of  the department of finance and (ii) multiplying the
  product obtained in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph by the  abatement
  base;
    (b)  for the second year of the benefit period, the abatement shall be
  equal to two-thirds of the abatement in the first year  of  the  benefit
  period; and
    (c)  for  the third year of the benefit period, the abatement shall be
  equal to one-third of the abatement in the first  year  of  the  benefit
  period.
    2.  If,  as  a  result of application to the tax commission or a court
  order or action by the department  of  finance,  the  billable  assessed
  value  is  reduced,  the  department  of  finance  shall recalculate the
  abatement utilizing such reduced billable  assessed  value.  The  amount
  equal to the difference between the abatement originally granted and the
  abatement as so recalculated shall be deducted from any refund otherwise
  payable  or  remission  otherwise  due  as a result of such reduction in
  billable assessed value, and any balance of such amount remaining unpaid
  after making any such deduction shall  be  paid  to  the  department  of
  finance within thirty days from the date of mailing by the department of
  finance  of  a  notice  of the amount payable. Such amount payable shall
  constitute a tax lien on the eligible building as of the  date  of  such
  notice  and,  if  not  paid  within  such thirty-day period, penalty and
  interest at the rate applicable to delinquent  taxes  on  such  eligible
  building  shall be charged and collected on such amount from the date of
  such notice to the date of payment.
    3. In no event shall the abatement for the eligible  premises  granted
  pursuant  to  this  title  exceed  the  tax  liability  allocable to the
  eligible premises.
    4. Notwithstanding the  provisions  of  any  lease  for  occupancy  of
  non-eligible  premises  in  an  eligible  building  or  for occupancy of
  eligible premises for which no certificate of abatement has been  issued
  pursuant to this title, a lessee of non-eligible premises or of eligible

  premises  for which no certificate of abatement has been issued pursuant
  to this title shall not be entitled to receive directly or indirectly  a
  reduction  in  either  the  real  property  taxes or any rent (including
  additional  rent)  payable  pursuant  to such lease where such reduction
  would result from an abatement of real property taxes  granted  pursuant
  to  this  title.  A landlord of an eligible building shall not allocate,
  credit, assign or disburse any portion of an abatement granted  pursuant
  to  this  title  to  a  lessee  of  non-eligible premises or of eligible
  premises for which no certificate of abatement has been issued  pursuant
  to  this  title.  A  landlord  shall  not be required to reduce the real
  property taxes or  any  rent  (including  additional  rent)  payable  by
  expansion  tenants,  new  tenants  and renewal tenants by an amount that
  exceeds the full amount of the abatement granted pursuant to this title,
  but a landlord shall be required to reduce the real  property  taxes  or
  any  rent  (including additional rent) payable by expansion tenants, new
  tenants and renewal tenants by an amount that, in the aggregate,  equals
  the  full  amount  of the abatement granted pursuant to this title. Such
  reduction shall be allocated in accordance with  the  abatement  granted
  for the eligible premises occupied by each such tenant.
    5.  (a)  A  tenant  who occupies or uses eligible premises for which a
  certificate of abatement is issued pursuant to this title shall  not  be
  eligible  to  receive  a  second  certificate  of abatement for the same
  eligible premises. A tenant who occupies or uses eligible  premises  for
  which  a  certificate  of abatement is issued pursuant to this title and
  who, upon the expiration  of  the  lease  for  such  eligible  premises,
  relocates  to  otherwise  eligible  premises,  shall  not be eligible to
  receive a certificate of abatement for such otherwise eligible premises,
  except to the extent that the square footage of such otherwise  eligible
  premises  exceeds the square footage of all eligible premises previously
  occupied or used by such tenant for which such tenant held a certificate
  of abatement. If the square footage of such otherwise eligible  premises
  exceeds  the  square  footage  of  all such eligible premises previously
  occupied or used by such tenant and if there is any variation in the tax
  liability per square foot of such otherwise eligible premises, then, for
  purposes of determining which square footage in such otherwise  eligible
  premises  is  entitled  to  an  abatement pursuant to this title, square
  footage with the greatest tax liability per square foot,  in  an  amount
  equal  to  the  square  footage of all such eligible premises previously
  occupied or used by such tenant, shall first be excluded.
    (b)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  paragraph   (a)   of   this
  subdivision,  a tenant who is eligible in accordance with the provisions
  of this title, who occupies  or  uses  eligible  premises  for  which  a
  certificate  of abatement is issued pursuant to this title and who, upon
  the termination of the lease for such premises as a result of  a  taking
  by  eminent  domain,  relocates to otherwise eligible premises, shall be
  eligible to receive a second certificate of abatement for such  eligible
  premises; provided, however, that such tenant shall have eighteen months
  from  the  date that the lease has terminated, as a result of the taking
  by eminent domain, or eighteen months from the effective  date  of  this
  paragraph, whichever is later, to relocate to such eligible premises.

Eligibility  requirements. 1. No abatement shall be granted
  pursuant to this title unless:
    (a) the landlord enters into a lease for eligible premises with a  new
  tenant or a renewal tenant and:
    (1) the lease commencement date is within the eligibility period;
    (2)  (i) if, by the sixtieth day following the rent commencement date,
  such new or renewal tenant employs  one  hundred  twenty-five  or  fewer
  employees  in  the  eligible  premises,  the initial lease term is for a
  period of at least five years or, with respect to a lease commencing  on
  or  after  April first, nineteen hundred ninety-seven, the initial lease
  term is for a period of at  least  three  years;  or  (ii)  if,  by  the
  sixtieth  day  following the rent commencement date, such new or renewal
  tenant employs more  than  one  hundred  twenty-five  employees  in  the
  eligible  premises,  the  initial lease term is for a period of at least
  ten years; and
    (3) (i) if the lease is with a new tenant required  to  sign  a  lease
  with  an  initial  lease  term  of  at least five years, expenditures on
  improvements to the eligible  premises  and  the  common  areas  of  the
  eligible  building  are  in  an amount at least equal to ten dollars per
  square foot, provided, however, that with respect to a lease  commencing
  on  or  after  April  first,  nineteen  hundred ninety-seven, if, by the
  sixtieth day following  the  rent  commencement  date,  the  new  tenant
  employs  one  hundred  twenty-five  or  fewer  employees in the eligible
  premises, expenditures on improvements to the eligible premises and  the
  common areas of the eligible building are in an amount at least equal to
  five  dollars per square foot; or (ii) if the lease is with a new tenant
  required to sign a lease with an initial lease  term  of  at  least  ten
  years,  expenditures  on  improvements  to the eligible premises and the
  common areas of the eligible building are in an amount at least equal to
  thirty-five dollars per square foot; or (iii) if the  lease  is  with  a
  renewal  tenant,  expenditures  on improvements to the eligible premises
  and the common areas of the eligible building are in an amount at  least
  equal  to  ten  dollars  per  square  foot  for  any premises previously
  occupied by such renewal tenant, provided, however, that with respect to
  a  lease  commencing  on  or  after  April   first,   nineteen   hundred
  ninety-seven,  if,  by  the sixtieth day following the rent commencement
  date, the renewal  tenant  employs  one  hundred  twenty-five  or  fewer
  employees  in  the eligible premises previously occupied by such renewal
  tenant, expenditures on improvements to the eligible  premises  and  the
  common areas of the eligible building are in an amount at least equal to
  five  dollars  per  square  foot; and in an amount at least equal to the
  amount specified in clause (i) or (ii) of this  subparagraph,  depending
  upon  the  required  initial lease term, for any premises not previously
  occupied by such renewal tenant; or
    (b) the landlord enters into a lease  with  an  expansion  tenant  for
  expansion premises and:
    (1) the lease commencement date is within the eligibility period;
    (2)  (i) if, by the sixtieth day following the rent commencement date,
  such expansion tenant employs one hundred twenty-five or fewer employees
  in the expansion premises, the initial  lease  term  for  the  expansion
  premises  is  for  a period of at least five years or, with respect to a
  lease commencing on or after April first, nineteen hundred ninety-seven,
  the initial lease term is for a period of at least three years; or  (ii)
  if,  by  the  sixtieth  day  following  the rent commencement date, such
  expansion tenant employs more than one hundred twenty-five employees  in
  such  expansion  premises,  the  initial  lease  term  for the expansion
  premises is for a period of at least ten years; and

    (3) (i) if the lease is with an expansion tenant required  to  sign  a
  lease with an initial lease term of at least five years, expenditures on
  improvements  to  the  expansion  premises  and  the common areas of the
  eligible building are in an amount at least equal  to  ten  dollars  per
  square  foot, provided, however, that with respect to a lease commencing
  on or after April first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-seven,  if,  by  the
  sixtieth  day following the rent commencement date, the expansion tenant
  employs one hundred twenty-five or  fewer  employees  in  the  expansion
  premises, expenditures on improvements to the expansion premises and the
  common areas of the eligible building are in an amount at least equal to
  five  dollars per square foot; or (ii) if the lease is with an expansion
  tenant required to sign a lease with an initial lease term of  at  least
  ten  years,  expenditures  on improvements to the expansion premises and
  the common areas of the eligible building are  in  an  amount  at  least
  equal to thirty-five dollars per square foot.
    2.  No  abatement  shall  be  granted  pursuant  to  this  title if an
  applicant shall fail to meet any  of  the  requirements  of  this  title
  within  sixty  days  of  the rent commencement date; provided that for a
  lease with a renewal tenant, the expenditures on  improvements  required
  by  subdivision one of this section shall be made within one year of the
  lease commencement date.
    3. (a) For purposes of determining whether the amount of  expenditures
  required  by  subdivision  one  of  this  section  have  been satisfied,
  expenditures on improvements to the common areas of an eligible building
  shall be included only if work on such improvements  commenced  and  the
  expenditures  are  made  on  or  after  April  first,  nineteen  hundred
  ninety-five  and  on  or  before  September  thirtieth,   two   thousand
  twenty-eight;  provided,  however,  that expenditures on improvements to
  the common areas of an eligible  building  made  prior  to  three  years
  before the lease commencement date shall not be included.
    (b)  The  landlord  may  allocate  expenditures on improvements to the
  common areas of an eligible building to eligible tenants in such  manner
  as reasonably relates to such eligible tenants.
    4. For purposes of this title, the expiration date of a lease shall be
  determined  by  the  expiration  date  set  forth in such lease, without
  giving effect to any rights of the landlord or the tenant  to  terminate
  such lease prior to the expiration date set forth therein.
    5.  The  lease  for  the eligible premises shall contain the following
  provisions:
    (a) a statement of the tenant's percentage share;
    (b) a statement informing the tenant in  at  least  twelve-point  type
  that:
    (1)  an  application  for abatement of real property taxes pursuant to
  this title will be made for the premises;
    (2) the rent,  including  amounts  payable  by  the  tenant  for  real
  property  taxes,  will accurately reflect any abatement of real property
  taxes granted pursuant to this title for the premises;
    (3) at least ten dollars per square foot or  thirty-five  dollars  per
  square foot must be spent on improvements to the premises and the common
  areas,  the  amount  being  dependent  upon  the length of the lease and
  whether it is a new or a renewal lease,  provided,  however,  that  with
  respect  to a lease commencing on or after April first, nineteen hundred
  ninety-seven, if, by the sixtieth day following  the  rent  commencement
  date,  the  tenant employs one hundred twenty-five or fewer employees in
  the relevant premises, at least five dollars per  square  foot  must  be
  spent on improvements to the premises and the common areas; and
    (4) all abatements granted with respect to a building pursuant to this
  title  will  be revoked if, during the benefit period, real estate taxes

  or water or sewer charges or other lienable charges are unpaid for  more
  than  one  year,  unless such delinquent amounts are paid as provided in
  subdivision four of section four hundred ninety-nine-f of this title.
    6. No abatement shall be granted pursuant to this title if:
    (a)  a  tenant has relocated from any area of the borough of Manhattan
  north of the center line of 96th Street  or  from  any  portion  of  the
  boroughs of the Bronx, Brooklyn, Queens, or Staten Island;
    (b)  the  lease  for  the  eligible  premises provides that during the
  initial lease term required by subdivision one of  this  section  either
  the  landlord  or  the  tenant  may  terminate  such  lease prior to the
  expiration date of such required initial lease term; provided that  such
  lease  may  provide that either the landlord or the tenant may terminate
  such lease if (1) the other party is in default of any of  such  party's
  obligations  under  the  lease, (2) the eligible premises are damaged or
  destroyed by fire or other  casualty,  (3)  the  eligible  premises  are
  rendered  unusable for any reason not attributable to any act or failure
  to act of either tenant or landlord, or (4) the  eligible  premises  are
  acquired by eminent domain; and
    (c)  there  are  real  property taxes, water or sewer charges or other
  lienable charges currently due and owing on the eligible building  which
  is  the  subject of an application for abatement pursuant to this title,
  unless such real property taxes or charges are currently being  paid  in
  timely  installments pursuant to a written agreement with the department
  of finance or other appropriate agency.
    7. No abatement shall be granted pursuant to  this  title  unless  the
  applicant  shall  file,  together  with  the  application,  an affidavit
  setting forth the following information:
    (a) a statement that within the seven years immediately preceding  the
  date  of  application  for  a  certificate  of  abatement,  neither  the
  applicant nor any person owning a substantial interest in  the  eligible
  building  as  defined  in  paragraph  (c)  of  this subdivision, nor any
  officer, director or general partner of the applicant or such person was
  finally adjudicated  by  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  to  have
  violated section two hundred thirty-five of the real property law or any
  section  of  article  one  hundred fifty of the penal law or any similar
  arson law of another jurisdiction with respect to any building,  or  was
  an  officer,  director  or  general partner of a person at the time such
  person was finally adjudicated to have violated such law; and
    (b) a statement setting forth any pending charges  alleging  violation
  of  section  two  hundred  thirty-five  of  the real property law or any
  section of article one hundred fifty of the penal  law  or  any  similar
  arson  law  of  another jurisdiction with respect to any building by the
  applicant or any person owning a substantial interest  in  the  eligible
  building  as  defined  in  paragraph  (c)  of  this  subdivision, or any
  officer, director or general partner of the applicant or such person, or
  any person for  whom  the  applicant  or  person  owning  a  substantial
  interest  in  the  eligible  building is an officer, director or general
  partner.
    (c) for purposes of this subdivision and subdivision seven of  section
  four  hundred  ninety-nine-f of this title, "substantial interest" shall
  mean ownership and control of an interest of ten per centum or  more  in
  the eligible building or in any person owning the eligible building.

Application for certificate of abatement. 1. Application for
  a certificate of abatement may be made on or after April first, nineteen
  hundred  ninety-five  and  until  sixty  days  after  the  end  of   the
  eligibility  period,  and shall be filed with the department of finance.
  No application may be filed prior to the date on which the lease for the
  eligible premises is executed by the landlord and tenant.
    2. No abatement pursuant to this title shall  be  granted  unless  the
  applicant  files  an  application  for a certificate of abatement within
  sixty days following the lease commencement date or  within  sixty  days
  following  the  date  chapter  four  of  the  laws  of  nineteen hundred
  ninety-five became  a  law,  whichever  is  later.  Notwithstanding  the
  foregoing  sentence and any other provision of law to the contrary, with
  respect to leases commencing on or after April first,  nineteen  hundred
  ninety-five  and  before  July  first,  nineteen  hundred ninety-six, an
  application for a certificate of abatement shall  be  considered  timely
  filed  if  filed  within  one  hundred  eighty  days following the lease
  commencement date or within one hundred eighty days following  the  date
  chapter  four  of the laws of nineteen hundred ninety-five became a law,
  whichever is later.
    3. In addition to any other information required by the department  of
  finance, the application for a certificate of abatement shall include an
  abstract  of  the lease for the eligible premises for which an abatement
  is being sought which abstract is signed by the landlord and the tenant.
  Such abstract shall include the tenant's  percentage  share,  the  lease
  commencement  date,  the rent commencement date, the expiration date for
  such lease and a description of the  improvements  to  be  made  to  the
  eligible  premises  and  the  common  areas  of  the  eligible building,
  including the estimated value of  such  improvements.  Such  application
  shall  also  include (i) a statement that the amount of the expenditures
  on such improvements will equal or exceed the amount required by section
  four hundred ninety-nine-c of this title, (ii) a statement of the number
  of persons who will, on the rent commencement date, be employed  in  the
  eligible  premises,  (iii)  a statement of the location of all office or
  retail space in the city of New York occupied by the tenant prior to the
  execution of the lease for the eligible premises, (iv) the  commencement
  and  expiration  dates  of all leases for premises in the abatement zone
  used or occupied as office or retail space and (v) the  aggregate  floor
  area  of  the  eligible building. Such application shall also state that
  the applicant agrees to comply with and be subject to the  rules  issued
  from time to time by the department of finance.
    4.  Within  sixty  days  following  the  rent  commencement  date, the
  applicant shall provide, in addition to any other  information  required
  by  the  department of finance, evidence acceptable to the department of
  finance that the number of employees in the eligible premises or in  the
  case  of  an  expansion  tenant,  in  the  expansion  premises,  and the
  expenditures on improvements to the eligible  premises  and  the  common
  areas  of  the eligible building or, in the case of an expansion tenant,
  to the expansion premises and the common areas of the eligible  building
  meet  the  requirements  of  section  four hundred ninety-nine-c of this
  title; provided that for a renewal tenant, evidence  acceptable  to  the
  department  of finance that expenditures on improvements to the eligible
  premises and  the  common  areas  of  the  eligible  building  meet  the
  requirements  of  section four hundred ninety-nine-c of this title shall
  be submitted within fourteen months of the lease commencement date.  The
  department  of  finance  shall  issue  a  certificate  of abatement upon
  determining that the applicant has submitted  proof  acceptable  to  the
  department  of  finance  that the applicant has met the requirements set
  forth in this title; provided that, with respect to  a  renewal  tenant,

  the  department  of  finance shall issue a certificate of abatement upon
  determining that the applicant has, not later than sixty days  following
  the  rent  commencement date, submitted to the department of finance (i)
  proof  acceptable  to the department of finance that the requirements of
  section  four  hundred  ninety-nine-c  of  this  title  concerning   the
  requisite  number  of  employees has been met, (ii) a certification that
  the applicant intends to meet the  requirements  of  such  section  four
  hundred ninety-nine-c concerning expenditures on improvements within the
  time  specified in such section and (iii) such additional information as
  the department of finance shall require.
    5. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to show by clear  and
  convincing  evidence that the requirements for granting a certificate of
  abatement have been satisfied. The department of finance shall have  the
  authority to require that statements in connection with such application
  be made under oath.
    6.  The  department  of  finance  may  provide  by rule for reasonable
  administrative  charges  or  fees  necessary  to  defray   expenses   in
  administering the abatement program provided by this title.
    7. Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, leases commencing
  on  or  after  July  first, nineteen hundred ninety-six and before April
  first, nineteen hundred ninety-seven shall be subject to the  provisions
  of this title as amended by chapter four hundred seventy-two of the laws
  of  nineteen  hundred ninety-six. Notwithstanding any other provision of
  law to the contrary, with respect to leases commencing on or after  July
  first,  nineteen hundred ninety-six, an application for a certificate of
  abatement shall be considered timely filed if filed within  one  hundred
  eighty  days  following the lease commencement date or within sixty days
  following the date chapter four  hundred  seventy-two  of  the  laws  of
  nineteen  hundred ninety-six became a law, whichever is later. Except as
  otherwise provided in subdivision two of this section, leases commencing
  before July first, nineteen hundred ninety-six shall be subject  to  the
  provisions  of this title as in effect prior to its amendment by chapter
  four hundred seventy-two of the laws of nineteen hundred ninety-six.
    8. Leases  commencing  on  or  after  April  first,  nineteen  hundred
  ninety-seven shall be subject to the provisions of this title as amended
  by  chapter  six  hundred  twenty-nine  of  the laws of nineteen hundred
  ninety-seven, chapter one hundred eighteen of the laws of  two  thousand
  one,  chapter  four  hundred  forty  of  the laws of two thousand three,
  chapter sixty of the laws of two thousand seven, chapter  twenty-two  of
  the  laws  of  two  thousand  ten, chapter fifty-nine of the laws of two
  thousand fourteen, chapter twenty of the laws of two  thousand  fifteen,
  chapter  sixty-one  of  the  laws  of  two  thousand  seventeen, chapter
  fifty-eight of the laws of two thousand twenty, and the chapter  of  the
  laws   of   two   thousand   twenty-three   that  amended  this  phrase.
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, with respect
  to  leases  commencing  on  or  after  April  first,  nineteen   hundred
  ninety-seven,  an  application  for  a certificate of abatement shall be
  considered  timely  filed  if  filed  within  one  hundred  eighty  days
  following the lease commencement date or within sixty days following the
  date  chapter  six  hundred  twenty-nine of the laws of nineteen hundred
  ninety-seven became a law, whichever is later.

Enforcement and administration.  The department of finance
  shall have, in addition to any other functions, powers and duties  which
  have  been  or  may  be conferred on it by law, the following functions,
  powers and duties:
    1. To receive and review applications for  certificates  of  abatement
  under  this  title and issue such certificates where authorized pursuant
  to this title.
    2. To receive evidence of expenditures made  on  improvements  to  the
  eligible premises and the common areas of the eligible building.
    3.  To  receive all certificates of continuing eligibility required by
  section four hundred ninety-nine-f of this title.
    4. To collect all real property taxes, with interest and penalty,  due
  and  owing  as  a  result of reduction, termination or revocation of any
  abatement granted pursuant to this title.
    5. To make and promulgate rules to carry  out  the  purposes  of  this
  title.

Reporting requirements; revocation of abatements.  1. For
  the duration of the applicant's benefit period, the applicant shall file
  annually with the department of finance, on or before July first of each
  year, a  certificate  of  continuing  eligibility  confirming  that  the
  eligible premises are occupied by the tenant who originally executed the
  lease  and  that  the  eligible premises are being used for the purposes
  described  in  the  application.     Such  certificate   of   continuing
  eligibility  shall  be on a form prescribed by the department of finance
  and shall contain such  additional  information  as  the  department  of
  finance  shall  require.    The  department  of  finance  shall have the
  authority to determine the abatements granted  pursuant  to  this  title
  upon failure of an applicant to file such certificate by such July first
  date.    The  burden  of  proof  shall  be on the applicant to establish
  continuing eligibility for benefits and the department of finance  shall
  have  the  authority to require that statements made in such certificate
  shall be made under oath.
    2. The department  of  finance  shall  revoke  any  abatement  granted
  pursuant to this title when the tenant who originally executed the lease
  is  no longer occupying the eligible premises.  Such revocation shall be
  retroactive to the date that such tenant vacated the  eligible  premises
  and  the  department  of finance shall require the landlord to pay, with
  interest, any taxes which become payable as a result of such revocation.
  The landlord shall notify the department of finance within  thirty  days
  following  the  date  on which such tenant vacated the eligible premises
  and, for failure to comply with this notification requirement, shall  be
  liable  for  penalty  calculated  for  the  same  period  as interest is
  calculated pursuant to the preceding sentence.
    3. If any portion of the premises for  which  an  abatement  has  been
  granted pursuant to this title ceases to be occupied or used as eligible
  premises  or is occupied by a subtenant, the department of finance shall
  reduce the abatement granted pursuant to this title by an  amount  equal
  to  the  percentage  of  such  eligible  premises which has ceased to be
  occupied or used as eligible premises or is  occupied  by  a  subtenant.
  Such  reduction  shall  be  retroactive  to  the date that such premises
  ceased to be occupied or used as eligible premises or was occupied by  a
  subtenant,  and  the department of finance shall require the landlord to
  pay, with interest, any taxes which become payable as a result  of  such
  reduction.    The landlord shall notify the department of finance within
  thirty days following the date  on  which  the  premises  ceased  to  be
  occupied  or  used  as  eligible premises or was occupied by a subtenant
  and, for failure to comply with this notification requirement, shall  be
  liable  for  penalty  calculated  for  the  same  period  as interest is
  calculated pursuant to the preceding sentence.
    4. If, during the benefit period, any real property tax  or  water  or
  sewer charge or other lienable charge due and payable with respect to an
  eligible  building  shall  remain unpaid for at least one year following
  the date upon which such tax or  charge  became  due  and  payable,  all
  abatements  granted pursuant to this title with respect to such building
  shall be revoked, unless within thirty days from the mailing of a notice
  of revocation  by  the  department  of  finance  satisfactory  proof  is
  presented to the department of finance that any and all delinquent taxes
  and  charges  owing with respect to such building as of the date of such
  notice have been paid in full or are  currently  being  paid  in  timely
  installments  pursuant  to  a  written  agreement with the department of
  finance or other appropriate agency.   Any revocation pursuant  to  this
  subdivision shall be effective with respect to real property taxes which
  become due and payable following the date of such revocation.

    5.  The  department of finance may deny, reduce, suspend, terminate or
  revoke any abatement granted pursuant to this title whenever:
    (a)  the  landlord  or the tenant receiving abatement pursuant to this
  title fails to comply with the requirements of this title or  the  rules
  promulgated hereunder; or
    (b) an application, certificate, report or other document submitted by
  the  applicant contains a false or misleading statement as to a material
  fact or omits to state any material fact necessary in order to make  the
  statement therein not false or misleading, and may declare any applicant
  who  makes  such  false  or  misleading  statement  or  omission  to  be
  ineligible for future abatement pursuant to this title for the  same  or
  other  property.    In addition, the department of finance shall require
  the applicant to pay, with penalty and interest, any abatement  received
  pursuant to this title as a result of such false or misleading statement
  or omission of a material fact.
    6.  Notwithstanding  any other provision of this title, the department
  of finance shall deny, terminate or revoke any abatement applied for  or
  granted  pursuant  to  this  title  upon  a determination that the lease
  between the landlord and the tenant does  not  constitute  a  bona  fide
  arm's  length  lease.    In making such determination, the department of
  finance may consider, among other factors,  the  relationship,  if  any,
  between  the  landlord  and the tenant and whether the business terms of
  such lease are consistent with the business  terms  generally  found  in
  leases for comparable space.
    7.  (a) If any person described in the statement required by paragraph
  (b) of subdivision seven of section four hundred ninety-nine-c  of  this
  title  or  paragraph (b) of this subdivision is finally adjudicated by a
  court of competent jurisdiction to be guilty of  any  charge  listed  in
  such  statement,  the  department  of finance shall revoke the abatement
  granted pursuant to this title  and  shall  require  the  payment,  with
  interest, of any abatement received pursuant to this title.
    (b) The applicant shall, on the certificate of continuing eligibility,
  state  whether  any  charges  alleging violation by the applicant or any
  person owning a substantial interest in the eligible  building,  or  any
  officer, director or general partner of the applicant or person owning a
  substantial  interest  in  the eligible building, or any person for whom
  the applicant or person owning a substantial interest  in  the  eligible
  building  is  an  officer,  director  or general partner, of section two
  hundred thirty-five of the real property law or any section  of  article
  one  hundred  fifty of the penal law or any similar arson law of another
  jurisdiction, are pending. For purposes of this paragraph,  "substantial
  interest"  shall  have the same meaning as set forth in paragraph (c) of
  subdivision seven of section four hundred ninety-nine-c of this title.
    8. The department  of  finance  shall  revoke  any  abatement  granted
  pursuant  to  this  title  with  respect to premises leased to a renewal
  tenant if the applicant shall fail to submit evidence acceptable to  the
  department  of finance, within the time specified in subdivision four of
  section four hundred ninety-nine-d of this title, that the  requirements
  of   section   four  hundred  ninety-nine-c  of  this  title  concerning
  expenditures on improvements have been met within the time specified  in
  such  section four hundred ninety-nine-c.  In such event, the department
  of finance shall require the landlord to pay, with penalty and interest,
  any abatement received pursuant  to  this  title  with  respect  to  the
  premises in question.
Tax lien; interest and penalty.  All taxes, with interest,
  required  to  be  paid  retroactively  pursuant  to  this  title   shall
  constitute  a  tax  lien  as of the date it is determined such taxes and
  interest are owed.  All interest shall be calculated from the  date  the
  taxes would have been due but for the abatement granted pursuant to this
  title  at  the applicable rate or rates of interest imposed by such city
  generally for non-payment of real  property  tax  with  respect  to  the
  eligible  building for the period in question.  When a provision of this
  title requires the payment of a penalty in  addition  to  interest,  the
  amount  of  such  penalty  shall be equal to the amount of interest that
  would have been payable pursuant to such  provision  had  such  interest
  been calculated at the rate of three percent per annum.
Confidentiality.    1.  Except  in accordance with a proper
  judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for
  the commissioner of finance, any officer or employee of  the  department
  of  finance,  the  president  or  a  commissioner or employee of the tax
  commission, any person engaged or retained by such  department  or  such
  commission on an independent contract basis, or any person who, pursuant
  to  this  title, is permitted to inspect any information submitted by an
  applicant to the department of finance pursuant to this title or to whom
  a copy, an abstract or a portion of any such information  is  furnished,
  to  divulge  or  make  known  in  any manner any such information to any
  person  not  authorized  pursuant  to  this  title   to   inspect   such
  information. The officers charged with custody of such information shall
  not  be  required to produce any of it or evidence of anything contained
  in it in any action or proceeding in any court except on behalf  of  the
  commissioner  of finance in an action or proceeding under the provisions
  of this title, or on behalf of any party to  any  action  or  proceeding
  under  the provisions of this title when such information or facts shown
  thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding, in either of
  which events the court may require the production of, and may  admit  in
  evidence  so  much of such information or of the facts shown thereby, as
  are pertinent to the action or proceeding and no  more.  Nothing  herein
  shall   be   construed   to   prohibit   the  inspection  by  the  legal
  representatives of the department of finance or the  tax  commission  of
  such information submitted by any applicant who shall bring an action to
  correct an assessment. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the
  delivery   to   an   applicant   or   the  applicant's  duly  authorized
  representative of a certified copy of any information  submitted  by  an
  applicant to the department of finance pursuant to this title; or to any
  agency  or any department of any city having a population of one million
  or more provided the same is requested for  official  business;  nor  to
  prohibit the inspection for official business of such information by the
  corporation  counsel  or  other legal representatives of a city having a
  population of one million or more or by the  district  attorney  of  any
  county  within  such city; nor to prohibit the publication of statistics
  so classified as to prevent the identification of  such  information  or
  particular  items  thereof. Information submitted by an applicant to the
  department of finance pursuant to this title shall  not  be  subject  to
  disclosure pursuant to article six of the public officers law.
    2.  Any violation of the provisions of subdivision one of this section
  shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one  thousand  dollars  or  by
  imprisonment  not  exceeding one year, or both, at the discretion of the
  court, and if the offender be an officer or employee of  the  department
  of  finance  or  of  the tax commission, the offender shall be dismissed
  from office.

Definitions. When used in this title, the following terms
  shall have the following meanings:
    1. "Applicant" shall mean (a) with respect  to  an  eligible  building
  held  in  the cooperative or condominium form of ownership, the board of
  managers of a condominium or the board of  directors  of  a  cooperative
  apartment  corporation,  or  (b)  with  respect  to  any  other eligible
  building, the owner of such building.
    2. "Application for tax abatement" shall mean  an  application  for  a
  green   roof   tax   abatement   pursuant   to   section   four  hundred
  ninety-nine-ccc of this title.
    3. "Architect" shall mean a person licensed and registered to practice
  the profession of architecture under the education law.
    4. "Compliance period"  shall  mean  the  tax  year  in  which  a  tax
  abatement is taken.
    5.  "Department  of finance" shall mean the department of finance of a
  city having a population of one million or more persons.
    6. "Designated agency" shall mean one or more agencies or  departments
  of  a  city  having a population of one million or more persons that are
  designated by the mayor of such city to exercise the  functions,  powers
  and duties of a designated agency pursuant to this title.
    7. "Eligible building" shall mean a class one, class two or class four
  real property, as defined in subdivision one of section eighteen hundred
  two  of  this  chapter, located within a city having a population of one
  million or more persons. No building shall be eligible for more than one
  tax abatement pursuant to this title.
    8. "Eligible rooftop space" shall mean the total space available on an
  eligible building to support a green roof, as certified by  an  engineer
  or  architect  or  other  certified  or  licensed  professional  whom  a
  designated agency designates by rule.
    9. "Engineer" shall mean a person licensed and registered to  practice
  the profession of engineering under the education law.
    10.  "Green  roof"  shall  mean  an  addition to a roof of an eligible
  building that covers at least fifty percent of such building's  eligible
  rooftop  space  and  includes  (a) a weatherproof and waterproof roofing
  membrane layer that complies with local construction and fire codes, (b)
  a root barrier layer, (c) a drainage  layer  that  complies  with  local
  construction  and  fire  codes  and  is  designed  so  the drains can be
  inspected and cleaned, (d) a filter or separation fabric, (e)  a  growth
  medium,  including  natural  or simulated soil, with a depth of at least
  two inches, (f) if the depth of the growth medium  is  less  than  three
  inches,  an  independent water holding layer that is designed to prevent
  the rapid drying of the growth medium, such as a non-woven  fabric,  pad
  or  foam  mat  or  controlled  flow roof drain, unless the green roof is
  certified not to need regular irrigation to maintain  live  plants,  and
  (g) a vegetation layer, at least eighty percent of which must be covered
  by  live plants such as (i) sedum or equally drought resistant and hardy
  plant species, (ii) native  plant  species,  and/or  (iii)  agricultural
  plant species.

Real  property  tax abatement. An eligible building shall
  receive an abatement of real property taxes as provided  in  this  title
  and the rules promulgated hereunder.
    1. (a) The amount of such tax abatement for any tax year commencing on
  or  after  July  first,  two  thousand nine and ending on or before June
  thirtieth, two thousand fourteen shall be four dollars and  fifty  cents
  per  square foot of a green roof pursuant to an approved application for
  tax abatement; provided, however, that the amount of such tax  abatement
  shall  not exceed the lesser of (i) one hundred thousand dollars or (ii)
  the tax liability for the eligible building in the tax year in which the
  tax abatement is taken.
    (b) The total amount of such tax abatement commencing on or after July
  first, two thousand fourteen and ending on or before June thirtieth, two
  thousand twenty-four, shall be five dollars and twenty-three  cents  per
  square  foot of a green roof pursuant to an approved application for tax
  abatement; provided, however, that the  amount  of  such  tax  abatement
  shall  not exceed two hundred thousand dollars. To the extent the amount
  of such tax abatement exceeds the total tax liability in any  tax  year,
  any  remaining  amount may be applied to the tax liability in succeeding
  tax years, provided that such abatement  must  be  applied  within  five
  years of the tax year in which the tax abatement was initially taken.
    (c)  Notwithstanding  paragraph  (b)  of  this  subdivision,  property
  located  within  specifically  designated  New   York   city   community
  districts,  selected by an agency designated by the mayor of the city of
  New York pursuant to subdivision five of this section, shall receive  an
  enhanced  tax  abatement  for any green roof with a growth medium with a
  depth of at least four inches. The total amount  of  such  enhanced  tax
  abatement  commencing  on or after July first, two thousand nineteen and
  ending on or before June thirtieth, two thousand twenty-four,  shall  be
  fifteen  dollars per square foot of a green roof pursuant to an approved
  application for enhanced tax  abatement:  provided,  however,  that  the
  amount  of  such  enhanced  tax  abatement  shall not exceed two hundred
  thousand dollars.  To  the  extent  the  amount  of  such  enhanced  tax
  abatement exceeds the total tax liability in any tax year, any remaining
  amount  may  be  applied  to  the tax liability in succeeding tax years,
  provided that such abatement must be applied within five  years  of  the
  tax year in which the tax abatement was initially taken.
    (d)  Notwithstanding  paragraph  (b)  or  (c) of this subdivision, the
  aggregate amount of tax abatements allowed under  this  subdivision  for
  the  tax  year  commencing  July first, two thousand fourteen and ending
  June thirtieth two thousand fifteen shall be a maximum of seven  hundred
  fifty  thousand  dollars,  and  the  aggregate  amount of tax abatements
  allowed under this subdivision for any tax year commencing on  or  after
  July first, two thousand fifteen and ending on or before June thirtieth,
  two  thousand  twenty-four shall be a maximum of one million dollars. No
  tax abatements shall be allowed under this subdivision for any tax  year
  commencing on or after July first, two thousand twenty-four.
    (e)  Such  aggregate  amount  of tax abatements including enhanced tax
  abatements, shall be allocated by the department of  finance  on  a  pro
  rata  basis  among applicants whose applications have been approved by a
  designated agency. If such allocation is not made prior to the date that
  the real property tax bill, statement of account or other  similar  bill
  or  statement  is  prepared,  then  the  department of finance shall, as
  necessary, after  such  allocation  is  made,  submit  an  amended  real
  property  tax  bill,  statement  of  account  or  other  similar bill or
  statement to any applicant whose abatement must be adjusted  to  reflect
  such allocation. Nothing in this paragraph shall be deemed to affect the
  obligation  of  any  taxpayer  under  applicable law with respect to the

  payment of any installment of real property tax for the fiscal  year  as
  to which such allocation is made, which was due and payable prior to the
  date  such  amended real property tax bills are sent, and the department
  of  finance  shall  be authorized to determine the date on which amended
  bills are to be sent and the installments of real property tax which are
  to be reflected therein.
    2. Such tax abatement shall  commence  on  July  first  following  the
  approval of an application for tax abatement by a designated agency.
    3.  With respect to any eligible building held in the condominium form
  of ownership that receive a tax abatement pursuant to this  title,  such
  tax abatement benefits shall be apportioned among all of the condominium
  tax lots within such eligible building.
    4.  If,  as  a  result of application to the tax commission or a court
  order or action by the department  of  finance,  the  billable  assessed
  value for the fiscal year in which the tax abatement is taken is reduced
  after the assessment roll becomes final, the department of finance shall
  recalculate the abatement so that the abatement granted shall not exceed
  the  annual  tax  liability  as  so  reduced.  The  amount  equal to the
  difference between the abatement originally granted and the abatement as
  so recalculated shall be deducted from any refund otherwise  payable  or
  remission  otherwise  due  as  a  result  of  such reduction in billable
  assessed value.
    5. Buildings located within  specifically  designated  New  York  city
  community  districts, as identified by an agency designated by the mayor
  of the city of  New  York,  shall  be  eligible  for  the  enhanced  tax
  abatement described in paragraph (c) of subdivision one of this section.
  No  building  located  outside of a designated area shall be eligible to
  receive an enhanced abatement. An agency designated by the mayor of  the
  city  of  New  York  shall select community districts on a rolling basis
  over a period of three years. In  selecting  community  districts,  such
  agency  shall  prioritize areas in the priority combined sewage overflow
  tributary areas identified by the city  of  New  York,  with  particular
  emphasis  on those portions of such city that have been identified by an
  agency designated by the mayor of such city as lacking green space.

Application for tax abatement. 1. To obtain a tax abatement
  pursuant  to  this  title, an applicant must file an application for tax
  abatement, which may be filed on or after January  first,  two  thousand
  nine, and on or before March fifteenth, two thousand twenty-three.
    2.  Such  application shall be filed with a designated agency no later
  than the March fifteenth before the tax year, beginning July first,  for
  which the tax abatement is sought.
    3. Such application shall contain the following:
    (a)  The  name  and  address  of the applicant and the location of the
  green roof.
    (b) Proof that the applicant  received  all  required  certifications,
  permits and other approvals to construct the green roof.
    (c)  Certifications, in a form prescribed by a designated agency, from
  an engineer or architect or other  certified  or  licensed  professional
  whom  a  designated  agency  designates by rule (i) of eligible roof top
  space, (ii) that a green  roof  has  been  constructed  on  an  eligible
  building in accordance with this title, the rules promulgated hereunder,
  and  local construction and fire codes, (iii) that a structural analysis
  of such building has been performed establishing that the  building  can
  sustain  the  load of the green roof in a fully saturated condition, and
  (iv) pursuant to paragraph  (f)  of  subdivision  ten  of  section  four
  hundred  ninety-nine-aaa  of this title, if required. All certifications
  required by this title or  the  rules  hereunder  shall  set  forth  the
  specific  findings  upon  which  the  certification  is based, and shall
  include information sufficient to identify the  eligible  building,  the
  certifying  engineer,  architect  or  other professional, and such other
  information as may be prescribed by a designated agency.
    (d) An agreement by the applicant, which includes a maintenance  plan,
  to  maintain  the  green  roof  during  the  compliance period and for a
  minimum of three years thereafter in such a manner that it  continuously
  constitutes  a green roof within the meaning of this title and the rules
  promulgated hereunder.
    (e) An agreement to permit a designated  agency  or  its  designee  to
  inspect  the  green  roof  and any related structures and equipment upon
  reasonable notice.
    (f) Any other information or certifications required by  a  designated
  agency pursuant to this title and the rules promulgated hereunder.
    4.  An application for tax abatement shall be in any format prescribed
  by a designated agency, including electronic form.
    5. An application for tax abatement shall be approved by a  designated
  agency   upon   determining  that  the  applicant  has  submitted  proof
  acceptable to such agency that the  requirements  for  obtaining  a  tax
  abatement  pursuant  to  this  title and the rules promulgated hereunder
  have been met. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to show  by
  clear  and  convincing evidence that the requirements for granting a tax
  abatement have been satisfied.
    6. Upon notification from a designated agency that an application  for
  tax  abatement  has been approved, the department of finance shall apply
  the tax abatement, provided there are no outstanding real estate  taxes,
  water  and  sewer  charges, payments in lieu of taxes or other municipal
  charges with respect to the eligible building.

Continuing  requirements.  The  tax  abatement  shall  be
  conditioned upon:
    1.  continuing  compliance  during  the  compliance  period  with  all
  applicable  provisions  of  law,  including without limitation the local
  construction and fire codes, maintaining the green roof in such a manner
  that it continuously constitutes a green roof within the meaning of this
  title and the rules promulgated hereunder, and permitting  a  designated
  agency  or  its  designee  to  inspect  the  green  roof and any related
  structures and equipment upon reasonable notice; and
    2. real estate taxes, water and sewer charges,  payments  in  lieu  of
  taxes  or  other  municipal charges with respect to an eligible building
  not having been due an owing during the compliance period for  a  period
  of six months or more.

Revocation of tax abatement. 1. The department of finance
  shall revoke, in whole or in part, any tax abatement granted pursuant to
  this title whenever a designated agency has determined and notified  the
  department of finance that:
    (a) an applicant has failed to comply with a requirement of this title
  or  any  rule  promulgated  hereunder  at any time during the compliance
  period, including without limitation any of the continuing  requirements
  set  forth in subdivision one of section four hundred ninety-nine-ddd of
  this title;
    (b) an eligible building has not been in compliance during all or part
  of the compliance period with any requirement of this title or any  rule
  promulgated hereunder;
    (c)  the  green  roof for which a tax abatement was granted has at any
  time during the compliance period failed to meet any requirement  for  a
  green roof pursuant to this title or any rule promulgated hereunder;
    (d)  the  green  roof  has  become a fire or safety hazard at any time
  during the compliance period; or
    (e) an application, certification, report or other document  submitted
  by  the  applicant  contains  a  false  or  misleading statement as to a
  material fact or omits to state any material fact necessary in order  to
  make the statement therein not false or misleading.
    2.  The department of finance may revoke, in whole or in part, any tax
  abatement granted pursuant to this title whenever it has determined that
  an applicant has failed to comply with the  continuing  requirement  set
  forth in subdivision two of section four hundred ninety-nine-ddd of this
  title.
    3.  Where  it has been determined by a designated agency, after notice
  to and an opportunity to be  heard  by  the  entity  receiving  the  tax
  rebate,  that  a  situation  described  in  any  of  the  provisions  of
  subdivision one of this section has  occurred,  such  designated  agency
  shall  so  notify  the department of finance no later than the ninetieth
  day after the last day of the compliance period.
    4. An applicant shall  pay,  with  interest,  such  part  of  any  tax
  abatement  received pursuant to this title that represents the period of
  non-compliance as determined by the designated agency or the  department
  of  finance,  as  the  case may be. In addition, a designated agency may
  declare any applicant ineligible for future tax  abatement  pursuant  to
  this  title  if any application, certification, report or other document
  submitted by the applicant contains a false or misleading  statement  as
  to  a  material  fact  or  omits to state any material fact necessary in
  order to make the statement therein not false or misleading.

Enforcement  and  administration.  1.  The  department of
  finance shall have, in addition  to  any  other  functions,  powers  and
  duties  that  have  been or may be conferred on it by law, the following
  functions, powers and duties to be exercised  in  accordance  with  this
  title:
    (a) to apply a tax abatement;
    (b) to revoke all or part of any such tax abatement;
    (c)  to  make  and  promulgate rules to carry out the purposes of this
  title; and
    (d) any other function, power or  duty  necessarily  implied  by  this
  title.
    2. A designated agency shall have, in addition to any other functions,
  powers  and  duties that have been or may be conferred on it by law, the
  following functions, powers and duties to  be  exercised  in  accordance
  with this title:
    (a)  to  receive,  review,  approve  and  deny  applications  for  tax
  abatement;
    (b) to inspect green roofs and any related structures and equipment;
    (c) to prescribe forms and make and promulgate rules to carry out  the
  purposes of this title;
    (d)  to  make the determinations provided for in sections four hundred
  ninety-nine-ccc and four hundred ninety-nine-eee of this  title  and  to
  notify the department of finance of such determinations; and
    (e)  any  other  function,  power  or duty necessarily implied by this
  title.
    3. If a designated agency determines that an architect or engineer  or
  other  certified or licensed professional whom such agency designates by
  rule,  in  making  any  certification  under  this  title  or  any  rule
  promulgated  hereunder,  engaged  in  professional misconduct, then such
  department shall so inform the education department or other appropriate
  certifying or licensing authority.
    4. A designated  agency  may  provide  for  reasonable  administrative
  charges  or  fees  necessary to defray expenses of administering the tax
  abatement program established by this title.
    5. A designated agency and the department of finance  shall  establish
  procedures  that  are  necessary  or  appropriate  for  (a)  the  timely
  notification to the department of finance by a designated agency  of  an
  approval  of  an  application  for tax abatement or of any noncompliance
  pursuant to section four hundred ninety-nine-eee of this title  and  (b)
  any  other  interagency  coordination to facilitate the purposes of this
  title.

Tax lien and interest. All taxes, with interest, required
  to be paid retroactively pursuant to this title shall constitute  a  tax
  lien  as  of the date it is determined such taxes and interest are owed.
  All interest shall be calculated from the date the taxes would have been
  due but for the tax abatement granted pursuant  to  this  title  at  the
  applicable  rate  or rates of interest imposed generally for non-payment
  of real property tax with respect  to  the  eligible  building  for  the
  period in question.

Definitions. When used in this title, the following terms
  shall have the following meanings:
    1. "Applicant" shall mean (a) with respect  to  an  eligible  building
  held  in  the cooperative or condominium form of ownership, the board of
  managers of a condominium or the board of  directors  of  a  cooperative
  apartment  corporation,  or  (b)  with  respect  to  any  other eligible
  building, the owner of such building.
    2. "Application for tax abatement" shall mean  an  application  for  a
  solar   electric   generating  system  and/or  electric  energy  storage
  equipment   tax   abatement   pursuant   to   section    four    hundred
  ninety-nine-cccc of this title.
    3. "Architect" shall mean a person licensed and registered to practice
  the profession of architecture under the education law.
    4.  "Compliance  period"  shall  mean  the  tax  year  in  which a tax
  abatement commences and the three tax years immediately thereafter.
    5. "Department of finance" shall mean the department of finance  of  a
  city having a population of one million or more persons.
    6.  "Designated agency" shall mean one or more agencies or departments
  of a city having a population of one million or more  persons  that  are
  designated  by  the mayor of such city to exercise the functions, powers
  and duties of a designated agency pursuant to this title.
    7. "Eligible building" shall mean a class one, class two or class four
  real property, as defined in subdivision one of section eighteen hundred
  two of this chapter, located within a city having a  population  of  one
  million or more persons. No building shall be eligible for more than one
  tax  abatement  pursuant  to  this  title  prior  to  January first, two
  thousand twenty-four.
    8.  "Eligible  solar  electric  generating  system  expenditures"  and
  "eligible  electric  energy  storage  equipment expenditures" shall mean
  reasonable expenditures for materials, labor costs properly allocable to
  on-site preparation, assembly and original  installation,  architectural
  and  engineering services, and designs and plans directly related to the
  construction or installation  of  a  solar  electric  generating  system
  and/or electric energy storage equipment installed in connection with an
  eligible building. Solar parking canopy structures shall be considered a
  solar  electric  generating system for the purposes of this subdivision.
  Such eligible expenditures shall not include interest or  other  finance
  charges,  or  any  expenditures incurred using a federal, state or local
  grant.
    9. "Engineer" shall mean a person licensed and registered to  practice
  the profession of engineering under the education law.
    10.  "Solar  electric generating system" shall mean a system that uses
  solar energy to generate electricity. Such system shall not include  any
  equipment  connected  to  a  solar  electric generating system that is a
  component of part or parts of a non-solar electric generating system  or
  that  uses  any  sort of recreational facility or equipment as a storage
  medium.
    11. "Electric energy storage equipment" means a  set  of  technologies
  capable of storing electric energy and releasing that energy as electric
  power  at  a  later time. Electric energy storage technologies may store
  energy as potential, kinetic, chemical or thermal  energy  that  can  be
  released as electric power, and include, but are not limited to, various
  types  of  batteries,  flywheels, electrochemical capacitors, compressed
  air storage and thermal storage devices.

Application  for  tax  abatement.    1.  To obtain a tax
  abatement pursuant to this title, an applicant must file an  application
  for  tax  abatement,  which  may be filed on or after January first, two
  thousand nine, and on or before January first, two thousand thirty-six.
    2. Such application shall be filed with a designated agency  no  later
  than  the  March  fifteenth  before  the  first tax year, beginning July
  first, for which the tax abatement is sought.
    3. Such application shall contain the following:
    (a) The name and address of the applicant  and  the  location  of  the
  solar   electric  generating  system  or  the  electric  energy  storage
  equipment.
    (b) Proof that the applicant  received  all  required  certifications,
  permits  and  other approvals to construct the solar electric generating
  system or the electric energy storage equipment.
    (c) Certifications in a form prescribed by a designated  agency,  from
  an  architect, engineer or other certified or licensed professional whom
  a designated agency designates  by  rule,  that  (i)  a  solar  electric
  generating  system  or electric energy storage equipment has been placed
  in service in connection with an eligible building  in  accordance  with
  this  title, the rules promulgated hereunder, and local construction and
  fire codes, and (ii) if the solar electric generating system or electric
  energy storage equipment has been placed on the roof of  a  building  or
  other   structure,   that  a  structural  analysis  has  been  performed
  establishing that such building or structure can  sustain  the  load  of
  such  solar  electric  generating  system  or  electric  energy  storage
  equipment. All certifications  required  by  this  title  or  the  rules
  promulgated  hereunder  shall set forth the specific findings upon which
  the certification is based, and shall include information sufficient  to
  identify  the  eligible  building, the certifying engineer, architect or
  other professional, and such other information as may be prescribed by a
  designated agency.
    (d) An agreement to permit a designated  agency  or  its  designee  to
  inspect  the solar electric generating system or electric energy storage
  equipment and any  related  structures  and  equipment  upon  reasonable
  notice.
    (e)  Any  other information or certifications required by a designated
  agency pursuant to this title and the rules promulgated hereunder.
    4. An application for tax abatement shall be in any format  prescribed
  by a designated agency, including electronic form.
    5.  An application for tax abatement shall be approved by a designated
  agency  upon  determining  that  the  applicant  has   submitted   proof
  acceptable  to  such  agency  that  the requirements for obtaining a tax
  abatement pursuant to this title and  the  rules  promulgated  hereunder
  have  been met. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to show by
  clear and convincing evidence that the requirements for granting  a  tax
  abatement have been satisfied.
    6.  Upon notification from a designated agency that an application for
  tax abatement has been approved, the department of finance  shall  apply
  the  tax abatement, provided there are no outstanding real estate taxes,
  water and sewer charges, payments in lieu of taxes  or  other  municipal
  charges with respect to the eligible building.

Continuing  requirements.  The  tax  abatement  shall be
  conditioned upon:
    1.  continuing  compliance  during  the  compliance  period  with  all
  applicable  provisions  of  law,  including without limitation the local
  construction and fire codes, maintaining the solar  electric  generating
  system  or  electric  energy  storage equipment in such a manner that it
  continuously constitutes a solar electric generating system or  electric
  energy  storage equipment within the meaning of this title and the rules
  promulgated  hereunder,  and  permitting  a  designated  agency  or  its
  designee  to  inspect  the  solar electric generating system or electric
  energy storage equipment and any related structures and  equipment  upon
  reasonable notice; and
    2.  real  estate  taxes,  water and sewer charges, payments in lieu of
  taxes or other municipal charges with respect to  an  eligible  building
  not  having been due and owing during the compliance period for a period
  of six months or more.

Revocation of tax abatement. 1. The department of finance
  shall revoke, in whole or in part, any tax abatement granted pursuant to
  this title whenever a designated agency has determined and notified  the
  department of finance that:
    (a) an applicant has failed to comply with a requirement of this title
  or  any  rule  promulgated  hereunder  at any time during the compliance
  period, including without limitation any of the continuing  requirements
  set forth in subdivision one of section four hundred ninety-nine-dddd of
  this title;
    (b) an eligible building has not been in compliance at any time during
  the  compliance  period  with  a  requirement  of this title or any rule
  promulgated hereunder;
    (c) the solar electric generating system or  electric  energy  storage
  equipment  for  which a tax abatement was granted has at any time during
  the compliance period  failed  to  meet  any  requirement  for  a  solar
  electric generating system or electric energy storage equipment pursuant
  to this title or any rule promulgated hereunder;
    (d)  the  solar  electric generating system or electric energy storage
  equipment has become a fire or safety hazard  at  any  time  during  the
  compliance period; or
    (e)  an application, certification, report or other document submitted
  by the applicant contains a  false  or  misleading  statement  as  to  a
  material  fact or omits to state any material fact necessary in order to
  make the statement therein not false or misleading.
    2. The department of finance may revoke, in whole or in part, any  tax
  abatement granted pursuant to this title whenever it has determined that
  an  applicant  has  failed to comply with the continuing requirement set
  forth in subdivision two of section  four  hundred  ninety-nine-dddd  of
  this title.
    3.  Where  it has been determined by a designated agency, after notice
  and  an  opportunity  to  be  heard,  that  any  of  the  provisions  of
  subdivision  one  of  this  section  have  not  been complied with, such
  designated agency shall so notify the department  of  finance  no  later
  than the ninetieth day after the last day of the compliance period.
    4.  An  applicant  shall  pay,  with  interest,  such  part of any tax
  abatement received pursuant to this title that represents the period  of
  non-compliance  as determined by the designated agency or the department
  of finance, as the case may be. In addition,  a  designated  agency  may
  declare  any  applicant  ineligible for future tax abatement pursuant to
  this title if any application, certification, report or  other  document
  submitted  by  the applicant contains a false or misleading statement as
  to a material fact or omits to state  any  material  fact  necessary  in
  order to make the statement therein not false or misleading.

Enforcement  and  administration.  1.  The department of
  finance shall have, in addition  to  any  other  functions,  powers  and
  duties  that  have  been or may be conferred on it by law, the following
  functions, powers and duties to be exercised  in  accordance  with  this
  title:
    (a) to apply a tax abatement;
    (b) to revoke all or part of any such tax abatement;
    (c)  to  make  and  promulgate rules to carry out the purposes of this
  title; and
    (d) any other function, power or  duty  necessarily  implied  by  this
  title.
    2. A designated agency shall have, in addition to any other functions,
  powers  and  duties that have been or may be conferred on it by law, the
  following functions, powers and duties to  be  exercised  in  accordance
  with this title:
    (a)  to  receive,  review,  approve  and  deny  applications  for  tax
  abatement;
    (b) to inspect solar electric generating systems  or  electric  energy
  storage equipment and any related structures and equipment;
    (c)  to  establish  permit  or certification requirements to determine
  when the solar electric generating system  or  electric  energy  storage
  equipment  has  been  placed  in  service,  such  as certification by an
  architect, engineer or other certified or licensed professional  whom  a
  designated agency designates by rule;
    (d) to establish guidance and procedures for determining or certifying
  eligible  solar  electric  generating  system or electric energy storage
  equipment expenditures;
    (e) to prescribe forms and make and promulgate rules to carry out  the
  purposes of this title;
    (f)  to  make the determinations provided for in sections four hundred
  ninety-nine-cccc and four hundred ninety-nine-eeee of this title and  to
  notify the department of finance of such determinations; and
    (g)  any  other  function,  power  or duty necessarily implied by this
  title.
    3. If a designated agency determines that an architect or engineer  or
  other  certified  or  licensed  professional  whom  a  designated agency
  designates by rule, in making any certification under this title or  any
  rule  promulgated  hereunder,  engaged  in professional misconduct, then
  such department shall  so  inform  the  education  department  or  other
  appropriate certifying or licensing authority.
    4.  A  designated  agency  may  provide  for reasonable administrative
  charges or fees necessary to defray expenses of  administering  the  tax
  abatement program established by this title.
    5.  A  designated agency and the department of finance shall establish
  procedures  that  are  necessary  or  appropriate  for  (a)  the  timely
  notification  to  the department of finance by a designated agency of an
  approval of an application for tax abatement  or  of  any  noncompliance
  pursuant  to section four hundred ninety-nine-eeee of this title and (b)
  any other interagency coordination to facilitate the  purposes  of  this
  title.
Tax lien and interest. All taxes, with interest, required
  to be paid retroactively pursuant to this title shall constitute  a  tax
  lien  as  of the date it is determined such taxes and interest are owed.
  All interest shall be calculated from the date the taxes would have been
  due but for the tax abatement granted pursuant  to  this  title  at  the
  applicable  rate  or rates of interest imposed generally for non-payment
  of real property tax with respect  to  the  eligible  building  for  the
  period in question.

Definitions. When used in this title:
    1. "Local public utility mass real property" means public utility mass
  real  property  that  is  located in a particular town, village, city or
  county assessing unit and under the same ownership.
    2. "Local assessing jurisdiction" means the  town,  city,  village  or
  county  assessing  unit  that  establishes the assessment rolls for such
  town, city, village or county.
    3. "Public utility mass real property" means real property,  including
  conduits,  cables,  lines,  wires,  poles,  supports  and enclosures for
  electrical conductors located on, above and below real  property,  which
  is  used  in the transmission and distribution of telephone or telegraph
  service, and electromagnetic voice, video and data  signals.  Such  term
  shall  include  all  property  described  in  paragraphs  (d) and (i) of
  subdivision twelve of section one hundred two of this  chapter.  Special
  franchise  property as described in subdivision seventeen of section one
  hundred two of this chapter, and all property  described  in  paragraphs
  (a)  and (b) and subparagraphs (A), (B), (C) and (D) of paragraph (i) of
  subdivision twelve of section one hundred two of this chapter shall  not
  be  considered  public  utility  mass real property for purposes of this
  title.
    4. "Taxation" means an ad valorem levy or special assessment for which
  public utility mass real property is otherwise liable pursuant  to  this
  chapter.

Annual  fee.  Any  costs  and expenses incurred by the
  commissioner in the  establishment  of  assessment  ceilings  for  local
  public  utility  mass real property shall be paid from the collection of
  an annual charge upon the owners  of  local  public  utility  mass  real
  property. The commissioner shall provide by rule for computation of such
  charge  through  the apportionment of these costs and expenses to owners
  of local public utility mass real property in relation to the total full
  value of the local public utility mass real  property  eligible  for  an
  assessment  ceiling  pursuant to this title. Prior to collecting payment
  of such charges, the commissioner  shall  annually  provide  a  detailed
  report  to  each  owner  of  local  public  utility  mass  real property
  identifying costs  related  to  establishment  of  assessment  ceilings,
  including,  but  not  limited  to, expenditures, revenue sources and any
  allocations. The charges established pursuant to this section  shall  be
  subject  to  the  approval  of the director of the budget. Each owner of
  local public utility mass real property shall be authorized to challenge
  any such charges pursuant to article seventy-eight of the civil practice
  law and rules.

Assessment of local public utility mass real property.
  Subject to the provisions of section four  hundred  ninety-nine-qqqq  of
  this  title,  the  assessor  in each city, town and village, and in each
  county having a county department of assessment, shall  annually  assess
  all local public utility mass real property situated in such city, town,
  village  or  county,  as  the case may be. Where a village has enacted a
  local law as provided in subdivision three of section  fourteen  hundred
  two  of  this  chapter, the town or county assessor shall apportion that
  part of the assessment of local public utility mass real property in the
  town or county to the village for village tax purposes.
Assessment ceiling. 1. To determine the extent to which
  local public utility mass real  property  shall  be  exempt  under  this
  title,  an  assessment  ceiling  for  the local public utility mass real
  property shall be established annually by the commissioner as follows:
    (a) Determine: (i) the local public utility mass real  property  value
  in   accordance   with   the   provisions   of   section   four  hundred
  ninety-nine-mmmm of this title; and (ii) the  equalization  rate  factor
  for  the  local public utility mass real property in accordance with the
  provisions of section four hundred ninety-nine-nnnn of this title.
    (b) Multiply the local public utility mass real property value by  the
  equalization rate factor.
    The result shall be the assessment ceiling.
    2.  The valuation date for all local public utility mass real property
  shall be January first of the year  preceding  the  year  in  which  the
  assessment  roll on which such property is to be assessed, completed and
  filed in the office of the city or town clerk. The  taxable  status  for
  all  local  public  utility  mass  real property shall be based upon its
  condition and ownership as of the taxable status date applicable to  the
  assessment roll on which it is to appear.
    3.  (a)  For assessment rolls with taxable status dates in each of the
  three calendar years including and following  the  year  in  which  this
  section   shall   take  effect,  the  commissioner  shall  establish  no
  assessment ceiling that is less than ninety percent  or  more  than  one
  hundred  ten percent of the assessment of such local public utility mass
  real property appearing on the municipal assessment roll with a  taxable
  status  date  occurring  in the second preceding calendar year from when
  this section  shall  take  effect,  except  that  the  commissioner  may
  establish  assessment  ceilings  below the ninety percent level or above
  the one hundred ten percent level to take into  account  any  change  in
  level  of  assessment  and/or  to  take  into  account  any additions or
  retirements to public utility mass real property or litigation affecting
  the value or taxable status  of  the  local  public  utility  mass  real
  property initiated prior to the effective date of this section.
    (b)  For  assessment  rolls with taxable status dates in the years two
  thousand eighteen, two thousand nineteen and two  thousand  twenty,  the
  commissioner  shall  establish  no  assessment ceiling that is below the
  lower limit or above the upper limit specified in this paragraph, except
  that the commissioner may establish assessment ceilings below such lower
  limit or above such upper limit to take into account any change in level
  of assessment and/or to take into account any additions  or  retirements
  to  public  utility mass real property or litigation affecting the value
  or taxable status  of  the  local  public  utility  mass  real  property
  initiated prior to the effective date of this section.
    (i)  For  assessment  rolls  with taxable status dates in two thousand
  eighteen, the assessment ceiling shall not  be  less  than  seventy-five
  percent  or  more than one hundred twenty-five percent of the assessment
  of such local  public  utility  mass  real  property  appearing  on  the
  municipal  assessment  roll  with a taxable status date occurring in the
  year two thousand thirteen.
    (ii) For assessment rolls with taxable status dates  in  two  thousand
  nineteen, the assessment ceiling shall not be less than fifty percent or
  more  than  one  hundred  fifty  percent of the assessment of such local
  public utility mass real property appearing on the municipal  assessment
  roll  with  a  taxable  status  date  occurring in the year two thousand
  thirteen.
    (iii) For assessment rolls with taxable status dates in  two  thousand
  twenty,  the  assessment  ceiling  shall  not  be  less than twenty-five
  percent or more than one hundred seventy-five percent of the  assessment

  of  such  local  public  utility  mass  real  property  appearing on the
  municipal assessment roll with a taxable status date  occurring  in  the
  year two thousand thirteen.

Local  public  utility  mass  real property value. The
  commissioner shall compute the local public utility mass  real  property
  value as follows:
    1.  The  local  reproduction  cost  of  the  public  utility mass real
  property of each public  utility  mass  real  property  owner  in  every
  assessing  unit  is  the cost of reproduction, less depreciation of that
  public utility mass real property.
    2. In  ascertaining  depreciation  of  property  under  this  section,
  consideration  may  be  given  to  the  age, physical condition, average
  service lives of assets and other relevant factors.
    3. Adjustments for economic or functional obsolescence shall  only  be
  made  upon  application  by  a  public utility mass real property owner.
  Every such  application  shall  be  submitted  with  the  annual  report
  required by section four hundred ninety-nine-rrrr of this title.

Equitable ratio of assessment. The commissioner and any
  assessing authority shall be  prohibited  from  assessing  local  public
  utility  mass  real  property  at a value that has a higher ratio to the
  full value of the local public utility mass real property than the ratio
  of assessed value of other real property in the  same  assessment  class
  and jurisdiction to its full value, as provided in section three hundred
  five of this chapter.

Equalization rate. In determining assessment ceilings,
  the commissioner shall apply the final state equalization rate used  for
  the  local  assessing  jurisdiction  on the assessment roll for the year
  immediately preceding the year in which the assessment ceiling is  being
  established,  except  that  (1)  if  a  special  equalization  rate  was
  established for such assessment roll, such rate shall  be  applied,  and
  (2)  in  the  case  of  a  special  assessing unit as defined in section
  eighteen hundred one of  this  chapter,  the  equalization  rate  to  be
  applied  shall  be  the  applicable class equalization rate used on such
  assessment roll.

Tentative determination of assessment ceiling; notice,
  complaints and hearing. 1. Each  year  the  commissioner  shall  make  a
  tentative  determination  of  an assessment ceiling for all local public
  utility mass real property.  Thereafter,  the  commissioner  shall  give
  notice,  in  writing  or electronically, to each assessing unit and each
  owner of  local  public  utility  mass  real  property  for  which  such
  tentative  determination  of an assessment ceiling shall have been made,
  specifying  the  amount  of  such  ceiling,  and  making  available  for
  inspection  and copying the computations used to establish the tentative
  assessment ceiling amount pursuant  to  the  public  officers  law,  and
  setting  forth  the  time and place where the commissioner or his or her
  designee will meet to  hear  any  complaint  concerning  such  tentative
  determination.  Such  notice  shall be sent electronically and served in
  writing at least forty-five days prior to the date  specified  for  such
  hearing.
    2.  A  tentative  assessment  ceiling  may  be  challenged  before the
  commissioner as follows:
    (a) An owner of local public utility mass real property or  the  local
  assessing  jurisdiction  objecting  to  a tentative ceiling must serve a
  complaint upon the commissioner, in writing, and a copy thereof upon the
  assessing unit or owner of local public utility mass real  property,  as
  the  case  may  be,  at least ten days before the date specified for the
  hearing. The complaint shall specify the objections  to  such  tentative
  determination. Service may be made either in person or by mail.
    (b)  On  or before the date specified for the hearing, an affidavit of
  service shall be filed with the commissioner stating  that  service  has
  been made in accordance with the provisions of this section.
    3.  The commissioner or his or her designee shall meet at the time and
  place specified in such notice set forth  in  subdivision  one  of  this
  section to hear complaints in relation to the tentative determination of
  the assessment ceiling. The provisions of section five hundred twelve of
  this chapter shall apply so far as may be practicable to a hearing under
  this  section.  Nothing contained in this subdivision shall be construed
  to require a hearing to be conducted when no complaints have been filed.
Equalization rate. In determining assessment ceilings,
  the commissioner shall apply the final state equalization rate used  for
  the  local  assessing  jurisdiction  on the assessment roll for the year
  immediately preceding the year in which the assessment ceiling is  being
  established,  except  that  (1)  if  a  special  equalization  rate  was
  established for such assessment roll, such rate shall  be  applied,  and
  (2)  in  the  case  of  a  special  assessing unit as defined in section
  eighteen hundred one of  this  chapter,  the  equalization  rate  to  be
  applied  shall  be  the  applicable class equalization rate used on such
  assessment roll.

Tentative determination of assessment ceiling; notice,
  complaints and hearing. 1. Each  year  the  commissioner  shall  make  a
  tentative  determination  of  an assessment ceiling for all local public
  utility mass real property.  Thereafter,  the  commissioner  shall  give
  notice,  in  writing  or electronically, to each assessing unit and each
  owner of  local  public  utility  mass  real  property  for  which  such
  tentative  determination  of an assessment ceiling shall have been made,
  specifying  the  amount  of  such  ceiling,  and  making  available  for
  inspection  and copying the computations used to establish the tentative
  assessment ceiling amount pursuant  to  the  public  officers  law,  and
  setting  forth  the  time and place where the commissioner or his or her
  designee will meet to  hear  any  complaint  concerning  such  tentative
  determination.  Such  notice  shall be sent electronically and served in
  writing at least forty-five days prior to the date  specified  for  such
  hearing.
    2.  A  tentative  assessment  ceiling  may  be  challenged  before the
  commissioner as follows:
    (a) An owner of local public utility mass real property or  the  local
  assessing  jurisdiction  objecting  to  a tentative ceiling must serve a
  complaint upon the commissioner, in writing, and a copy thereof upon the
  assessing unit or owner of local public utility mass real  property,  as
  the  case  may  be,  at least ten days before the date specified for the
  hearing. The complaint shall specify the objections  to  such  tentative
  determination. Service may be made either in person or by mail.
    (b)  On  or before the date specified for the hearing, an affidavit of
  service shall be filed with the commissioner stating  that  service  has
  been made in accordance with the provisions of this section.
    3.  The commissioner or his or her designee shall meet at the time and
  place specified in such notice set forth  in  subdivision  one  of  this
  section to hear complaints in relation to the tentative determination of
  the assessment ceiling. The provisions of section five hundred twelve of
  this chapter shall apply so far as may be practicable to a hearing under
  this  section.  Nothing contained in this subdivision shall be construed
  to require a hearing to be conducted when no complaints have been filed.
Final determination of assessment ceiling; certificate.
  1.  After the hearing provided in section four hundred  ninety-nine-oooo
  of  this  title, the commissioner shall finally determine the assessment
  ceiling for the local public utility mass real property  of  each  local
  public utility mass real property owner situated in each assessing unit.
    2.  Notwithstanding  that  a  complaint  may  not have been filed with
  respect to a tentative  determination  of  an  assessment  ceiling,  the
  commissioner   shall  give  effect  to  any  special  equalization  rate
  established pursuant to  section  twelve  hundred  twenty-four  of  this
  chapter  prior to the date for the final determination of the assessment
  ceiling.
    3. No later than ten days before the last date prescribed by  law  for
  the  levy  of  taxes,  the commissioner shall file a certificate setting
  forth each assessment ceiling as finally determined with the assessor of
  the appropriate assessing unit  or  the  town  or  county  assessor  who
  prepares  a copy of the applicable part of the town or county assessment
  roll for village tax  purposes  as  provided  in  subdivision  three  of
  section fourteen hundred two of this chapter. The commissioner shall, at
  the  same time, transmit to each owner of local public utility mass real
  property for which such ceiling has been determined a duplicate copy  of
  such certificate.
    4.  (a)  Any  final  determination  of  an  assessment  ceiling by the
  commissioner pursuant to  subdivision  one  of  this  section  shall  be
  subject  to  judicial challenge by an owner of local public utility mass
  real property or a local assessing jurisdiction in  a  proceeding  under
  article  seven  of  this chapter; provided however, the time to commence
  such proceeding shall be within sixty days of the issuance of the  final
  assessment  ceiling  certificate and all questions of fact and law shall
  be determined de novo. Any judicial proceeding shall be commenced in the
  supreme court in the county of Albany or the county agreed upon  by  the
  parties in which the local public utility mass real property is located.
    (b) Nothing in this section shall preclude a challenge of the assessed
  value  established  by  a  local  assessing jurisdiction with respect to
  local public utility mass real property as otherwise provided in article
  seven of this chapter, provided however that:
    (i) Upon motion of the local assessing  jurisdiction,  such  challenge
  shall be consolidated with the challenge to the final assessment ceiling
  commenced  pursuant  to  this  subdivision  and  litigated  in the venue
  specified by this subdivision.
    (ii) In any proceeding initiated by an owner of local  public  utility
  mass  real property challenging an assessed value established by a local
  assessing jurisdiction for local public utility mass real property,  the
  final  certified  assessment ceiling established pursuant to subdivision
  one of this section, and the evidence submitted in connection therewith,
  may be considered by the  court  when  determining  the  merits  of  the
  challenge to the assessed value established by the assessing unit.
    (iii)  In  such  a  proceeding, the local assessing jurisdiction, upon
  request to the local public utility mass real property owner,  shall  be
  provided with a copy of the portion of the annual report provided to the
  commissioner  under  section four hundred ninety-nine-rrrr of this title
  that directly relates to the local public  utility  mass  real  property
  located within the local assessing jurisdiction, provided that:
    (A)  Such  report,  or the applicable portion thereof, need only be so
  provided if (1) the property at issue in the proceeding is  property  to
  which  an  assessment  ceiling  applies,  and  (2)  the  assessed  value
  established by the assessing unit for the property is  no  greater  than
  the assessment ceiling set for the property by the commissioner.

    (B) Notwithstanding any other requirements of law to the contrary, the
  annual  report  or  portion  thereof so provided shall be treated by the
  local assessing jurisdiction as confidential in all respects, and  shall
  not  be published or otherwise disclosed to any person or agency, except
  that  such report may be shared with persons who are providing the local
  assessing jurisdiction with legal or appraisal  services  in  connection
  with  the  litigation,  in  which  case  such  persons shall be likewise
  obliged to treat such report as confidential in all respects, and except
  that such report may be offered into evidence in the litigation, subject
  to its admissibility being determined by the court. If ruled admissible,
  the owner of public utility mass real property may move the court for an
  order directing that the portion of the record containing  such  report,
  or  the  applicable  portion  thereof,  not be made available for public
  inspection or disclosure. If such a motion is made, the local  assessing
  jurisdiction shall be deemed to consent thereto.
    (C)  If  the local public utility mass real property owner is required
  by this subparagraph to provide to the local assessing jurisdiction such
  report, or the applicable portion thereof, but it fails to do so  within
  thirty days of such a request, the proceeding shall be dismissed.

Application  of  assessment  ceiling;  computation  of
  exemption. 1. Upon receipt of a  certificate  setting  forth  the  final
  certified   assessment  ceiling  for  local  public  utility  mass  real
  property,  the  assessor   shall   compare   the   assessed   valuations
  attributable  to  the  local  public utility mass real property for each
  owner of local  public  utility  mass  real  property  included  in  the
  assessment  ceiling.  Where  the  owner of the local public utility mass
  real property reports information by specific property identification to
  the commissioner or the local assessing jurisdiction has  implemented  a
  system  by the commissioner standardizing the identity of public utility
  mass real  property  on  assessment  rolls,  such  certified  assessment
  ceilings  shall  be  provided  by  the commissioner, as set forth on the
  local assessing jurisdiction's  assessment  rolls.  Where  the  assessed
  valuation does not exceed the final certified assessment ceiling, as set
  forth  in  the  certificate  for  the  local  public  utility  mass real
  property, the assessor need not make any  adjustment  in  such  assessed
  valuation.  Provided,  however, the assessed valuation exceeds the final
  certified assessment ceiling, as set  forth  in  the  certificate,  such
  local public utility mass real property shall be exempt from taxation to
  the  extent  of  such excess and the assessor shall forthwith reduce the
  assessments of such local public utility mass real property, so that the
  taxable assessed  valuation  of  such  property  shall  not  exceed  the
  certified  assessment  ceiling.  All certificates of assessment ceilings
  shall be attached to the assessment roll or filed therewith as  provided
  in article fifteen-C of this chapter.
    2.  The  assessor  is  hereby  authorized  and  directed  to  make the
  reductions, if any, provided for in this section on the assessment  roll
  of  the  local  assessing jurisdiction in which the local public utility
  mass real property is located, notwithstanding the fact that he  or  she
  may  receive  the  certificate of the assessment ceiling after the final
  completion, verification and filing of such assessment roll. Other local
  officers, including school authorities, applying such  final  assessment
  roll,  are  hereby  authorized and directed, on the basis of information
  which shall be provided by the assessor, to make the reductions provided
  for in this section on their respective tax rolls prior to levy  of  tax
  or,  if  received  after the tax rolls have been established, to correct
  any tax levy of local public utility mass real property to reflect  such
  reduction.  If  the  reduction is made after the tax levy and payment of
  same by the owner of local public utility mass real property, then  such
  owner  of local public utility mass real property shall be entitled to a
  refund in accordance with  section  seven  hundred  twenty-six  of  this
  chapter.
    3.  In  assessing  units  for  which  he  or she is required by law to
  prepare an assessment roll, the assessor of a  county  having  a  county
  department  of  assessment  shall perform all the acts prescribed for an
  assessor by this title. Where a village  has  enacted  a  local  law  as
  provided  in  subdivision  three of section fourteen hundred two of this
  chapter, the assessor of the town or county who prepares a copy of  this
  applicable  part  of  the town or county assessment roll for village tax
  purposes shall also perform the acts prescribed for  assessors  by  this
  title on behalf of the village.

Reports to commissioner. 1. The commissioner may require
  from  an  owner  of  a local public utility mass real property an annual
  report that shall include such information and data that  is  prescribed
  in  regulation  by  the  commissioner  and is reasonable and necessarily
  related to the establishment of a ceiling assessment by the commissioner
  for the local public utility mass real property, and which shall  be  in
  the same format and substance as required for special franchise property
  pursuant  to article six of this chapter. Such reports shall be the same
  for similarly situated local public utility mass real property owners.
    2. Every report required by or pursuant to this section shall be  made
  by  a  person authorized to prepare such reports and having knowledge of
  the contents thereof, or who is authorized to obtain  such  information.
  The  commissioner  may  prepare  and require the use of forms for making
  such reports.
    3. Any owner of local public utility mass  real  property  failing  to
  file  the  annual  report  pursuant  to  this  section  within  the time
  specified by the commissioner shall not be entitled to  judicial  review
  of an assessment ceiling that would have been the subject of such report
  as  provided in this title and shall be subject to a fine of one hundred
  dollars for each day until such report is filed in accordance with  this
  section;  provided,  however,  such  fine  shall not be applied as a tax
  lien; and provided, further, such owner of  local  public  utility  mass
  real  property  shall  not be subject to any other fine or penalty for a
  violation of this section.
    4. In addition to the provisions of subdivision three of this section,
  if an owner of local public utility mass real property fails to  furnish
  a  report  required  by this section within the required time frame, the
  commissioner may commence a special proceeding in the supreme  court  to
  compel such owner to furnish the report.
    5.  If  an  owner  of local public utility mass real property fails to
  submit an annual report as required  by  this  section,  the  assessment
  ceiling on the next annual assessment roll shall be calculated using the
  best information available to the commissioner.
    6.  If  an  owner  of  local  public  utility mass real property makes
  reasonable efforts to file an annual report, such  owner  shall  not  be
  subject to any charge or fine pursuant to this section.

Inspection of accounts and property of public utilities.
  1.  The commissioner shall, upon reasonable prior notice, have access at
  reasonable times  to  reasonable  disclosure  of  accounts  and  records
  established  and maintained by a local public utility mass real property
  owner relating to its local public utility mass real property.
    2. The commissioner shall, at reasonable times in the normal  business
  operations  of  the  local  public utility mass real property owner, and
  with prior notice and appointment, and not otherwise limited by  federal
  law  or  regulations,  have  access to inspect locations where the local
  public utility mass real property is situated.



























