§  1.  Short  title.  This  chapter  shall  be  known as the "multiple
  dwelling law."


   §  2.  Legislative  finding.  It  is  hereby  declared  that intensive
  occupation of multiple dwelling sites, overcrowding of multiple dwelling
  rooms,  inadequate  provision  for  light  and  air,  and   insufficient
  protection  against  the  defective  provision for escape from fire, and
  improper sanitation of multiple dwellings in certain areas of the  state
  are  a  menace  to  the  health, safety, morals, welfare, and reasonable
  comfort of the citizens of the state; and  that  the  establishment  and
  maintenance of proper housing standards requiring sufficient light, air,
  sanitation  and protection from fire hazards are essential to the public
  welfare.  Therefore the provisions hereinafter  prescribed  are  enacted
  and  their  necessity  in  the  public  interest is hereby declared as a
  matter of legislative determination.


   §  3. Application to cities, towns and villages. 1. This chapter shall
  apply to all cities with  a  population  of  three  hundred  twenty-five
  thousand or more.
    2.  The  legislative body of any other city, town or village may adopt
  the provisions of this chapter and make the same applicable to dwellings
  within the limits of such city, town or village  by  the  passage  of  a
  local  law  or ordinance adopting the same; and upon the passage of such
  local law or ordinance all of  the  provisions  of  articles  one,  two,
  three, four, five, ten and eleven and such sections or parts of sections
  of  the  other  articles  of this chapter as such local law or ordinance
  shall enumerate, shall apply to such city, town or village from the date
  stated in such law or ordinance.
    3. Except as herein otherwise specified, every multiple dwelling shall
  be constructed or maintained in conformity with other applicable laws.
    4. a. Any city, town or  village  may  make  local  laws,  ordinances,
  resolutions  or  regulations not less restrictive than those provided in
  this chapter and may provide for their enforcement by legal or equitable
  actions or proceedings,  and  prescribe  the  penalties,  sanctions  and
  remedies  for violations thereof.  In the enforcement and administration
  of this chapter in a city of three hundred twenty-five thousand or  more
  persons,  the penalties, sanctions and remedies enacted by local law may
  be applied, notwithstanding their inconsistency with  this  chapter,  or
  the provisions of this chapter.
    b.  In  a  city of three hundred twenty-five thousand or more persons,
  such local laws may authorize such actions or  proceedings  against  the
  owner, lessee of a whole multiple dwelling, agent or other person having
  control  of  such  dwelling,  and  any responsible party, or against the
  dwelling in rem. Such local laws may further authorize  (1)  that  civil
  penalties  may  be enforced against the person liable therefor, and that
  in addition to the methods of enforcement for judgments  established  in
  the  civil  practice  law  and  rules, a lien may be imposed against the
  premises and the rents therefrom; (2) that such civil penalties  may  be
  enforced  against  the  dwelling by the imposition of a lien against the
  rents therefrom.
    c. Such local laws may also  authorize  that  all  liens  upon  rents,
  whether  authorized  by  state  or  local  law, may be satisfied without
  further judicial proceedings by the collection of rents due or to become
  due.
    5. Whenever a provision of any local  law,  ordinance,  resolution  or
  regulation is more restrictive in a requirement for height, area or use,
  such  local  law,  ordinance,  resolution or regulation shall govern and
  take precedence over any lesser  requirements  of  this  chapter.  When,
  however,   the  provisions  of  this  chapter  impose  more  restrictive
  requirements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
    6. A local law, ordinance, resolution or regulation shall not prohibit
  in any  class  A  multiple  dwelling  erected  after  April  eighteenth,
  nineteen  hundred twenty-nine, in compliance with the provisions of this
  chapter,  the  use  of  wood  for  sleepers,  grounds,  nailing  blocks,
  underflooring or finish flooring or, within apartments, doors with their
  assemblies,  interior  trim and assemblies of exterior windows, interior
  finish, closet fixtures, kitchen fixtures, shelving, cupboards, cabinets
  or wardrobes.
    7. Except as provided in subdivisions four  and  five,  a  local  law,
  ordinance,  rule  or  regulation  shall  not modify or dispense with any
  provision of this chapter.
    8. Wherever the word "city"  occurs  in  this  chapter,  it  shall  be
  construed  as  though followed by the words "or town or village to which
  this  chapter  is  applicable."  The   words   "charter,"   "ordinance,"


 "resolution,"  "regulation,"  "building  code,"  "department of health,"
  "department of water supply," "fire department," "department,"  "board,"
  "city  engineer,"  "corporation  counsel,"  "city  treasury,"  or  "fire
  limits,"   shall   be   construed  as  if  followed  by  the  words  "or
  corresponding authority of any city,  town  or  village  to  which  this
  chapter  is applicable and in which the dwelling or location referred to
  is situated."
    9. Wherever in any statute of the state other than this chapter, or in
  any local law, ordinance, resolution or regulation, reference is made to
  the tenement house law in relation to a city to which  this  chapter  is
  applicable,  such  reference  shall  be  construed  as  applying  to the
  provisions of this chapter. If reference be made therein to any  section
  or  other  part  of  the  tenement  house  law,  such reference shall be
  construed as applying to the provisions of this chapter relating to  the
  same  subject  matter  as the said section or part. If reference be made
  therein to a "tenement house," such  reference  shall  be  construed  as
  applying to a class A multiple dwelling.
    10.  Wherever the date April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine,
  shall appear in this chapter such date shall be construed as if followed
  by the words "or the date when this chapter or  any  of  its  provisions
  became  or  becomes  applicable to any city, town or village outside the
  City of New York."
    11. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the following
  enumerated articles, sections  and  subdivisions  of  sections  of  this
  chapter  shall  not  apply to the construction or alteration of multiple
  dwellings for  which  an  application  for  a  permit  is  made  to  the
  department  after  December sixth, nineteen hundred sixty-nine in a city
  having a population of one million or more which adopts or  has  adopted
  local  laws, ordinances, resolutions or regulations providing protection
  from fire hazards and making provision  for  escape  from  fire  in  the
  construction  and alteration of multiple dwellings and in other respects
  as protective as local law seventy-six of the laws of the  city  of  New
  York  for  nineteen  hundred  sixty-eight  and covering the same subject
  matter  as  the  following:  subdivisions   twenty-five,   twenty-seven,
  twenty-eight, thirty-five-c, thirty-six and thirty-nine of section four,
  subdivision   three   of   section  twenty-eight,  sections  thirty-six,
  thirty-seven,  fifty,  fifty-one,  fifty-two,  fifty-three,  fifty-five,
  sixty,  sixty-one,  sixty-seven, subdivisions one, two, four and five of
  section  seventy-five,  article  four,  article  five,  article  five-A,
  article  six  and  article  seven-B;  except  that after December sixth,
  nineteen hundred sixty-nine where a multiple dwelling erected  prior  to
  December  sixth,  nineteen  hundred sixty-nine is altered, or a building
  erected  prior  to  December  sixth,  nineteen  hundred  sixty-nine   is
  converted to a multiple dwelling pursuant to a permit applied for to the
  department  having  jurisdiction,  the  foregoing articles, sections and
  subdivisions of sections shall remain applicable where a  local  law  of
  such  city  authorizes  such alteration or conversion to be made, at the
  option of the owner, either in accordance with the requirements  of  the
  building  law  and  regulations in effect in such city prior to December
  sixth, nineteen hundred sixty-eight or the requirements of the  building
  law  and  regulations in effect after such date, and the owner elects to
  comply with the requirements of the  building  law  and  regulations  in
  effect prior to December sixth, nineteen hundred sixty-eight.








   §  4.  Definitions. Certain words and terms when used in this chapter,
  unless the context or subject matter requires otherwise, are defined  as
  follows:
    1. Wherever the word or words "occupied," "is occupied," "used" or "is
  used"  appear,  such  word or words shall be construed as if followed by
  the words "or is intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied."
    2. The word "shall" is always mandatory.
    3. The term "department" shall mean the department,  bureau,  division
  or other agency charged with the enforcement of this chapter.
    4.  A "dwelling" is any building or structure or portion thereof which
  is occupied in whole or in part as the home, residence or sleeping place
  of one or more human beings.
    5. A "family" is either a person occupying a dwelling and  maintaining
  a  household,  with  not more than four boarders, roomers or lodgers, or
  two  or  more  persons  occupying  a  dwelling,  living   together   and
  maintaining  a  common  household,  with  not  more  than four boarders,
  roomers or lodgers.  A "boarder," "roomer" or "lodger" residing  with  a
  family  shall  mean  a  person  living  within  the household who pays a
  consideration for such residence and does not occupy such  space  within
  the household as an incident of employment therein.
    6.  A  "private  dwelling"  is  any building or structure designed and
  occupied exclusively  for  residence  purposes  by  not  more  than  two
  families.
    A  building  designed  for and occupied exclusively by one family is a
  "single-family private dwelling."
    A building designed for and occupied exclusively by two families is  a
  "two-family private dwelling."
    Private  dwellings  shall  also  be  deemed  to  include  a  series of
  one-family or two-family dwelling  units  each  of  which  faces  or  is
  accessible  to  a legal street or public thoroughfare provided that each
  such dwelling unit is equipped as a  separate  dwelling  unit  with  all
  essential services, and also provided that each such unit is arranged so
  that it may be approved as a legal one-family or two-family dwelling.
    7. A "multiple dwelling" is a dwelling which is either rented, leased,
  let  or  hired  out,  to be occupied, or is occupied as the residence or
  home of three or more families living independently of  each  other.  On
  and after July first, nineteen hundred fifty-five, a "multiple dwelling"
  shall  also include residential quarters for members or personnel of any
  hospital staff which are not located in any building used primarily  for
  hospital  use  provided,  however,  that any building which was erected,
  altered or converted prior to July first, nineteen  hundred  fifty-five,
  to  be  occupied  by such members or personnel or is so occupied on such
  date shall not be subject to the requirements of this  chapter  only  so
  long  as  it  continues  to be so occupied provided there are local laws
  applicable to such building and such building is in compliance with such
  local laws. A "multiple dwelling" shall  not  be  deemed  to  include  a
  hospital,  convent,  monastery,  asylum  or  public  institution,  or  a
  fireproof building used wholly for commercial purposes  except  for  not
  more  than  one  janitor's  apartment  and  not  more than one penthouse
  occupied by not more than two families. For the purposes of this chapter
  "multiple dwellings" are divided into two classes: "class A" and  "class
  B."
    8.  a.  A  "class  A" multiple dwelling is a multiple dwelling that is
  occupied for permanent residence  purposes.  This  class  shall  include
  tenements,   flat   houses,  maisonette  apartments,  apartment  houses,
  apartment  hotels,  bachelor  apartments,  studio   apartments,   duplex
  apartments,  kitchenette  apartments,  garden-type  maisonette  dwelling
  projects, and all other  multiple  dwellings  except  class  B  multiple


 dwellings.  A class A multiple dwelling shall only be used for permanent
  residence purposes. For the  purposes  of  this  definition,  "permanent
  residence purposes" shall consist of occupancy of a dwelling unit by the
  same  natural person or family for thirty consecutive days or more and a
  person or family so occupying a  dwelling  unit  shall  be  referred  to
  herein  as  the permanent occupants of such dwelling unit. The following
  uses of a dwelling unit by the permanent occupants thereof shall not  be
  deemed  to  be inconsistent with the occupancy of such dwelling unit for
  permanent residence purposes:
    (1) (A)  occupancy  of  such  dwelling  unit  for  fewer  than  thirty
  consecutive days by other natural persons living within the household of
  the  permanent occupant such as house guests or lawful boarders, roomers
  or lodgers; or
    (B) incidental and occasional occupancy  of  such  dwelling  unit  for
  fewer  than  thirty  consecutive  days by other natural persons when the
  permanent occupants are temporarily absent for personal reasons such  as
  vacation  or  medical  treatment,  provided  that  there  is no monetary
  compensation paid to the permanent occupants for such occupancy.
    (2)  In  a  class  A  multiple  dwelling  owned   by   an   accredited
  not-for-profit  college  or  university  or  leased by such a college or
  university under a net lease for a term of forty-nine years or more, the
  use of designated dwelling units for occupancy  for  fewer  than  thirty
  consecutive  days  shall  not be inconsistent with the occupancy of such
  multiple dwelling for permanent residence purposes if:
    (A) No more than five percent of the dwelling units in  such  multiple
  dwelling  but  not  less than one dwelling unit, are designated for such
  use and the designation of a unit  once  made  may  not  be  changed  to
  another unit;
    (B) A list of the designated dwelling units certified by an authorized
  representative  of  the college or university is kept on the premises by
  the owner or net lessee and made available upon request  for  inspection
  by the department or the fire department of such city;
    (C)  Only designated dwelling units on the certified list are used for
  occupancy for fewer than thirty consecutive days and only by (i) natural
  persons, other than persons whose only relationship with the college  or
  university  is  as  a  student,  for  whom the college or university has
  undertaken to provide housing accommodations such as visiting professors
  and academics, graduate students with research or teaching  fellowships,
  researchers  and  persons  presenting  academic papers, interviewing for
  positions of employment  or  having  other  similar  business  with  the
  college  or  university,  or  (ii)  natural  persons for whom a hospital
  affiliated with such college or university  has  undertaken  to  provide
  housing  accommodations  such  as  patients,  patients'  families and/or
  accompanying escorts, medical professionals and  healthcare  consultants
  or persons having other similar business with such hospital. A log shall
  be maintained on the premises of the names and addresses of such persons
  and the duration and reason for their stay. Such log shall be accessible
  upon request for inspection by the department and the fire department of
  such municipality;
    (D) No rent or other payment is collected for such occupancy; and
    (E)  The  fire  department  of such city shall require the filing of a
  fire safety plan or other appropriate fire safety procedure.
    b.  A  "garden-type  maisonette  dwelling  project"  is  a  series  of
  attached, detached or semi-detached dwelling units which are provided as
  a  group  collectively  with  all  essential  services  such as, but not
  limited to, water supply and house sewers, and which units  are  located
  on  a  site  or  plot  not less than twenty thousand square feet in area
  under common ownership and erected under plans filed with the department


 on or after April eighteenth, nineteen  hundred  fifty-four,  and  which
  units  together  and  in  their  aggregate  are  arranged or designed to
  provide three or more apartments.
    9.  A  "class  B"  multiple  dwelling  is a multiple dwelling which is
  occupied, as a rule transiently, as the more or less temporary abode  of
  individuals or families who are lodged with or without meals. This class
  shall  include  hotels, lodging houses, rooming houses, boarding houses,
  boarding schools, furnished room houses, lodgings, club houses,  college
  and  school  dormitories and dwellings designed as private dwellings but
  occupied by one or two families with five or  more  transient  boarders,
  roomers or lodgers in one household.
    10.  A  "converted  dwelling"  is  a dwelling (a) erected before April
  eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, to be occupied by one  or  two
  families living independently of each other and subsequently occupied as
  a  multiple  dwelling, or (b) a dwelling three stories or less in height
  erected after April eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine,  to  be
  occupied  by  one or two families living independently of each other and
  subsequently occupied by not more than three families  in  all,  with  a
  maximum  occupancy of two families on each floor in a two story building
  and one family on each floor in a three story  building,  in  compliance
  with  the  provisions  of article six of this chapter, including section
  one hundred seventy-a of said article. A converted dwelling occupied  as
  a class A multiple dwelling is a class A converted dwelling; every other
  converted dwelling is a class B converted dwelling.
    11.  A "tenement" is any building or structure or any portion thereof,
  erected before April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, which  is
  occupied,  wholly or in part, as the residence of three families or more
  living independently of each other and  doing  their  cooking  upon  the
  premises,  and  includes  apartment  houses,  flat  houses and all other
  houses so erected and occupied, except that  a  tenement  shall  not  be
  deemed  to  include  any  converted dwelling. An "old-law tenement" is a
  tenement existing  before  April  twelfth,  nineteen  hundred  one,  and
  recorded  as  such  in  the department before April eighteenth, nineteen
  hundred twenty-nine, except that it shall not be deemed to  include  any
  converted dwelling.
    12. A "hotel" is an inn having thirty or more sleeping rooms.
    13.  A  "rooming  house"  or  a  "furnished  room house" is a multiple
  dwelling, other than a hotel, having less than thirty sleeping rooms and
  in which persons either individually or as families are housed for  hire
  or  otherwise  with  or  without  meals.  An  inn  with less than thirty
  sleeping rooms is a rooming house.
    14. A "lodging house" is a multiple dwelling, other than  a  hotel,  a
  rooming house or a furnished room house, in which persons are housed for
  hire  for  a  single  night, or for less than a week at one time, or any
  part of which is let for any person to sleep in for any term less than a
  week.
    15. An "apartment" is that part of a multiple dwelling  consisting  of
  one  or  more  rooms containing at least one bathroom and arranged to be
  occupied by the members of a family, which room or rooms  are  separated
  and set apart from all other rooms within a multiple dwelling.
    16.  "Single room occupancy" is the occupancy by one or two persons of
  a single room, or of two  or  more  rooms  which  are  joined  together,
  separated  from  all  other  rooms  within  an  apartment  in a multiple
  dwelling, so that the occupant or occupants  thereof  reside  separately
  and  independently  of  the  other  occupant  or  occupants  of the same
  apartment. When a class A multiple dwelling is used wholly  or  in  part
  for single room occupancy, it remains a class A multiple dwelling.


   17.  A  "public  hall"  is  a  hall,  corridor  or passageway within a
  building but outside of all apartments and suites of  private  rooms.  A
  "public  vestibule"  is  a corridor, not within an apartment or suite of
  private rooms, providing access to a stair or  elevator  and  not  wider
  than seven feet nor longer than twice the width of the stair or elevator
  shafts  opening  upon it. A "public room" or "public part" of a dwelling
  is a space used in common by the occupants of two or more apartments  or
  rooms,  or by persons who are not tenants, or exclusively for mechanical
  equipment of such dwelling or for storage purposes.
    18. A "living room" is a room which  is  not  a  public  hall,  public
  vestibule,  public  room  or other public part of a dwelling. Every room
  used for sleeping purposes shall be deemed a living  room.  Dining  bays
  and  dinettes  fifty-five  square  feet  or  less in floor area, foyers,
  water-closet compartments, bathrooms, cooking spaces  less  than  eighty
  square  feet  in  area,  and  halls,  corridors and passageways entirely
  within an apartment or suite of rooms shall not be deemed living  rooms.
  "Floor  space"  shall  mean the clear area of the floor contained within
  the partitions or walls  enclosing  any  room,  space,  foyer,  hall  or
  passageways of any dwelling.
    19.  A "dining bay," "dining recess" or "dinette" is a recess used for
  dining purposes off a living room, foyer or kitchen.
    20. A "foyer" is a space within an apartment or suite of rooms used as
  an entrance hall directly from a public hall.
    21. A "dormitory" in a lodging house is any place  used  for  sleeping
  purposes.  A  "cubicle"  is  a  small  partially enclosed sleeping space
  within a dormitory with or without a window to the outer air.
    22. "Premises" shall mean land and improvements  or  appurtenances  or
  any part thereof.
    23. "Structure" shall mean a building or construction of any kind.
    24.  "Alteration,"  as  applied to a building or structure, shall mean
  any change or rearrangement in the structural parts  or  in  the  egress
  facilities  of  any  such  building  or  structure,  or  any enlargement
  thereof, whether by extension on any side or by any increase in  height,
  or  the  moving  of  such  building  or  structure  from one location or
  position to another.
    25. A "fireproof multiple dwelling" is one  in  which  the  walls  and
  other  structural  members  are of incombustible materials or assemblies
  meeting all of the requirements of the building code and  with  standard
  fire-resistive  ratings  of  not  less than one of the following sets of
  requirements:
    a. For any multiple dwelling more than one  hundred  feet  in  height,
  four  hours  for  fire  walls,  party  walls,  piers,  columns, interior
  structural members which carry walls, girders carrying columns, and  for
  exterior  walls  other  than panel walls; three hours for other girders,
  fire partitions, floors including their beams and girders, beams, roofs,
  floor fillings, and stairway enclosures;  and  two  hours  for  exterior
  panel walls.
    b.  For  any multiple dwelling one hundred feet or less in height, the
  provisions of preceding paragraph a shall apply, except that the minimum
  requirements shall be three hours for exterior walls  other  than  panel
  walls,  which  shall  be two hours; two hours for protection of interior
  columns; one and one-half hours for roofs  and  for  floors  and  beams;
  provided, however, that for a multiple dwelling three stories or less in
  height, the requirement for all floors and the roof shall be one hour.
    26. The term "fireproof," as applied to a part or parts of a building,
  means  such  part  or  parts  are  made  of incombustible materials with
  standard fire-resistive ratings not less than  those  required  for  the
  corresponding part or parts of a fireproof dwelling.


   27.  A  "non-fireproof  dwelling"  is  one  which  does  not  meet the
  requirements for a fireproof dwelling.
    28.  A  "frame  dwelling" is a dwelling of which the exterior walls or
  any structural parts of such walls are of wood. A dwelling  which  would
  not  otherwise  be a frame dwelling shall not be deemed a frame dwelling
  by reason of the existence on such  dwelling  of  frame  oriel,  bay  or
  dormer  windows,  frame  porches  not  more than one story in height, or
  frame extensions not more than one story in height and fifty-nine square
  feet in area if such windows, porches or extensions were  erected  prior
  to April thirteenth, nineteen hundred forty.
    29.  The  term  "fire-retarded,"  as  applied  to a part or parts of a
  building, means such part or parts are either covered  with  metal  lath
  plastered  with  two  or  more  coats  of  mortar or otherwise protected
  against fire in a manner approved by the department  with  materials  of
  standard fire-resistive ratings of at least one hour. Fireproofing shall
  always be accepted as meeting any requirement for fire-retarding.
    30.  "Fire-stopping" means the closing of all concealed draft openings
  to form an effectual fire barrier at floors,  ceilings  and  roofs  with
  brick,  concrete,  gypsum, asbestos, mineral wool, rock wool, metal lath
  with  cement  or  gypsum  plaster,  or  other   approved   incombustible
  materials.
    31.  A "lot" is a parcel or plot of ground which is or may be occupied
  wholly or in part by  a  dwelling,  including  the  spaces  occupied  by
  accessory or other structures and any open or unoccupied spaces thereon,
  but not including any part of an abutting public street or thoroughfare.
    a.  A  "corner lot" is a lot of which at least two adjacent sides abut
  for their full length upon streets or public places not less than  forty
  feet  in  width.  That  portion of a corner lot in excess of one hundred
  feet from any street on which the  lot  abuts  shall  be  considered  an
  interior lot.
    An "interior lot" is a lot which is neither a corner lot nor a through
  lot.
    b.  The  "front"  of  a  lot  is that boundary line which abuts on the
  street, or, if there be more than one street  abutting,  on  the  street
  designated  by  the  owner. The "rear" of a lot is the side opposite the
  front.
    c. The "depth" of a lot is the distance from the front of the  lot  to
  the extreme rear line of the lot. In the case of an irregular-shaped lot
  the mean depth shall be taken.
    d.  A  "through  lot"  is  a lot running through from street to street
  whose front and rear lines abut for their entire lengths upon streets or
  open public places; provided, however, that when either  of  said  lines
  exceeds the other in length by more than twenty per centum, that part of
  the  lot  contiguous  to  the  excess length of the longer line shall be
  deemed an interior lot. The department may designate which part  of  the
  longer   line   is   the  excess  in  length  and  make  any  reasonable
  interpretation of the part of the lot to be regarded  as  contiguous  to
  such excess.
    e.  Lots  or portions of lots shall be deemed "back to back" when they
  are on opposite sides of the same part of a rear line common to both and
  the opposite street lines on which the lots front are parallel with each
  other or make an angle with each  other  of  not  more  than  forty-five
  degrees.
    32.  A  "rear  yard"  is an open space on the same lot with a dwelling
  between the extreme rear line of the lot and the extreme  rear  wall  of
  the  dwelling.  A "side yard" is a continuous open space on the same lot
  with a dwelling between the wall of a dwelling and a  line  of  the  lot
  from  the  street  to a rear yard or rear line of a lot. A "court" is an


 open space other than a side  or  rear  yard,  on  the  same  lot  as  a
  dwelling.  A court not extending to the street or rear yard is an "inner
  court". A court extending to the  street  or  rear  yard  is  an  "outer
  court".
    32-a.  "A  rear yard equivalent" is an open area which may be required
  on a through lot as an alternative to a required rear yard.
    33. The "curb level", for the purpose of measuring the height  of  any
  portion  of  a  building,  is the level of the curb at the center of the
  front of the building; except that where a building faces on  more  than
  one  street, the curb level is the average of the levels of the curbs at
  the center of each front. Where no curb elevation has  been  established
  the average elevation of the final grade adjoining all exterior walls of
  a  building,  calculated from grade elevations taken at intervals of ten
  feet around the exterior walls of the building, shall be considered  the
  curb  level, unless the city engineer shall establish such curb level or
  its equivalent.
    34. A "street wall" of a building, at any level, is the  wall  of  the
  building nearest to a street line abutting the property.
    35.  a.  The  "height" of a dwelling is the vertical distance from the
  curb level to the level of the highest point of the roof  beams;  except
  that, in the case of pitched roofs, it is the vertical distance from the
  curb  level  to  the  mean  height  level of the gable or roof above the
  vertical street wall. When  no  roof  beams  exist  or  when  there  are
  structures  wholly or partly above the roof, the height shall, except as
  otherwise expressly provided, be measured from the  curb  level  to  the
  level  of  the  highest  point  of any such structure; except that where
  every part of the building is set back more than twenty-five feet from a
  street line, the  height  shall  be  measured  from  the  average  grade
  elevation  calculated from the final grade elevations taken at intervals
  of ten feet around the exterior walls of the building.
    b. Except as otherwise provided in section  two  hundred  eleven,  the
  following superstructure shall not be considered in measuring the height
  of  a  dwelling;  parapet walls or guard railings, other superstructures
  twelve feet or less in height and occupying fifteen per centum  or  less
  of  the  area  of  the  roof, elevator enclosures thirty feet or less in
  height used solely for elevator purposes, enclosures fifty feet or  less
  in  height  used  solely  for  tanks, cooling towers or other mechanical
  equipment; and, when  approved  by  the  department,  pergolas,  spires,
  chimneys, other ornamental treatments, roof gardens and playgrounds.
    c.  When  on  the main roof of any fireproof multiple dwelling erected
  after April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, in  which  one  or
  more  passenger  elevators are operated, a penthouse dwelling is erected
  the height of which does not exceed twelve feet and the walls  of  which
  are  set back as provided in this paragraph, the height of such multiple
  dwelling shall be measured as though no such penthouse had been  erected
  thereon.  Such  penthouse walls shall be set back from the outer face of
  the front parapet wall at least five feet, from the outer  face  of  the
  yard  parapet  wall  at least ten feet, and from the inner face of every
  other parapet wall at least three  feet;  except  that  the  setback  so
  required  from  any  parapet  wall  facing  any  court or yard or recess
  therefrom but not facing any street may be reduced  one-third  for  each
  ten  per  centum  by  which  the  area of such court or yard exceeds the
  required minimum area thereof at the highest level of such parapet wall,
  and the setback so required from any parapet wall facing any street  may
  be  reduced  one  foot  for each foot that such parapet wall is set back
  from the building line established by law at the highest level  of  such
  parapet  wall,  provided  that in the opinion of the department safe and
  sufficient passage is provided to and from every part of the main  roof.


 Any penthouse wall which may be flush with the inner face of any parapet
  wall may be flush with the outer face thereof.
    d.  If  a  rear  multiple  dwelling is erected after April eighteenth,
  nineteen hundred twenty-nine, on  the  same  lot  as  a  front  multiple
  dwelling,  and  the  depth of the yard of the front multiple dwelling is
  more than sixty feet and the lowest point of such yard is below the curb
  level and below the floor of a cellar of the front multiple dwelling  or
  of  the  lowest  story  thereof if there is no cellar, the height of the
  rear multiple dwelling shall be measured from such lowest point  instead
  of from the curb level.
    36.  A  "story" is a space between the level of one finished floor and
  the level of the next higher finished floor, or, if the  top  story,  of
  the space between the level of the highest finished floor and the top of
  the highest roof beams, or, if the first story, of the space between the
  level  of the finished floor and the finished ceiling immediately above.
  For the purpose of measuring height by  stories  in  multiple  dwellings
  erected  after  April  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine,  one
  additional story shall be added for each twelve feet or fraction thereof
  that the first story exceeds fifteen feet in height, and for each twelve
  feet or fraction thereof that any story above the  first  story  exceeds
  twelve feet in height.
    37.  A  "cellar"  in  a dwelling is an enclosed space having more than
  one-half of its height below the curb level;  except  that  where  every
  part  of  the  building  is  set  back more than twenty-five feet from a
  street line, the height shall  be  measured  from  the  adjoining  grade
  elevations  calculated from final grade elevations taken at intervals of
  ten feet around the exterior walls of the building. A cellar  shall  not
  be counted as a story.
    38.  A "basement" is a story partly below the curb level but having at
  least one-half of its height above the curb  level;  except  that  where
  every part of the building is set back more than twenty-five feet from a
  street  line,  the  height  shall  be  measured from the adjoining grade
  elevations calculated from final grade elevations taken at intervals  of
  ten  feet around the exterior walls of the building. A basement shall be
  counted as  a  story  in  determining  height,  except  as  provided  in
  paragraph e of subdivision six of section one hundred two.
    39.  A  "section" of a multiple dwelling is a part thereof, other than
  an apartment or suite of rooms, separated as a unit  from  the  rest  of
  such dwelling by fireproof construction.
    40.  A  "shaft"  is  an  enclosed  space extending through one or more
  stories of a building connecting a series of openings  therein,  or  any
  story or stories and the roof, and includes exterior and interior shafts
  whether for air, light, elevator, dumbwaiter or any other purpose.
    41.  A  "stair"  is  a  flight  or  flights of steps together with any
  landings and parts of public halls through which it is necessary to pass
  in going from one level thereof to another.
    42. a. A "fire-tower" is a  fireproof  stair,  enclosed  in  fireproof
  walls, without access to the building from which it affords egress other
  than by a fireproof self-closing door opening on a communicating balcony
  or other outside platform at each floor level.
    b.  A  "fire-stair" is a fireproof stair, enclosed in fireproof walls,
  within the body of the building which it serves, to which access may  be
  had only through self-closing fireproof doors.
    c.  A  "fire-escape"  is a combination of outside balconies and stairs
  providing an unobstructed means of egress from  rooms  or  spaces  in  a
  building.
    d.  A  "panel  wall"  is  a  non-bearing wall in skeleton construction
  erected between columns or piers and wholly supported at each story.


   43. Window dimensions shall always be taken between stop-beads or,  if
  there  are  no  stop-beads, between the sides, head and sill of the sash
  opening.
    44. The term "owner" shall mean and include the owner or owners of the
  freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee
  in  possession,  assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee,
  agent, or any other person, firm or corporation, directly or  indirectly
  in  control  of a dwelling. Whenever a multiple dwelling shall have been
  declared a public nuisance to any extent  pursuant  to  paragraph  b  of
  subdivision  one  of section three hundred nine of this chapter and such
  declaration shall have been filed as therein provided, the term  "owner"
  shall  be deemed to include, in addition to those mentioned hereinabove,
  all the officers, directors and persons having an interest in more  than
  ten  per cent of the issued and outstanding stock of the owner as herein
  defined, as holder or beneficial owner  thereof,  if  such  owner  be  a
  corporation  other than a banking organization as defined in section two
  of the banking law, a national banking association,  a  federal  savings
  and loan association, The Mortgage Facilities Corporation, Savings Banks
  Life  Insurance Fund, The Savings Banks Retirement System, an authorized
  insurer as defined in section one hundred seven of the insurance law, or
  a trust company or other corporation organized under the  laws  of  this
  state all the capital stock of which is owned by at least twenty savings
  banks  or  a subsidiary corporation all of the capital stock of which is
  owned by such trust company or other corporation.




   § 8. General application of chapter to dwellings. All the requirements
  of  this  chapter  shall  apply  to  all  kinds  and classes of multiple
  dwellings, except where there are specific provisions,  requirements  or
  exceptions  for  one or more kinds or classes.  A specific provision for
  one kind or class of dwelling shall apply only to that kind or class  of
  dwelling  to which such reference is made. Whenever a specific provision
  is inconsistent with a general provision of this chapter,  the  specific
  provision  shall  apply  and  take precedence. The department shall have
  power to classify dwellings in accordance with the  provisions  of  this
  chapter.


   §  9.  Buildings  converted  or  altered.  1.  On  or  after  December
  fifteenth, nineteen hundred sixty-one, no  multiple  dwelling  shall  be
  enlarged  or  its  lot  diminished  so that the yard or other unoccupied
  areas shall be  less  in  size  or  area  than  the  minimum  dimensions
  prescribed in section twenty-six.
    2.  A  building  not  a  dwelling, if converted or altered after April
  eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, to a multiple dwelling,  shall
  thereupon   become  subject  to  all  the  provisions  of  this  chapter
  applicable to dwellings of like class and kind erected after such date.
    3. A dwelling of one class or kind, altered or converted  after  April
  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine,  to  another class or kind,
  except as hereinafter in this section and  in  articles  six  and  seven
  otherwise provided, shall thereupon become subject to all the provisions
  of  this chapter applicable to a building of that class or kind, erected
  after such date, to which it is altered or converted.
    4. No dwellings shall be altered so as  to  be  in  violation  of  any
  provision  of  this chapter relating to dwellings of like class and kind
  erected after April eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine,  except
  that  it  shall  be  sufficient  for  the  purposes of this section that
  tenements shall comply with article seven,  converted  dwellings  comply
  with  article  six,  and  lodging  houses comply with section sixty-six.
  Nothing in this section  shall,  however,  be  deemed  to  prohibit  the
  conversion  or  alteration  of  any  multiple  dwelling,  other  than  a
  converted dwelling and a lodging house, from a class  A  to  a  class  B
  multiple  dwelling,  or vice-versa, provided that the entire dwelling is
  of fireproof construction and is  made  to  conform  to  the  applicable
  provisions  of  section sixty-seven, and to all other provisions of this
  chapter applicable to multiple dwellings of like class and kind  erected
  before April eighteenth, nineteen hundred and twenty-nine.
    5.  a.  Any  multiple  dwelling  may  be  altered  to conform with any
  provision of this chapter applicable to dwellings of like class and kind
  and not expressly limited in  application  to  dwellings  erected  after
  April  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine; or to conform to the
  provisions of  this  chapter  relating  to  egress,  or  to  exits  from
  apartments,  in dwellings of like class and kind erected after such date
  if such dwelling also  conforms  or  is  made  to  conform  to  all  the
  requirements  relating  to  stairs and public halls in dwellings erected
  after such date, except that  existing  dimensions  of  stair  landings,
  treads and risers need not be changed.
    b.  An  apartment in any part of a fireproof multiple dwelling erected
  before April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, may be altered or
  subdivided and need not conform to the requirements of  paragraph  a  of
  this  section  relating  to  stairs and public halls provided each newly
  created apartment has access to a public hall which provides  horizontal
  egress  to  at least two stairs. If both of such stairs are not arranged
  and designed as required by sections  two  hundred  thirty-six  and  two
  hundred  thirty-seven,  at least one of such stairs shall be so arranged
  and designed, and the other shall be arranged and designed  as  required
  by  section  two  hundred thirty-nine. Both stairs shall be protected by
  automatic sprinkler heads throughout.
    6. Any tenement previously converted to other uses may be  altered  or
  reconverted  to  a  tenement by complying with the provisions of article
  seven, provided, however, that its height and  bulk  were  not  enlarged
  prior  to  such alteration or reconversion except as permitted by and in
  accordance with the provisions of sections two hundred  eleven  and  two
  hundred twelve of this chapter.
    7. In any class B multiple dwelling, except a rooming house or lodging
  house,  any  apartment  may  be  occupied  as  an apartment in a class A


 multiple  dwelling,  provided  such  apartment  complies  with  all  the
  requirements  for apartments in class A multiple dwellings erected after
  April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine. In any rooming house  or
  lodging  house, one apartment may be occupied as an apartment in a class
  A multiple dwelling, provided such apartment is occupied solely  by  the
  owner, janitor, superintendent or caretaker.
    8.  Any apartment in any class A multiple dwelling may be occupied for
  single room occupancy only if such dwelling complies with the provisions
  of section two hundred forty-eight and  all  other  provisions  of  this
  chapter applicable to such dwelling.
    9.  Excepting  a frame dwelling, any dwelling three stories or less in
  height erected after April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine as a
  one or two-family dwelling may be converted to a multiple dwelling to be
  occupied by not  more  than  three  families  in  all,  with  a  maximum
  occupancy  of two families on each floor in a two story building and one
  family on each floor in a three story building, provided however that it
  shall be unlawful for any such dwelling  converted  at  any  time  since
  October  fifteenth,  nineteen hundred fifty-two, to have any boarders or
  roomers. In each such instance, compliance shall be  required  with  all
  the  provisions  of article six, including section one hundred seventy-a
  of said article.
    10. If any class A dwelling erected before April eighteenth,  nineteen
  hundred  twenty-nine,  is altered so as to increase the number of living
  rooms by more than twenty per centum, such dwelling, except as otherwise
  provided in sections two hundred eighteen, two hundred  thirty-five  and
  two  hundred thirty-six, shall be made to conform to the requirements of
  this chapter with respect to class A dwellings of like  class  and  kind
  erected after such date.




   §  10.  Time  for compliance. All alterations required by this chapter
  upon dwellings erected before its adoption  by  or  application  to  any
  city,  town  or village, in whole or in part, shall, unless specifically
  provided otherwise in this chapter, be made not later  than  five  years
  after  such  adoption  or application, or at such earlier date as may be
  deemed necessary by the  department  in  order  to  remove  a  condition
  dangerous or detrimental to life or health.


   § 11. Dwellings damaged or moved. 1. If a multiple dwelling be damaged
  by  fire or other cause to the extent of two-thirds or more of its value
  at the time of such damage exclusive of the  value  of  the  foundation,
  such dwelling shall not be repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with
  the provisions of this chapter relative to dwellings erected after April
  eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine.
    2.  If  any non-fireproof stair in any multiple dwelling be damaged by
  fire or other cause to such extent that such stair or the  first  flight
  thereof  above  the entrance story is required to be rebuilt, such stair
  to the extent that it is required to be rebuilt shall  be  fire-retarded
  throughout.
    3.  If  any  dwelling  be moved from one lot to another, such dwelling
  shall thereupon be made to conform to all the provisions of this chapter
  relative to light, ventilation, fire protection and egress of a dwelling
  erected after April eighteenth, nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine,  but  no
  frame  building of any kind whatsoever shall be moved so as to be placed
  upon the same lot with any multiple dwelling,  nor  shall  any  multiple
  dwelling  be  moved  so as to be placed upon the same lot with any frame
  building.






§  12.  Prohibited  uses.  1. It shall be unlawful to use any multiple
  dwelling or any part of the lot or premises thereof for the  purpose  of
  prostitution or assignation of any description.
    2.  It  shall be unlawful to keep any horse, cow, calf, swine, rabbit,
  sheep, goat, chicken or duck, or any pigeon  except  Antwerp  or  homing
  pigeons,  in  or  on  any  multiple  dwelling  or on the lot or premises
  thereof unless  permitted  by  and  in  accordance  with  local  law  or
  regulation.
    3.  It  shall  be unlawful to use any multiple dwelling or any part of
  the lot or premises thereof for the keeping, storing or handling of  any
  combustible  article  or any article dangerous or detrimental to life or
  health, unless a permit is obtained for  such  use  in  conformity  with
  provisions  prescribed  by  local law, and where such local law does not
  exist, in conformity with provisions prescribed by the fire department.




   §  13.  Application  of  chapter  to  existing dwellings. Any building
  erected and occupied on or before  April  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred
  twenty-nine, or thereafter, as a tenement, which is not recorded as such
  in  the  department, shall be required to comply with all the provisions
  governing dwellings of like class  or  kind  erected  after  such  date.
  Except  as  otherwise expressly required in this section and in sections
  nine  and  twenty-five,  subdivision  six  of  section  thirty-one,  and
  sections thirty-three, sixty-six and sixty-seven and in articles six and
  seven,  nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require any change
  in the construction, use or occupancy of any multiple dwelling  lawfully
  occupied  as  such  on  April  eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine,
  under  the  provisions  of  all  local  laws,  ordinances,   rules   and
  regulations applicable thereto on such date; but should the occupancy of
  any such dwelling be changed to any other kind or class after such date,
  such dwelling shall be required to comply with the provisions of section
  nine.


   §  14.  Application  of  chapter  to  uncompleted  dwellings.  1.  The
  provisions of this chapter relating to multiple dwellings erected  after
  April  eighteenth,  nineteen hundred twenty-nine, shall not apply to any
  multiple dwelling for which plans were on file with the department or  a
  permit  to  commence building was issued by the department before August
  ninth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, and the entire building shall  have
  been completed according to the plans filed with the department, subject
  to  any lawful subsequent amendment thereto, before July first, nineteen
  hundred forty-seven.
    2. No provisions of any part  of  this  section  shall  be  deemed  to
  prohibit  the  amendment  of  any  plans filed and approved before April
  eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, if such amendment  would  have
  been  lawful  before  such  date, or if such amendment complies with the
  requirements of this chapter for alterations to buildings of like  class
  and kind existing before April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine.
    3. A permit to commence building issued by the department before April
  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine,  based upon plans filed and
  approved for a multiple dwelling described in subdivision one, shall  be
  deemed to be in compliance with section three hundred.
    4.  The  provisions  of  this  chapter  relating to multiple dwellings
  erected and occupied as such before April eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred
  twenty-nine,  shall  apply  to  the dwellings described in this section;
  except, however, that unless otherwise  expressly  required  in  article
  three  nothing  in this chapter shall be construed to require any change
  in the plans or occupancy of any such dwelling if it  be  fireproof  and
  the plans therefore when filed were in compliance with the provisions of
  all local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations applicable thereto and
  in  effect  on  April  eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, or were
  subsequently amended to comply with such provisions.




   * §  15. Multiple dwelling emergency information. 1. In the case of an
  emergency affecting a multiple dwelling, the  owner  or  agent  of  such
  multiple  dwelling  shall  provide emergency service personnel, upon the
  request of such emergency service personnel, including but  not  limited
  to  local  police  and  fire  departments,  with  the  names and contact
  information of all affected residents or  occupants  as  listed  in  the
  lease  of  such multiple dwelling as is required to ascertain the safety
  of such residents or occupants. For the purposes  of  this  section,  an
  emergency shall include but not be limited to fires, gas leaks, building
  collapses,  natural  disasters, acts of terrorism and other events where
  the physical safety of residents must be accounted for  by  ascertaining
  their whereabouts.
    2.  The owner or agent of such multiple dwelling shall update the list
  of names and contact information of all affected residents or  occupants
  of  such  multiple  dwelling  upon  the  execution of a new lease, lease
  renewal or lease amendment. Specific and informed written consent  shall
  be  obtained  by  the  owner or agent of the multiple dwelling from each
  occupant or resident each time the list is updated and no occupant's  or
  resident's  name  or  contact information shall be included in such list
  without their specific and  informed  written  consent.  Written  notice
  shall be provided to the occupant or resident about the contact list and
  shall  include but not be limited to that such list is maintained by the
  owner and the potential impact of opting-out.
    3. Such list of names and contact information shall only be maintained
  for  the  purpose  of  an  emergency  evacuation  and   shall   not   be
  disseminated,  used  or  accessed  by  emergency  services  personnel or
  disseminated, used or accessed by the owner or agent  of  such  multiple
  dwelling for any other purposes.
    * NB Effective February 15, 2024


   §  25.  Application  of  article  three. Except as otherwise expressly
  provided, all the provisions  of  this  article  shall  apply  to  every
  multiple  dwelling  erected  after  April  eighteenth,  nineteen hundred
  twenty-nine. Except as otherwise expressly provided, only the  following
  enumerated  sections  of  this  article,  and  then  only  to the extent
  required therein, shall apply to multiple dwellings, whether class A  or
  class B, erected before such date:
     § 28. Two or more buildings on         59. Bakeries and fat boiling
             same lot                       60. Motor vehicle storage
       29. Painting of courts and           61. Business uses
             shafts                         62. Parapets, guard railings
       31. Size of rooms--subdi-                  and wires--subdivision two
             vision six                     66. Lodging houses
       33. Cooking spaces                   67. Hotels and certain other
       35. Entrance doors and                     class A and B dwellings
             lights                         75. Water supply
       37. Artificial hall lighting         76. Water-closet and bath
       50-a. Entrances: doors,                    accommodations
             locks and intercommunication   77. Plumbing and drainage
             systems                        78. Repairs
       52. Stairs                           79. Heating
       55. Wainscoting                      80. Cleanliness
       56. Frame buildings and              81. Receptacles for waste
             extensions                           matter
       57. Bells; mail receptacles          83. Janitor or housekeeper






   §  26.  Height,  bulk,  open  spaces.  1.  Dwellings affected. a. This
  section, except as may specifically be provided  otherwise  in  articles
  six and seven, shall apply to all dwellings erected, enlarged, converted
  or  altered  pursuant  to  plans  filed  on or after December fifteenth,
  nineteen hundred sixty-one for the purpose of  regulating  their  height
  and  bulk  and  regulating and determining the area of yards, courts and
  other open spaces of such dwellings.
    b. The construction, enlargement,  conversion  or  alteration  of  any
  dwelling undertaken pursuant to plans filed prior to December fifteenth,
  nineteen hundred sixty-one in compliance with the provisions of sections
  twenty-six,  twenty-seven  and  twenty-eight  of  this  chapter, as they
  existed prior to the enactment of chapter ten hundred seventy-two of the
  laws of nineteen hundred sixty, effective July first,  nineteen  hundred
  sixty-one  may  be commenced, continued or completed as if such sections
  remained in full force and effect.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of
  subdivision  four  of  section  three  hundred, the department shall not
  require any change or modification in the height or bulk or in the  area
  of  yards,  courts  and  other open spaces of dwellings to be erected or
  enlarged pursuant to plans filed prior to December  fifteenth,  nineteen
  hundred sixty-one as a condition for the reissuance of a building permit
  or  the  renewal  of an approval, except as may otherwise be provided by
  local law, ordinance or zoning ordinance.
    c. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any change in
  the height, bulk, or open  space  of  any  dwelling  erected,  enlarged,
  converted  or altered pursuant to plans filed before December fifteenth,
  nineteen hundred sixty-one.
    d. Notwithstanding the  provisions  of  paragraphs  a,  b  or  c,  the
  provisions  of  this section shall apply to buildings erected, enlarged,
  converted  or  altered  pursuant  to  plans  filed  prior  to   December
  fifteenth,  nineteen  hundred  sixty-one,  where  such compliance may be
  required by local law, ordinance or zoning ordinance.
    2. Definitions. For the purpose of  this  section  certain  words  are
  defined  herein  but  such  definitions  shall  not be held to modify or
  affect legal interpretations of such terms or words as used in any local
  law, ordinance, rule or regulation and shall apply in  addition  to  and
  not in substitution for the provisions of section four of this chapter.
    a.  "Accessory  use  or  accessory  structure":  a  use  or  structure
  customarily incident to the principal use or building:
    b. "Floor area": the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all  of  the
  several  floors of a dwelling or dwellings and accessory structures on a
  lot measured from the exterior faces  of  exterior  walls  or  from  the
  center line of party walls, except:
    (1) cellar space;
    (2) attic space providing head room of less than eight feet;
    (3) space for mechanical equipment;
    (4) elevator and stair bulkheads, tanks and cooling towers;
    (5)  open or roofed terraces, exterior balconies or porches, uncovered
  steps and open porte-cocheres or breezeways abutting or adjoining  grade
  entrances;
    (6)  accessory  space  used  for  off-street  motor vehicle parking or
  storage.
    c. "Floor area ratio (FAR)": A figure determined by dividing the floor
  area of the several floors of all buildings on a lot by the area of such
  lot.
    d. "Corner lot": A lot bounded entirely by  streets  or  a  lot  which
  adjoins  the  point of intersections of two of more streets and in which
  the interior angle formed by the extensions of the street lines  in  the
  directions  which  they take at their intersections with lot lines other


 than street lines, forms an angle of one hundred thirty-five degrees  or
  less.  In  the  event  that  any  street line is a curve at its point of
  intersection with a lot line other than a street line,  the  tangent  to
  the  curve at that point shall be considered the direction of the street
  line. The portion of such lot subject to the regulations for corner lots
  is that portion bounded  by  the  intersecting  street  line  and  lines
  parallel to and one hundred feet from each intersecting street line. Any
  remaining  portion  of  a corner lot shall be subject to the regulations
  for a through lot or for an interior lot, whichever is applicable.
    e. "Tower": A dwelling or dwellings or portion thereof  which  has  an
  aggregate  horizontal area of not more than forty per centum of the area
  of a lot, or, for lots of less than twenty thousand square feet, the per
  centum set forth in the following table:
    Area of lot       Maximum percent
  (in square feet)      of lot coverage
  10,500 or less ............................. 50 %
  10,501 to 11,500 ........................... 49
  11,501 to 12,500 ........................... 48
  12,501 to 13,500 ........................... 47
  13,501 to 14,500 ........................... 46
  14,501 to 15,500 ........................... 45
  15,501 to 16,500 ........................... 44
  16,501 to 17,500 ........................... 43
  17,501 to 18,500 ........................... 42
  18,501 to 19,999 ........................... 41
    3. Floor area ratio (FAR). The floor area ratio (FAR) of any  dwelling
  or  dwellings  on  a  lot shall not exceed 12.0, except that a fireproof
  class B dwelling in which six or more passenger elevators are maintained
  and operated in any  city  having  a  local  zoning  law,  ordinance  or
  resolution restricting districts in such city to residential use, may be
  erected  in accordance with the provisions of such zoning law, ordinance
  or resolution, if such class B dwelling is erected in a district no part
  of which is restricted by such zoning law, ordinance  or  resolution  to
  residential uses.
    4.  Height.  A dwelling may be erected to any height and any number of
  stories so long as it does not exceed the bulk  limitations  hereinafter
  prescribed.
    5. Rear yard. a. Except as otherwise provided in the zoning resolution
  of  the city of New York and except as hereinafter provided for a corner
  lot,  an  interior  lot  within  one  hundred  feet  of  the  point   of
  intersection  of  the  two  street lines intersecting at an angle of one
  hundred thirty-five degrees or less, an interior lot fronting on a block
  measuring less than two  hundred  thirty  feet  in  length  between  two
  intersecting streets or a through lot, a rear yard shall be required for
  each  dwelling  and  shall  extend  the entire width of the lot at every
  point. For dwellings occupying an entire block or a through lot, no rear
  yard shall be required. When dwellings do not exceed in area thirty-five
  per centum of the plot, the department shall  permit  such  location  of
  yards and courts as will promote the best possible plot ventilation. For
  purposes  of  this paragraph a, a block shall not be deemed less than an
  entire block because a portion thereof is conveyed after construction of
  such multiple dwelling or dwellings to a city for public park purposes.
    b. Except as otherwise provided in the zoning resolution of  the  city
  of  New  York, the minimum depth of a required rear yard shall be thirty
  feet for the first one hundred twenty-five feet above  curb  level,  and
  fifty  feet above that point. The depth of a rear yard shall be measured
  at right angles from the rear lot line to the extreme exterior rear wall
  of the dwelling. The provisions of this paragraph requiring a rear  yard


 fifty  feet in depth for portions of a building in excess of one hundred
  twenty-five feet above the curb level shall not be applied to a tower.
    c.  Except  as otherwise provided in the zoning resolution of the city
  of New York, on a corner lot no rear yard shall be  required,  provided,
  however, every required window shall open into either:
    (1) a lawful inner or outer court; or
    (2)  a  side or rear yard with a minimum width or depth of thirty feet
  in one direction; or
    (3) if such lot is less than ten thousand square feet in area, a  side
  yard  with  a minimum width of twenty feet, or an inner space equivalent
  to the area of a lawful inner court.
    d. Except as otherwise provided in the zoning resolution of  the  city
  of  New York, on any through lot one hundred ten feet or more in maximum
  depth from street to street, one of the following rear yard  equivalents
  shall be provided:
    (1)  An open area with a minimum depth of sixty feet, extending across
  the entire lot and linking abutting rear yards, or if no such rear yards
  exist, then an open area, with a minimum depth of sixty feet, midway (or
  within five feet thereof) between the two street lines upon  which  such
  through lot fronts and provided further that the provisions of paragraph
  b  of  this  subdivision  shall  apply above a height of one hundred and
  twenty-five feet above the curb level as if such  rear  yard  equivalent
  were two adjoining rear yards; or
    (2)  Two open areas, each abutting and extending along the full length
  of a street line, and each with a minimum depth of thirty feet  measured
  from such street line; or
    (3) An open area adjoining and extending along the full length of each
  side  lot  line,  with a minimum width of thirty feet measured from each
  side lot line.
    e. When the maximum depth of any interior  lot  owned  separately  and
  individually  from  all  other  adjoining  tracts  of  land  on December
  fifteenth, nineteen hundred sixty-one is less  than  seventy  feet,  the
  required  depth of the rear yard of a dwelling on such lot for the first
  one hundred twenty-five feet above curb level may be decreased one  foot
  for  each  foot  by  which  the maximum depth is less than seventy feet.
  However, any such yard shall never be less than ten feet in depth at any
  point above its lowest level.
    f. Except for fireproof buildings and except as otherwise provided  in
  this paragraph there shall be access from a street to the yard through a
  fireproof  passage  either  in  a  direct  line or through a court. Such
  passage shall be not less than three feet in clear width and seven  feet
  in  height.  Such  passage shall not be required for a multiple dwelling
  which does not exceed three stories in height and  is  not  occupied  by
  more  than  one  family  on  any story or three families in all or for a
  dwelling which does not exceed two stories in height and is not occupied
  by more than two families on any story or four families in all  provided
  every  required  means  of egress from such dwelling leads directly to a
  street or to an outer court opening upon a street. When a dwelling  does
  not  exceed three stories in height and is not occupied by more than two
  families  on  any  story,  such  passage   may   be   of   fire-retarded
  construction.
    6. Side yard. Except as otherwise provided in the zoning resolution of
  the  city of New York, no side yard shall be required. If a side yard is
  provided it shall in no event be less than eight feet in  width  at  any
  point. Such side yard need not exceed thirty feet in width.
    7.  Courts.  Except  as otherwise provided in the zoning resolution of
  the city of New York:


   a. An inner court shall have minimum width of four inches per foot for
  each one foot of height of such court, but in no event less than fifteen
  feet in width at any point. The area of such inner court shall be  twice
  the  square  of  the width of the court dimension based on the height of
  such court, but in no event less than three hundred fifty square feet in
  area.  The  area  of such court need not exceed one thousand two hundred
  square feet provided that the minimum horizontal  distance  between  any
  required  window of a living room opening on an inner court shall not be
  less than thirty feet from any wall opposite such window. For a dwelling
  three stories or less in height, an inner court may have a minimum width
  of three inches for each one foot of height of such  court,  but  in  no
  event  less  than ten feet in width at any point. The area of such court
  shall be twice the square of the required width of court dimension based
  on the height of such court but in no event less than two hundred  fifty
  square  feet  in area. An air in-take of fireproof construction shall be
  provided at or near the lowest level of every inner court  of  dwellings
  exceeding  two  stories in height, and shall communicate directly with a
  street or yard. Such in-take shall have a vertical cross-sectional  area
  of  not less than twenty-one square feet and a minimum width of not less
  than  three  feet  in  its  least  dimension,  and  shall  be  open  and
  unobstructed  throughout,  except that where the intake is not used as a
  passage  or  exit,  gates  or  grilles  which  do  not  interfere   with
  ventilation may be installed.
    b.  An  outer  court at any given height shall have a minimum width at
  least equal to twice the depth of such outer court if such  outer  court
  is  less  than  thirty feet wide. Such outer court shall have a width at
  least equal to its depth if such court is thirty feet or more in  width.
  An  outer  court need not exceed sixty feet in width. Except as provided
  in section sixty, an outer court on a side lot line  may  begin  at  the
  level  of  the floor of the lowest story in which there is a living room
  opening therefrom. Any outer court not on a side lot line may  begin  at
  any  level,  the  height  of such court to be measured from the level at
  which such court begins.
    7-a. Lights in rear yards, side yards, front  yards  and  courts.  The
  owner  of  every dwelling shall install and maintain in every rear yard,
  side yard, front yard and court a light or  lights  of  at  least  forty
  watts  of  incandescent illumination or equivalent illumination, in such
  locations as the department may prescribe, which shall be  kept  burning
  from sunset on each day to sunrise on the day following.
    8. Level of areas adjoining living rooms. The bottom of any yard, rear
  yard  equivalent,  court  or  other open area which abuts or adjoins and
  gives light or ventilation to a living room shall be at the floor  level
  or lower of such living room, except that:
    a.  If  the  depth  of a yard exceeds the minimum required depth by as
  much as one-half, the bottom of such yard may be at any level not higher
  than six inches below the window sills of any such adjoining living room
  and not more than three feet above the floor of such room.
    b. If the width of an outer court exceeds the minimum required  by  as
  much  as  forty per centum, the bottom of such court may be at any level
  permitted by paragraph a for a yard or rear yard equivalent.
    9. Permitted obstructions. Every yard and court shall comply with  all
  the  requirements  of this section and be open and unobstructed at every
  point from the lowest level to the sky except that the  following  shall
  not  be deemed to obstruct or reduce the area of otherwise lawful yards,
  rear yard equivalents  or  courts,  provided  that  required  light  and
  ventilation  for  living rooms and required egress from the dwelling are
  maintained to the satisfaction of the department:


   a. Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or  enclosed,  conforming
  to the applicable provisions of section sixty.
    b.  Fire escapes erected as provided in paragraph b of subdivision two
  of section fifty-three.
    c. In a yard  or  rear  yard  equivalent,  boiler  flues  or  chimneys
  projecting  not  more  than three feet into such yard and provided every
  such flue or chimney does not exceed two per cent of the  required  area
  of the yard.
    d.  Outside  stairways,  fire  towers, platforms or balconies or other
  similar projections which extend beyond the wall of the dwelling.
    e.  Enclosures  of  balconies  or  spaces  erected  as   provided   in
  subdivision four of section thirty.
    f.  Arbors,  trellises,  awnings or canopies, fences, flag poles, open
  steps, or breezeways.
    g. Recreational or drying yard equipment except as otherwise  provided
  in section fifty-six.
    h.  Walls not exceeding eight feet in height and not roofed or part of
  a structure.
    i. Retaining walls to protect adjoining premises provided  such  walls
  are not more than fifteen feet in height measured from the curb level of
  the lot on which such walls are erected, do not extend above the sill of
  any  required  living  room window on the first story facing such a wall
  and do not extend more than thirty-six inches into the required area  of
  a yard, rear yard equivalent or court.
    j.  A party wall not more than twelve inches into the required area of
  a yard, or rear yard equivalent or court.
    k. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent cutting off  the
  corners of any yard, rear yard equivalent or court, provided the running
  length  of  the  wall at the angle of such yard or court does not exceed
  seven feet.
    l. In a  rear  yard  equivalent,  an  enclosed  passageway  connecting
  portions  of  separate  buildings  where such passageway does not exceed
  fourteen feet in height and fifteen feet in width measured  between  the
  outer faces of the walls thereof.
    m.  In  a  city  with a population of one million or more, the area of
  yards, rear yard equivalents, courts or open  spaces  required  by  this
  section,  section  one hundred seventy-two or section two hundred twelve
  of this chapter shall not be deemed  to  be  reduced  or  obstructed  by
  exterior wall thickness of up to eight inches added to the exterior of a
  building  to  accommodate  the addition of insulation to the extent that
  such exterior  wall  thickness  is  a  permitted  obstruction  for  such
  building under the zoning resolution of such city.
    10.  Nothing  contained in this section shall be deemed to prevent the
  turfing over of any yard or court space or the  planting  of  shrubs  or
  trees therein when approved by the department.
    11.  Pending actions or proceedings. Nothing contained in this section
  shall affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing
  or accrued or acquired, or liability, penalty, forfeiture or  punishment
  incurred  prior  to  December fifteenth, nineteen hundred sixty-one, but
  the same way may be enjoyed, asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted
  as fully and to the same extend as if this section had not been enacted.






   §  28.  Two or more buildings on same lot. 1. If any separate multiple
  dwelling  is  erected   after   April   eighteenth,   nineteen   hundred
  twenty-nine,  upon the rear of a lot which has another multiple dwelling
  on the front or upon the front of  a  lot  which  has  another  multiple
  dwelling on the rear, access shall be provided to the rear dwelling from
  a  street  by  means  of  an  unobstructed court at least twenty feet in
  width.
    2. Except as otherwise provided for motor  vehicle  storage  space  in
  section  sixty and for dwellings erected, enlarged, converted or altered
  pursuant to plans filed prior to December  fifteenth,  nineteen  hundred
  sixty-one  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  subdivision one of
  section twenty-six, if any building or dwelling is placed on the rear of
  the same lot with a multiple dwelling or a multiple dwelling  is  placed
  anywhere  on  the  same  lot  with another building, there shall be left
  between the two buildings an open space unoccupied from  the  ground  up
  and  at  least  forty  feet in depth, measured in the direction from one
  building to the other for the first one hundred twenty-five  feet  above
  the curb level, and eighty feet above that point. The provisions of this
  subdivision  requiring  an  open  space  eighty  feet  in  depth between
  portions of buildings in excess of one hundred  twenty-five  feet  above
  the curb level shall not be applied when both such portions are towers.
    3. If on the rear of a lot any such building or any portion thereof is
  used  for  business  purposes, a separate passageway at least three feet
  six inches wide and seven feet high shall be provided leading from every
  such open  space  adjacent  to  such  building  to  a  street.  No  such
  passageway shall connect with, go through or form a part of any entrance
  hall  or  other public hall of a multiple dwelling upon the front of the
  lot.


   § 29. Painting of courts and shafts. The exterior surface of all walls
  of  all  courts and shafts of multiple dwellings, except of outer courts
  opening on a street, and courts having  dimensions  of  at  least  fifty
  percent  in excess of the minimum set forth in section twenty-six, shall
  be of a lightcolored brick or stone, or  be  thoroughly  whitewashed  or
  painted  a light color by the owner and be so maintained. Such whitewash
  or paint shall be renewed whenever necessary, as may be  determined  and
  required by the department.






   §  30.  Lighting  and  ventilation of rooms. 1. The provisions of this
  section shall apply only  to  multiple  dwellings  erected  after  April
  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine, and shall apply to all such
  dwellings unless otherwise expressly limited.
    2.  Except  as  in  this  section  and   in   sections   thirty-three,
  seventy-six,  one  hundred  fifteen,  one  hundred  sixty,  one  hundred
  seventy-six, two hundred, two hundred thirteen, two  hundred  fifty  and
  two   hundred   fifty-one  otherwise  expressly  provided,  every  room,
  including kitchens, water-closet compartments and bathrooms, shall  have
  at  least  one  window  opening  directly upon a street or upon a lawful
  yard, court or space above a setback upon the same lot as that  occupied
  by  the  multiple  dwelling  in  which such room is situated. Every such
  window shall be so located as to light  properly  all  portions  of  the
  room.
    3. No room in any apartment of three rooms or less, and no room in any
  non-fireproof apartment, shall extend in depth, from a street or yard on
  which  it  faces,  more  than  thirty feet without a window opening on a
  lawful court.
    4. a. Nothing in this section or section twenty-six shall be construed
  as prohibiting the windows or doors  of  any  room  from  opening  on  a
  partially-enclosed  balcony  or  space  above  a  setback, provided such
  balcony or space opens directly to a street or to a lawful yard or court
  and the area of the front of the balcony or space which is open  to  the
  outer  air  is  at  least  equal to seventy-five per centum of the floor
  surface area of such balcony or space. Any living room thus lighted  and
  ventilated by windows or doors opening on such balcony or space shall be
  at most thirty feet in depth measured from the extreme outer face of the
  wall  forming the partial enclosure of the balcony or space. The windows
  or doors providing light and ventilation for a  room  or  rooms  opening
  exclusively  on  such  a balcony or space shall have altogether at least
  the area of one-tenth of the combined floor  surface  of  such  room  or
  rooms  and the portion of the balcony or space directly adjoining and in
  front of such room or rooms.
    b. On a  fireproof  dwelling  a  balcony  or  space  above  a  setback
  permitted  under  paragraph  a  of  this  subdivision  may be completely
  enclosed, provided the outer  enclosing  wall  or  walls  and  roof  are
  constructed  of  incombustible  materials  and the walls are glazed with
  clear plate glass or plastic equivalent and such  glazed  wall  area  is
  equal  to  at  least  fifty per centum of the area of the interior walls
  enclosing such balcony or space. At least fifty per centum of the glazed
  area shall be openable directly upon a street or upon a lawful  yard  or
  court.  No window shall open from any bathroom, water-closet compartment
  or cooking space upon such enclosed balcony.
    c. The enclosure on any balcony or a space above a setback  shall  not
  (1)  be  more than one story in height or (2) be erected in violation of
  the provisions of paragraph a of subdivision six of section one  hundred
  two of this chapter.
    5.  No  multiple dwelling shall be so altered as to diminish the light
  or ventilation of any room or public hall  or  stairs  in  any  way  not
  approved by the department.
    6.  No  window  shall  be  required  in any public room of a fireproof
  multiple dwelling if such room is used solely for  storage  purposes  or
  has  adequate  mechanical ventilation maintained to provide at least the
  number of changes of the  air  volume  of  such  room  approved  by  the
  department  as  necessary  for the health and safety of the occupants of
  such dwelling. Any fresh air supply system required  by  the  department
  for  such  purposes  shall  be provided with adequate means for removing


 dust from the incoming air and with adequate means to heat such  air  at
  least to sixty degrees Fahrenheit.
    7.  No  required window shall open upon any offset or recess less than
  six feet in  width  except  a  window  of  a  water-closet  compartment,
  bathroom,  or  stair or of a cooking compartment less than eighty square
  feet in floor surface area.
    8. (a) The windows in every room, except a  water-closet  compartment,
  bathroom, or cooking space less than eighty square feet in floor surface
  area,  shall  have  a total area at least one-tenth of the floor surface
  area of such room and every window in such a room, including a mullioned
  casement window, shall be at least twelve square feet in area.
    (b) All required  windows  shall  be  so  constructed  that  at  least
  one-half  of  their required area may be opened, except that a mullioned
  casement  window,  if  otherwise  large  enough  to  supply  the  window
  requirements of the room, need be readily openable to the outer air only
  to the extent of five and one-half square feet of its area.
    (c)  Where  fresh  air  is  furnished in any room through a mechanical
  ventilating unit or system which is an integral  part  of  the  dwelling
  structure  and  capable of introducing not less than forty cubic feet of
  air per minute, the required window area in such room need  be  openable
  only to the extent of twenty-five per cent of such window area but in no
  event less than five and one-half square feet.
    9. Transoms or partition sash, or louvres having a minimum area of 144
  square  inches and arranged to be opened or closed, shall be provided to
  private halls  or  to  adjoining  rooms  to  secure  through-ventilation
  whenever  required  by  the department, but no such transom or partition
  sash or louvre shall be required in a room having two windows opening to
  the outer air if each window is at least nine square feet in area, or in
  a room having a mullioned or single window with an aggregate area of  at
  least eighteen square feet.
    10.  All windows and their assemblies in walls situated on a lot line,
  except those facing on a street, shall  be  fireproof,  with  assemblies
  having a fire-resistive rating of at least three-quarters of an hour and
  glazed  with  wire  glass  at  least one-quarter of an inch thick. Every
  opening in a wall situated on a lot line which is less than  fifty  feet
  in  a vertical direction above a non-fireproof roof of another structure
  within a distance of thirty feet of the wall in  which  the  opening  is
  located shall be an automatic fireproof window.






   §  31.  Size  of  rooms.  1.  The  provisions  of this section, except
  subdivision six, shall apply only to multiple  dwellings  erected  after
  April  eighteenth,  nineteen hundred twenty-nine, and shall apply to all
  such dwellings unless otherwise expressly limited.
    2. Except as in this section and  in  section  thirty-three  otherwise
  expressly  provided,  rooms,  except kitchens, water-closet compartments
  and bathrooms, shall meet the following minimum requirements as to size:
    a. In each apartment in a class A multiple dwelling there shall be  at
  least  one living room containing at least one hundred thirty-two square
  feet of floor area.
    b. Every living room, except as provided in paragraph e, shall contain
  at least eighty square feet of floor space.
    c. Every room shall be at least eight feet high, the  measurements  to
  be  taken  from  the  finished  floor  to  the finished underside of the
  ceiling beams except that as many as four beams crossing the ceiling  of
  any  basement  room  may  be  disregarded if none of them exceeds twelve
  inches in width or extends below the ceiling more than six inches.
    d. Every living room shall  be  at  least  eight  feet  in  its  least
  horizontal  dimension, except as provided in paragraph e and except that
  any number of bedrooms up  to  one-half  of  the  total  number  in  any
  apartment  containing three or more bedrooms may have a least horizontal
  dimension of seven feet or more.
    e. A one-room apartment in a class B multiple dwelling may be as small
  as sixty square feet in its  floor  area  and  six  feet  in  its  least
  dimension.
    3.  The  requirements  of  this  section  with  respect  to  the least
  horizontal dimension  and  the  minimum  area  of  rooms  shall  not  be
  applicable to any room in a fireproof class B multiple dwelling occupied
  as  a  lodging  house in which every apartment, other than one apartment
  occupied exclusively by a person or persons engaged in  the  maintenance
  or  supervision  of  such multiple dwelling, consists of one room and in
  which every such room opens directly upon a public hall.
    4. Dining bays with a floor area of fifty-five  square  feet  or  less
  shall not be considered as rooms or alcoves and shall not be required to
  comply  with the provisions of section thirty-two. Every such dining bay
  shall be equipped with such appropriate permanent  fittings  as  may  be
  required  by  the  department  and  shall  be provided with at least one
  window opening directly upon a street or upon a lawful  yard,  court  or
  space  above  a  setback.  Such  window  shall  have an area of at least
  one-eighth of the floor area of such dining bay.
    5. A portion of any  apartment  used  as  an  entrance  hall  to  such
  apartment  may  be  designated  as  a  foyer.  Such a foyer shall not be
  considered a room if the department shall so permit and if either
    a. Its floor area does not exceed ten per centum of  the  total  floor
  area of such apartment, or
    b.  Every  room in such apartment exceeds in area the minimum required
  area of such room by more than twenty per centum and the floor  area  of
  such  foyer  does not exceed twenty per centum of the floor area of such
  apartment.
    6. a. Exept in class B dwellings and dormitories,  no  room  shall  be
  occupied  for  sleeping  purposes  by  more than two adults, considering
  children of twelve years of age or  more  as  adults  and  two  children
  between  the ages of two and eleven years inclusive as the equivalent of
  one adult. Children under two years of age need  not  be  considered  as
  occupants.  No  room  shall have sleeping accomodations for more persons
  than can be accommodated in  conformity  with  the  provisions  of  this
  subdivision.


   b. Every room in every dwelling, whenever erected, shall have at least
  four  hundred  cubic  feet  of air for each adult, and two hundred cubic
  feet of air for each child  occupying  such  room.  Except  in  class  B
  dwellings,  dormitories  and except as otherwise provided in subdivision
  two  of  section  thirty-one  or  in  section  thirty-four for dwellings
  erected after April eighteenth, nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine,  and  in
  sections  one hundred seventy-four, two hundred fourteen and two hundred
  sixteen, every living room shall (1) contain sixty square feet  or  more
  of floor space, (2) be at least six feet wide at its narrowest part, (3)
  if  a  sleeping  room, contain seventy-five square feet or more of floor
  space and (4) if less than seventy-five square feet in floor area, shall
  not be occupied by more than one adult.






   § 32. Alcoves. 1. Every alcove, except a lawful cooking space, opening
  from  any  room in any multiple dwelling erected after April eighteenth,
  nineteen hundred twenty-nine, shall be separately lighted and ventilated
  as provided for other rooms in section thirty. It  shall  have  a  floor
  area of at least seventy square feet, a least horizontal dimension of at
  least  seven feet and an opening at least sixty square feet in area into
  the room which it adjoins.
    2. Except for cubicles permitted in lodging houses,  no  part  of  any
  room  in  any multiple dwelling erected after April eighteenth, nineteen
  hundred twenty-nine, shall be enclosed or subdivided at any time, wholly
  or in part, by a curtain, portiere, fixed or movable partition or  other
  contrivance  or  device, unless each such enclosure or subdivision shall
  contain a separate window as required for a room by section thirty and a
  floor space of at least seventy square feet.






   §  33.  Cooking  spaces. 1. Every space which is intended, arranged or
  designed for cooking or warming of food shall be  either  a  kitchen  or
  kitchenette.  The  term  "kitchen" shall mean such a space eighty square
  feet or more in floor area. The term "kitchenette"  shall  mean  such  a
  space which is less than eighty square feet in floor area.
    2.  Every  cooking space shall be deemed to be in compliance with this
  section if such space was accepted or approved by the department  on  or
  before  June  thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-five, and is maintained
  in accordance with such acceptance or approval.
    3. Except as  provided  in  sections  sixty-one  and  sixty-seven  and
  subdivision  two  of  this  section,  a  kitchen or kitchenette shall be
  unlawful unless it is constructed, arranged and maintained in compliance
  with the following applicable provisions:
    a. The ceiling and walls, exclusive  of  doors,  of  all  kitchenettes
  shall  be  fire-retarded or in lieu thereof such space shall be equipped
  with one or more sprinkler heads to fuse at  a  temperature  not  higher
  than  two  hundred  twelve  degrees  Fahrenheit.  Such  heads  shall  be
  connected to the water supply through a pipe of at least  one-half  inch
  inside diameter.
    b.   In  every  kitchen  and  kitchenette,  all  combustible  material
  immediately underneath or within one foot  of  any  apparatus  used  for
  cooking  or  warming  of  food  shall  be  fire-retarded or covered with
  asbestos  at  least  three-sixteenths  of  an  inch  in  thickness   and
  twenty-six  gauge  metal  or  with fire-resistive material of equivalent
  rating, except where such apparatus  is  installed  in  accordance  with
  requirements  established by the department in conformity with generally
  accepted safety standards for such apparatus. There shall always  be  at
  least  two feet of clear space above any exposed cooking surface of such
  apparatus.
    c. Every kitchenette constructed after July  first,  nineteen  hundred
  forty-nine,  shall  be  provided  with a window opening upon a street or
  upon a yard, court, shaft, or upon  any  space  above  a  setback.  Such
  window  shall  be  at least one foot wide, have a total area of at least
  three square feet and be at least ten  per  centum  of  the  superficial
  floor area of such kitchenette. In lieu of such window, such kitchenette
  may  be  provided  with  mechanical  ventilation to provide at least six
  changes per hour of the air volume of such  kitchenette  or,  when  such
  kitchenette  is  on the top story, may have a skylight at least one foot
  wide with a total area of at least four square feet or one-eighth of the
  area  of  the  kitchenette,  whichever  is  greater,  and   shall   have
  ventilating openings of at least one-half of the area of the skylight.
    d.  Every  kitchenette  constructed after July first, nineteen hundred
  forty-nine, may be equipped with a door or  doors,  provided  the  lower
  portion  of  each  such  door  has  a  metal  grille containing at least
  forty-eight square inches of clear  openings  or,  in  lieu  of  such  a
  grille,  there  are  two clear open spaces, each of at least twenty-four
  square inches, one between the bottom of the door and the floor, and the
  other between the top of each such door and the head jamb.
    e. Every kitchen  and  kitchenette  shall  be  provided  with  gas  or
  electricity or both, and shall be equipped for artificial lighting.






   §  33.  Cooking  spaces. 1. Every space which is intended, arranged or
  designed for cooking or warming of food shall be  either  a  kitchen  or
  kitchenette.  The  term  "kitchen" shall mean such a space eighty square
  feet or more in floor area. The term "kitchenette"  shall  mean  such  a
  space which is less than eighty square feet in floor area.
    2.  Every  cooking space shall be deemed to be in compliance with this
  section if such space was accepted or approved by the department  on  or
  before  June  thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-five, and is maintained
  in accordance with such acceptance or approval.
    3. Except as  provided  in  sections  sixty-one  and  sixty-seven  and
  subdivision  two  of  this  section,  a  kitchen or kitchenette shall be
  unlawful unless it is constructed, arranged and maintained in compliance
  with the following applicable provisions:
    a. The ceiling and walls, exclusive  of  doors,  of  all  kitchenettes
  shall  be  fire-retarded or in lieu thereof such space shall be equipped
  with one or more sprinkler heads to fuse at  a  temperature  not  higher
  than  two  hundred  twelve  degrees  Fahrenheit.  Such  heads  shall  be
  connected to the water supply through a pipe of at least  one-half  inch
  inside diameter.
    b.   In  every  kitchen  and  kitchenette,  all  combustible  material
  immediately underneath or within one foot  of  any  apparatus  used  for
  cooking  or  warming  of  food  shall  be  fire-retarded or covered with
  asbestos  at  least  three-sixteenths  of  an  inch  in  thickness   and
  twenty-six  gauge  metal  or  with fire-resistive material of equivalent
  rating, except where such apparatus  is  installed  in  accordance  with
  requirements  established by the department in conformity with generally
  accepted safety standards for such apparatus. There shall always  be  at
  least  two feet of clear space above any exposed cooking surface of such
  apparatus.
    c. Every kitchenette constructed after July  first,  nineteen  hundred
  forty-nine,  shall  be  provided  with a window opening upon a street or
  upon a yard, court, shaft, or upon  any  space  above  a  setback.  Such
  window  shall  be  at least one foot wide, have a total area of at least
  three square feet and be at least ten  per  centum  of  the  superficial
  floor area of such kitchenette. In lieu of such window, such kitchenette
  may  be  provided  with  mechanical  ventilation to provide at least six
  changes per hour of the air volume of such  kitchenette  or,  when  such
  kitchenette  is  on the top story, may have a skylight at least one foot
  wide with a total area of at least four square feet or one-eighth of the
  area  of  the  kitchenette,  whichever  is  greater,  and   shall   have
  ventilating openings of at least one-half of the area of the skylight.
    d.  Every  kitchenette  constructed after July first, nineteen hundred
  forty-nine, may be equipped with a door or  doors,  provided  the  lower
  portion  of  each  such  door  has  a  metal  grille containing at least
  forty-eight square inches of clear  openings  or,  in  lieu  of  such  a
  grille,  there  are  two clear open spaces, each of at least twenty-four
  square inches, one between the bottom of the door and the floor, and the
  other between the top of each such door and the head jamb.
    e. Every kitchen  and  kitchenette  shall  be  provided  with  gas  or
  electricity or both, and shall be equipped for artificial lighting.






   §  34.  Rooms  in  basements  and cellars. 1. In any multiple dwelling
  erected after April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, every room
  in a cellar or basement shall have a permit as provided  in  subdivision
  five of section three hundred and, except as provided in subdivision six
  of this section, shall comply with the following conditions:
    a.  Such  rooms  shall be everywhere at least eight feet high from the
  floor to the ceiling, except that in a basement room  as  many  as  four
  beams  twelve  inches  or less in width and extending six inches or less
  below the ceiling may be disregarded.
    b. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph f, the ceiling  of  every
  such room in the front part of the dwelling, or in an apartment or suite
  extending  to  the  front  part, shall be at every point of such room at
  least four feet six inches above the curb level  directly  in  front  of
  such  point  on  the street in front of the dwelling; and the ceiling of
  every other such room, unless the yard of the dwelling is sixty feet  or
  more in depth or extends to a street along its entire width, shall be at
  every point of such room at least two feet above the curb level directly
  in  front  of  such  point on the street in front of the dwelling. Every
  yard or court upon which any such cellar or basement room  or  apartment
  opens shall, conform to the requirements of subdivision eight of section
  twenty-six.  Every such room, except as otherwise provided in paragraphs
  e and f, shall be an integral part of an apartment or  suite  containing
  at  least one room with a window opening directly upon a street or yard.
  Except as provided in paragrahs e and f, and  if  the  yard  of  such  a
  dwelling  is  less than sixty feet in depth there shall be not more than
  one apartment or suite in any cellar therein and any such  apartment  or
  suite  shall  contain  not  more than five rooms, shall be supplied with
  water closet and bath accommodations, and shall not open upon any  court
  less  than  five feet in width. Every part of such an apartment or suite
  shall either be within twenty-five feet of  the  inner  surface  of  the
  front or rear wall of the dwelling or have a window opening upon a court
  of  at  least  the dimensions prescribed in section tweny-six, but never
  less than ten feet wide.
    c. Every  such  cellar  or  basement  room  shall  have  access  to  a
  water-closet   constructed   and   arranged  as  prescribed  in  section
  seventy-six.
    d. Every such room shall have a window or windows complying  with  the
  requirements  of  section  thirty. The aggregate area of windows in each
  such room, except  as  provided  in  paragraph  f,  shall  be  at  least
  one-eighth of the horizontal area of the room. Each such window shall be
  constructed  so that the upper half of its area can be opened, and shall
  open upon a street, court or yard. The underside of the top stop-bead of
  each such window shall be within  twelve  inches  of  the  ceiling.  One
  window  in  each  such room shall have an area of at least twelve square
  feet.
    e. In addition to a janitor's apartment three rooms or less  may  also
  be  provided in the cellar of such a dwelling exclusively for the use of
  persons regularly and continuously employed in the maintenance  of  such
  dwelling.  Every  such room shall be completely separated from any other
  room or private hall and shall comply with all the provisions respecting
  a janitor's apartment except those relating to  water-closet  and  bath,
  but  there  shall  be at least one water-closet and bath accessible from
  each such room without passing through a janitor's apartment.  No  other
  rooms  in  such  a  cellar  shall  be  occupied  for  living or sleeping
  purposes, except  as  permitted  in  paragraphs  b  and  f.  Whenever  a
  janitor's apartment in the cellar of such a dwelling, or a room therein,
  is  expressly  excepted  from  a  requirement  in  any provision of this


 chapter, such exception shall apply also to  any  cellar  room  lawfully
  occupied as in this paragraph provided.
    f.  (1) When the lot of such a dwelling abuts upon two or more streets
  and the difference in level between the highest and the lowest points of
  the curbs adjoining the lot is more than ten  feet,  a  room  below  the
  highest  curb  point  may  be used for living purposes provided it opens
  upon a street or upon a lawful court or  yard  which  connects  directly
  with a street or, if the floor of such room is not more than twelve feet
  below  the  highest  curb  point,  upon  an  interior court with a least
  dimension of not less than thirty feet if such court is  situated  on  a
  lot line, and otherwise with a least dimension not less than fifty feet.
  Every  such room shall be at least nine feet high from finished floor to
  finished ceiling. When any such room or an apartment containing it faces
  a street, the ceiling of the room at every point shall be at least  four
  feet six inches above the curb level of such street directly in front of
  such  point. For the purpose of determining the required dimensions of a
  court or yard  of  any  dwelling  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this
  sub-paragraph,  the  height  of such dwelling shall be measured from the
  lowest point of such court or yard.
    (2) When the lot of such a multiple dwelling does not run through from
  street to street and there is a difference  in  level  exceeding  twenty
  feet  between the highest point of the curb in front of the dwelling and
  the lowest point of the curb on a street directly in  the  rear  of  the
  dwelling which street is within one hundred twenty-five feet of the rear
  line of the lot, a room below the level of the highest point of the curb
  in  front  of the dwelling may be used for living purposes provided such
  room opens upon a yard or a court adjoining a yard.  The  floor  of  any
  such  room shall be at least six inches above the level of every part of
  every yard and court upon which such room opens and of the curb  on  the
  street  in  the rear of such dwelling and also of all intervening ground
  between the rear street and the rear lot line. Every such room shall  be
  at  least  nine  feet  high from finished floor to finished ceiling. The
  required dimensions of a yard, or of a court adjoining a yard, on  which
  such  a  room  opens  in  any dwelling subject to the provisions of this
  sub-paragraph, shall be  determined  by  the  height  of  such  dwelling
  measured from the lowest point of such yard or court.
    (3) In any portion of a multiple dwelling arranged for living purposes
  below  the  curb  level  under authority of either of the sub-paragraphs
  above there  shall  be  no  wood  beams,  wood  lintels  or  other  wood
  structural  members, nor shall any wood or other inflammable material be
  used in any partitions, furrings or ceilings.
    2. Every multiple dwelling erected after  April  eighteenth,  nineteen
  hundred  twenty-nine,  whenever  the department shall deem it necessary,
  shall have all walls below the ground level  and  all  cellar  or  lower
  floors   damp-proofed   and   water-proofed.   Such   damp-proofing  and
  water-proofing shall run throughout the cellar or other lowest floor and
  through and up the walls as high as the ground level.
    3. Every cellar and basement  in  every  multiple  dwelling  shall  be
  properly lighted and ventilated to the satisfaction of the department.
    4. In every multiple dwelling the cellar walls and ceilings, except in
  rooms  occupied  as  provided  in  paragraph  f of subdivision one or in
  subdivision six, shall either be constructed of  light-colored  material
  or  be thoroughly whitewashed or painted a light color by the owner, and
  shall be so  maintained.  Such  whitewash  or  paint  shall  be  renewed
  whenever necessary, as may be determined and required by the department.
    5.  Notwithstanding  any  provisions of this section or of subdivision
  five of section three hundred, an apartment or room in  a  cellar  which
  was  occupied for living purposes at any time on or after October first,


 nineteen hundred fifty-two may thereafter continue to  be  occupied  for
  such  purposes  until  July  first,  nineteen  hundred  sixty-seven,  in
  accordance with the conditions imposed by subdivision  five  of  section
  two hundred sixteen.
    6.  An  apartment in a cellar or basement of any multiple dwelling may
  be used for living purposes provided all of the following conditions are
  complied with:
    a. Such apartment has at least one half of its height and all  of  its
  window  surfaces  above every part of an "adequate adjacent space." Such
  "adequate adjacent space" shall be open to the sky,  shall  be  properly
  drained to the satisfaction of the department, and shall be a continuous
  surface area outside the dwelling not less than thirty feet in its least
  dimension  and  abutting at same level, or directly below, every part of
  the exterior walls of such apartment and of every other apartment on the
  same floor. Such "adequate adjacent  space"  shall  include  only  space
  which  is located on the same lot or plot as the dwelling or on a street
  or public place or space.
    b. Every living room of such apartment is everywhere  at  least  eight
  feet  high from the floor to the ceiling in dwellings erected after July
  first, nineteen hundred fifty-seven, and seven feet in dwellings erected
  prior thereto.
    c. All parts of the exterior walls of the  dwelling  which  are  below
  ground level and on the same floor as such apartment or above such floor
  are  dampproof  to  the  satisfaction of the department and the floor of
  such apartment is dampproof and waterproof.
    d. The yard and every court of the dwelling containing such  apartment
  are adequately drained to the satisfaction of the department.
    e. If any part of the apartment is below the "adequate adjacent space"
  referred  to in paragraph a of this subdivision, all ceilings, walls and
  partitions of such apartment are fire-retarded or the rooms  and  spaces
  within  such  apartment  are  protected  by  a  sprinkler  system to the
  satisfaction of the department.
    f. Such apartment and every part of the floor on which it is  situated
  meet  all of the requirements which would be in effect for such floor if
  none of the rooms thereon were used for living purposes.
    g. Such apartment complies with all of the requirements for apartments
  in the same dwelling which are not in a cellar or basement.
    h. The floor on which such apartment is situated, if a  cellar,  shall
  nevertheless  be  counted as a story for the purpose of all requirements
  except those relating to the height of the dwelling.




   §  35.  Entrance doors and lights.  In every multiple dwelling erected
  after April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, every door  giving
  access  to  an  entrance hall from outside the dwelling shall contain at
  least five square feet of glazed surface. The width of every  such  door
  shall be at least seventy-five per centum of the required clear width of
  such  entrance  hall  as  provided  in section fifty, except that when a
  series of such entrance doors is provided their  aggregate  clear  width
  shall  not be less than seventy-five per centum of the required width of
  the entrance hall and the clear width of each of  the  doors  separately
  shall  be  at  least  two  feet six inches.   Such a door opening upon a
  street or a court extending to a street may be  of  wood.  Such  a  door
  opening  upon  a yard or upon a court not extending to a street shall be
  fireproof.
    The owner of every multiple dwelling  shall  install  and  maintain  a
  light  or lights at or near the outside of the front entrance-way of the
  building which shall in the aggregate provide not less than fifty  watts
  incandescent   illumination  for  a  building  with  a  frontage  up  to
  twenty-two feet and one hundred watts incandescent  illumination  for  a
  building  with  a  frontage  in excess of twenty-two feet, or equivalent
  illumination and shall be kept burning from sunset every day to  sunrise
  on the day following. In the case of a multiple dwelling with a frontage
  in  excess  of twenty-two feet, the front entrance doors of which have a
  combined width in excess of five feet,  there  shall  be  at  least  two
  lights,  one  at  each  side  of  the  entrance  way,  with an aggregate
  illumination of one hundred fifty watts or equivalent  illumination.  In
  enforcing this provision the department shall permit owners to determine
  for   themselves   the   actual  location,  design  and  nature  of  the
  installation of such light or lights to meet  practical,  aesthetic  and
  other  considerations,  so  long as the minimum level of illumination is
  maintained.




§  36.  Windows and skylights for public halls and stairs. 1. In every
  multiple dwelling  erected  after  April  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred
  twenty-nine, one at least of the required windows provided to light each
  public  hall  or part thereof shall be at least two feet six inches wide
  and five feet high. Every required window in such a hall shall open upon
  a street, court, yard or space above a setback. On the top story of such
  a dwelling a ventilating  skylight  of  the  same  dimensions  shall  be
  accepted in lieu of a window for that story.
    2. In every multiple dwelling erected after April eighteenth, nineteen
  hundred  twenty-nine,  there  shall  be  in the roof, directly over each
  required  stair,  fire-stair  and  fire-tower,  a  ventilating  skylight
  provided  with  ventilators  having  a  minimum  opening of forty square
  inches or with fixed or movable louvres. The roof of every such skylight
  shall be glazed with plain glass and equipped with suitable wire screens
  above and below. The glazed area of every  such  skylight  shall  be  at
  least  twenty  square feet, except that in a class A dwelling or section
  thereof two stories or less in height and occupied by not more than  two
  families  on each story and in dwellings three stories in height erected
  pursuant to plans filed with the  department  on  or  after  May  first,
  nineteen  hundred fifty-nine and occupied by not more than one family on
  each story, the glazed area of such a skylight need be only nine  square
  feet.  In  lieu of a skylight a window of the same area as prescribed in
  subdivision one may be provided. If such a window is used in lieu  of  a
  skylight,  fixed louvres having a minimum opening of forty square inches
  shall also be installed in or directly adjacent to such window.
    3. When any  stair,  fire-stair  or  fire-tower  in  such  a  dwelling
  terminates  at  the level of a setback of an outer wall and such setback
  consists of a terrace at least four feet in width, measured between  the
  inside  of  the  parapet wall and the wall of the building, and at least
  ten feet in length, measured parallel to the wall of the building, there
  may be provided in lieu of such a skylight a fireproof door and assembly
  with the door self-closing giving access from such stair, fire-stair  or
  fire-tower  to  such terrace. Such door shall have a panel at least five
  square feet in area glazed with wire glass and shall  be  equipped  with
  fixed  or  movable  louvres  with  an  opening  of at least forty square
  inches.






   §  37.  Artificial  hall  lighting.  1. In every multiple dwelling the
  owner shall provide a light or lights, each  of  at  least  sixty  watts
  incandescent  or  twenty  watts  cool  white  fluorescent  or equivalent
  illumination, for every vestibule and  entrance  hall  in  every  public
  hall,  stair,  fire-stair  and  fire-tower on every floor. Said light or
  lights shall be located as prescribed by the department, but,  in  every
  stair,  fire-stair  or  fire-tower,  shall be so located that every part
  thereof shall be lighted.
    2. Except as provided in subdivision three, every such light shall  be
  turned  on  by the owner at sunset every day and shall not be turned off
  by the owner until the following sunrise. Every such light shall be kept
  burning daily from sunset until sunrise, but if it becomes  extinguished
  and  remains  so  without the knowledge or consent of the owner he shall
  not be liable. The burden shall be upon the owner to show that the light
  became and remained extinguished without his knowledge or consent.
    3. Every light in every fire-stair and fire-tower at every story,  and
  in  every  stair and public hall at every story where there is no window
  opening to the outer air, shall be kept burning continuously except that
  this provision shall not apply to public halls lighted  as  provided  in
  subdivision eleven of section two hundred seventeen.
    4. When the natural light in any public hall in a multiple dwelling is
  not  sufficient  to  permit  a person to read the names on a mail box or
  other receptacle for mail, the owner shall install  a  lighting  fixture
  directly over such mail box or receptacle and maintain it in serviceable
  condition,  so  that  a  light  may  be  turned  on  at any time for the
  convenience of tenants or the mail carrier.






   §  50.  Entrance halls. Every entrance hall in every multiple dwelling
  erected after April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine,  shall  be
  at  least four feet in clear width from the entrance to the first stair,
  and beyond that shall be at least  three  feet  eight  inches  in  clear
  width.  If  such  an entrance hall is the only entrance to more than one
  flight of stairs, the required width of such hall shall be increased  in
  every  part,  for each such additional flight of stairs, by one-half the
  width required for one flight of stairs.






   §  50-a.  Entrances:  doors, locks and intercommunication systems.  1.
  Every entrance from the street,  passageway,  court,  yard,  cellar,  or
  similar  entrance  to  a  class A multiple dwelling erected or converted
  after January first, nineteen hundred sixty-eight,  except  an  entrance
  leading  to  the main entrance hall or lobby which main entrance hall or
  lobby is equipped with one or more automatic self-locking  doors,  shall
  be  equipped with automatic self-closing and self-locking doors and such
  doors shall be locked at  all  times  except  when  an  attendant  shall
  actually  be  on  duty.  Every entrance from the roof to such a dwelling
  shall  be  equipped  with  a  self-closing  door  which  shall  not   be
  self-locking  and  which  shall  be  fastened on the inside with movable
  bolts, hooks or a lock which does not require a key to open from  inside
  the dwelling.
    2.  Every class A multiple dwelling erected or converted after January
  first, nineteen hundred sixty-eight containing eight or more  apartments
  shall   also   be  equipped  with  an  intercommunication  system.  Such
  intercommunication system shall be located at an automatic  self-locking
  door  giving  public  access  to the main entrance hall or lobby of said
  multiple dwelling and shall consist of a device  or  devices  for  voice
  communication  between  the  occupant  of  each  apartment  and a person
  outside said door to the main entrance hall or lobby and to permit  such
  apartment  occupant  to  release the locking mechanism of said door from
  the apartment.
    3. On or after January first, nineteen hundred sixty-nine, every class
  A multiple  dwelling  erected  or  converted  prior  to  January  first,
  nineteen   hundred   sixty-eight,   shall  be  equipped  with  automatic
  self-closing and self-locking doors, which doors shall  be  kept  locked
  except  when  an  attendant  shall  actually  be  on  duty, and with the
  intercommunication system described in paragraph two  of  this  section,
  provided  that tenants occupying a majority of all the apartments within
  the structure comprising  the  multiple  dwelling  affected  request  or
  consent   in   writing   to   the   installation   of   such  doors  and
  intercommunication system on forms which  shall  be  prescribed  by  the
  department,  except that in the event a majority of tenants in occupancy
  request  or  consent  on  or  after  January  first,  nineteen   hundred
  sixty-eight,  to  the  installation  of such doors or intercommunication
  system such installation shall be started within ninety days,  but  need
  not  be completed until six months after the owner's receipt of requests
  or consents by a majority of  the  tenants,  except  that  in  any  such
  multiple  dwelling  owned  or  operated by a municipal housing authority
  organized pursuant to article thirteen of the public housing  law,  such
  installation  need  not  be  completed  until one year after the owner's
  receipt of requests or consents by a majority of  the  tenants.  If  the
  dwelling  is  subject to regulation and control of its residential rents
  pursuant to the local emergency housing rent control act, the local city
  housing rent agency shall upon the filing of executed  forms  containing
  the  required  requests or consents, prescribe the terms under which the
  costs of providing such doors  and  intercommunication  systems  may  be
  recovered  by the owner from the tenants. In any multiple dwelling built
  pursuant to the provisions of the redevelopment companies law  in  which
  residential  rents  are limited by contract, the costs of providing such
  doors and intercommunication systems may be recovered by the owner  from
  the  tenants. The terms under which such costs may be recovered shall be
  the same as those prescribed by the local city housing  rent  agency  in
  the city in which the multiple dwelling is located for dwellings subject
  to  regulation  and  control  of  rent  pursuant  to the local emergency
  housing rent control act. Such costs shall not be deemed to be "rent" as
  that term is limited and defined in the contract.


   4.   All   such   self-closing    and    self-locking    doors,    and
  intercommunication systems shall be of a type approved by the department
  and  by  such  other department as may be prescribed by law and shall be
  installed and maintained in a manner prescribed by the department and by
  such other department.
    5.  Every  owner  who shall fail to install and maintain the equipment
  required by this section, in the manner prescribed  by  the  department,
  and by such other department as may be prescribed by law, and any person
  who  shall  wilfully destroy, damage, or jam or otherwise interfere with
  the  proper  operation  of,  or  remove,  without  justification,   such
  equipment  or  any  part  thereof  shall  be  guilty of a misdemeanor as
  provided in subdivision  one  of  section  three  hundred  four  of  the
  multiple dwelling law and shall be punishable as provided therein.






   §  50-c.  Rights  of tenants to operate and maintain a lobby attendant
  service. 1. Tenants of every class A multiple dwelling containing  eight
  or  more  apartments  shall  be entitled to maintain and operate a lobby
  attendant service for such multiple dwelling at any time or  times  when
  an  attendant  hired  or  furnished by the owner thereof shall not be on
  duty.  Such lobby attendants so maintained  by  such  tenants  shall  be
  engaged solely for security purposes and shall perform no acts or duties
  other  than  those  which  shall  be  directly related to the safety and
  security of occupants and visitors to such building while in  and  about
  the  public  portions  thereof  and  no owner shall unreasonably hinder,
  interfere with, obstruct or prohibit the maintenance  and  operation  of
  such  service,  provided that each attendant so engaged by tenants shall
  at all times when on duty be stationed at and  remain  in  the  entrance
  halls  or  public  lobbies of the building adjacent to the main entrance
  thereto, and provided further that no owner of such building shall be in
  any manner liable or responsible for any injury to any such attendant or
  for any damage or injury arising out of or resulting  from  any  act  or
  omission  of any such attendant or for the payment of any wages or other
  compensation  to  such  attendants.  The  lobby  attendants   furnished,
  operated  or  maintained by tenants pursuant to this section may consist
  of or include tenants or other occupants of the  multiple  dwelling  and
  may include either volunteer or paid personnel or a combination thereof.
    2.  Any agent, owner or other person who shall unreasonably interfere,
  hinder, obstruct or prohibit the installation, maintenance and operation
  of any such lobby attendant or shall unreasonably  hinder  or  interfere
  with  the  performance  of  the  duties  of such lobby attendant engaged
  pursuant to this section, shall be guilty of a violation with a  maximum
  fine not to exceed fifty dollars.






   §  51.  Shafts, elevators and dumbwaiters.  1. Every shaft constructed
  after April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine,  in  any  multiple
  dwelling  shall  be enclosed on all sides with fireproof walls and shall
  have fireproof doors and assemblies at  all  openings,  with  the  doors
  self-closing.  Dumbwaiter  shafts,  except those adjoining public halls,
  may be constructed with walls of gypsum plaster blocks approved  by  the
  department, at least two inches thick if solid and at least three inches
  thick if hollow.
    2.  All dumbwaiter doors constructed after such date shall be fastened
  by an interior lock in the shaft operated and controlled from a  central
  point in the cellar or lowest story if there be no cellar.
    3. The doors of every elevator shaft constructed after such date shall
  be  provided  with  an  automatic  device  approved by the department to
  prevent the normal operation of the elevator unless the hoistway door at
  which the car is standing is closed and locked, or unless  all  hoistway
  doors  are  locked  in  a  closed position. Such doors may have a vision
  panel of wire glass not exceeding one square foot in area.
    4. Every elevator installed after such date shall be equipped  with  a
  gate  with an automatic device approved by the department to prevent the
  normal operation of such elevator unless such gate is closed.
    5. When any elevator or dumbwaiter constructed after such  date  opens
  into more than one stair, elevator vestibule or other public hall on any
  floor,  such elevator or dumbwaiter shall be placed in a separate shaft.
  Not more than three elevators or two dumbwaiters shall ever be placed in
  the same shaft.
    6. Every dwelling erected after such date which exceeds six stories or
  sixty feet in height shall  be  equipped  with  one  or  more  passenger
  elevators,  operative  at  all  times,  at  least  one of which shall be
  accessible to every apartment above the entrance story.
    7.  In  every  multiple  dwelling,  elevator  shafts,  not  previously
  enclosed  to  the satisfaction of the department, shall be enclosed with
  fireproof walls and shall have fireproof doors and assemblies, with  the
  doors self-closing.






   § 51-a. Peepholes.  In every multiple dwelling the owner shall provide
  and  maintain a peephole in the entrance door of each housing unit. Such
  peephole shall be located, as prescribed by the department, but shall be
  so located as to enable a person in such housing unit to view  from  the
  inside  of  the  entrance  door  any  person  immediately outside of the
  entrance door to such housing unit. The provisions of this section shall
  not apply to  hotels  or  apartment  hotels  or  to  college  or  school
  dormitories.






   §  51-b.  Mirrors  in  connection  with self-service elevators. In all
  multiple dwellings in which there are one or more self-service passenger
  elevators, there shall, pursuant to such regulations as  the  department
  shall  prescribe,  be  affixed  and  maintained  in each such elevator a
  mirror which will enable persons prior to entering into such elevator to
  view the inside thereof to determine  whether  any  person  is  in  such
  elevator.




   §  51-c.  Rights  of  tenants to install and maintain locks in certain
  entrance doors. Every tenant of a multiple dwelling, except a tenant  of
  a  multiple  dwelling  under  the supervision and control of a municipal
  housing authority, occupied by him, except  as  a  hotel  or  motel,  or
  college  or  school  dormitory,  shall  have  the  right  to install and
  maintain or cause to be installed and maintained in the entrance door of
  his particular housing unit in such multiple dwelling, a lock,  separate
  and  apart  from  any lock installed and maintained by the owner of such
  multiple dwelling, not more than three inches in  circumference,  as  an
  ordinary  incident to his tenancy, provided that a duplicate key to such
  lock shall be supplied to the landlord or his agent  upon  his  request;
  and  every  provision  of any lease hereafter made or entered into which
  reserves or provides for the payment by such tenant  of  any  additional
  rent,  bonus,  fee  or  other charge or any other thing of value for the
  right or privilege of installing and/or maintaining any such lock, shall
  be deemed to be void as against public policy and wholly unenforceable.






§  52.  Stairs.  1.  In  every  multiple  dwelling erected after April
  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine,   every   interior   stair,
  fire-stair  and  fire-tower  and every exterior stair in connection with
  any dwelling altered or erected after January  first,  nineteen  hundred
  fifty-one, shall be provided with proper balustrades or railings and all
  such  interior and exterior stairs shall be kept in good repair and free
  from any encumbrance. Every such stair, fire-stair and  fire-tower  more
  than  three  feet eight inches wide shall be provided with a handrail on
  each side.
    2. The upper surface of every balustrade  or  railing  placed  in  any
  stair  after April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, shall be at
  least two feet six inches and at most two feet eight  inches  above  the
  front  edge  of  the  stair treads, and at any stair landing shall be at
  least two feet eight inches and at most three feet above  the  level  of
  such landing.
    3.  The  treads  and  risers of every stair, fire-stair and fire-tower
  constructed after April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, in any
  multiple dwelling shall be of  uniform  height  and  width  in  any  one
  flight. Each tread, exclusive of nosing, shall be not less than nine and
  one-half   inches   wide;   each   riser  shall  not  exceed  seven  and
  three-quarters inches in height; and the product of the number of inches
  in the width of the tread and the number of inches in the height of  the
  riser shall be at least seventy and at most seventy-five.
    4. No winding stairs shall be constructed in any multiple dwelling.
    5. a. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph b of this subdivision,
  every   stair  constructed  after  April  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred
  twenty-nine, leading to a cellar or basement from the first story  above
  shall  be  entirely  enclosed  with fireproof walls and be provided with
  fireproof doors and assemblies at both top and bottom,  with  the  doors
  self-closing;  except that, in a non-fireproof multiple dwelling erected
  before such date, where such a stair is permitted such  enclosing  walls
  may be fire-retarded.
    b.  When  the  first  floor or a part thereof, in a fireproof multiple
  dwelling, is used for business purposes, a stair leading to a cellar  or
  basement  from  such business space shall be enclosed in fireproof walls
  having a fire-resistive rating of at least three hours and  be  provided
  with  a  fireproof  door  and  assembly  at  the  bottom,  with the door
  self-closing. No opening shall be permitted between such business  space
  and the remainder of the dwelling.
    6.   The  department  shall  have  the  power  to  make  supplementary
  regulations relating to fire-towers.
    7. In every multiple dwelling  erected  under  plans  filed  with  the
  department  after  January first, nineteen hundred sixty, on every story
  above the entrance story every door opening into such stair shall be  so
  hung  and  arranged that in opening and when opened it shall at no point
  reduce the clear and unobstructed required width of the stair  or  stair
  landing.
    8. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a stair within an
  apartment  provided  that  each  level of the apartment is provided with
  required means of egress complying with the provisions of this article.








§  53. Fire-escapes. Every fire-escape erected after April eighteenth,
  nineteen hundred twenty-nine, shall be  located,  arranged,  constructed
  and maintained in accordance with the following provisions:
    1. Access to a fire-escape shall be from a living room or private hall
  in  each  apartment  or     suite of rooms at each story above the entrance
  story, and such access shall not include any window of a stairhall.
    a. Such room or private  hall  shall  be  an  integral  part  of  such
  apartment or suite of rooms and accessible to every room thereof without
  passing through a public hall.
    b.  When  one  or  more  living  rooms  of any apartment are rented to
  boarders or lodgers, every such room shall be directly accessible  to  a
  fire-escape  without  passing  through a public hall, and for separately
  occupied living rooms access to fire-escapes shall be direct  from  such
  rooms  without  passing  through  a  public hall or any other separately
  occupied room, except as may be permitted  for  dormitories  in  section
  sixty-six.
    c.  Access  to  any  fire-escape  shall  not be obstructed by sinks or
  kitchen fixtures or in any other way.  Iron  bars,  grilles,  gates,  or
  other obstructing devices on any window giving access to fire-escapes or
  to  a  required  secondary means of egress shall be unlawful unless such
  devices are of a type approved by the board of appeals and are installed
  and maintained as prescribed by the board; provided, however, that in  a
  city  having  a population of one million or more, such devices shall be
  of a type approved, installed and maintained as prescribed by  the  fire
  commissioner,  or  as previously approved and prescribed by the board of
  standards and appeals of such city, except as otherwise provided by said
  commissioner.
    d. Every such fire-escape shall be accessible to one or more  exterior
  doors  or  windows  opening  from the room, apartment, suite of rooms or
  other space which it serves as means of egress, and such window or  door
  shall be two feet or more in clear width and two feet six inches or more
  in  clear height. The sill of any such window shall be within three feet
  of the floor.
    2. A required fire-escape may be  erected  in  any  of  the  following
  places:
    a. On a wall facing a street or yard;
    b.  In  a  court  of  a  non-fireproof  multiple  dwelling to serve an
  apartment or suite of rooms which does not  contain  any  room  fronting
  upon a street or yard, or in any inner court thirty-five feet or more in
  its  least  horizontal  dimension,  provided  the  fire-escape  does not
  project more than four feet  from  the  wall  of  the  dwelling  and  is
  directly  connected  at  the  bottom  of  such  court  with  a fireproof
  passageway at least three feet wide and seven feet high leading directly
  to a street unless the court itself leads to a street;
    c. In any outer court eighteen feet or more in width and  thirty  feet
  or less in length;
    d.  In  any outer court more than eighteen feet in width the length of
  which does not exceed its width by more than seventy per centum;
    e. In any outer court ten feet or more in width  at  every  point  and
  situated on a lot line;
    f. In any outer court seven feet or more in width at every point which
  is situated on a lot line and extends from a street to a yard;
    g.  In a recess on the front wall of a multiple dwelling, provided the
  recess  does  not  exceed  five  feet  in  depth,  is  used  solely  for
  fire-escape purposes and has seventy-five per centum or more of its area
  open  to the street, and is otherwise unenclosed and open at the top. No
  such recess shall be counted as a part of the  unoccupied  area  of  the


 premises  or  be  construed as a court unless its entire area is open to
  the street.
    3.  No fire-escape may project more than four and one-half feet into a
  public highway from the lot line of the  multiple  dwelling  it  serves.
  Every  part  of  such  fire-escape  shall be at least ten feet above any
  sidewalk directly below.
    4. a. Every fire-escape shall be constructed  of  open  balconies  and
  stairways  of  iron  or  stone  capable of sustaining a load of at least
  eighty pounds per square foot. The use or reuse of old materials or cast
  iron in the construction of fire-escapes shall be unlawful.
    b. Balconies for fire-escapes shall be three feet  or  more  in  clear
  width  except  that  a party-wall balcony as permitted by paragraph f of
  subdivision one of section one hundred eighty-seven may be two  feet  in
  clear width.
    c. Every stairway shall be placed at an angle of sixty degrees or less
  with  flat  open steps at least six inches in width and twenty inches in
  length and with a maximum rise  of  nine  inches.  The  opening  in  any
  balcony for such a stairway shall be at least twenty-one by twenty-eight
  inches.
    5.  a.  There  shall be provided from the lowest balcony a drop ladder
  fifteen inches in width and of sufficient length  to  reach  to  a  safe
  landing  place  beneath.  Such  ladder shall be constructed, located and
  arranged so as to be held in proper position at all  times  and,  unless
  properly  counter-balanced,  shall be placed in guides so that it can be
  easily lowered.
    b. The distance from the lowest balcony to the ground or safe  landing
  place  beneath  shall  be  not  more  than sixteen feet, except that the
  department may permit such lowest balcony to  be  up  to  eighteen  feet
  above a public sidewalk because of structural conditions in any multiple
  dwelling erected before April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine.
    c. No drop ladder shall be required where the distance from the lowest
  balcony to a safe landing place beneath is five feet or less.
    6. The balcony on the top story shall be provided with a stairway or a
  gooseneck  ladder  from  such balcony to and above the roof and securely
  fastened thereto, except that  no  such  stairway  or  ladder  shall  be
  required:
    a.  On  multiple dwellings two stories or less in height erected after
  April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine; or
    b. Wherever there is a peak roof with a  pitch  in  excess  of  twenty
  degrees;
    c.  When  the fire-escape is on the front of the dwelling, in a recess
  on the front of the dwelling, or on an outer court opening to a street.
    7. Every fire-escape if constructed of  material  subject  to  rusting
  shall  be  painted  with  two or more coats of good paint in contrasting
  colors; in the case of a new fire-escape the first coat before erection,
  and the second coat  after  erection.  Whenever  a  fire-escape  becomes
  rusty,  the  owner  shall  repaint  it with two additional coats of good
  paint.
    8. a. Whenever a non-fireproof multiple dwelling is not provided  with
  sufficient  means  of  egress  in case of fire, the department may order
  such additional fire-escapes or balconies as  in  its  judgment  may  be
  deemed necessary.
    b.  The  owner  of  a  multiple dwelling shall keep and maintain every
  fire-escape thereon in good order and repair.
    c. No person shall at any time  place  any  encumbrance  of  any  kind
  before  or  upon  any  fire-escape, or place or keep a cover of any kind
  over the stairway opening in a balcony of such fire-escape. An  occupant
  or  tenant  of  a  multiple  dwelling who shall violate or assist in the


 violation of the provisions of this  paragraph  shall  be  guilty  of  a
  misdemeanor punishable as provided in section three hundred four.
    9. No fire-escape shall be removed from or constructed on any existing
  multiple dwelling without permission from the department. No fire-escape
  shall  be  removed  from  any  apartment  without due precaution against
  leaving occupants of such apartment without adequate means of egress  in
  case  of  fire. A wire, chain cable, vertical ladder or rope fire-escape
  is an unlawful means of egress. Every such fire-escape, if required as a
  means  of  egress,  shall  be  removed  and  replaced  by  a  system  of
  fire-escapes constructed and arranged as provided in this section.
    10.  The  department  shall  have  the  power  to  make  supplementary
  regulations relating to fire-escapes.






   § 54. Cellar entrance. There shall be a direct entrance to the cellar,
  or  to the lowest story if there be no cellar, from the outside of every
  multiple dwelling  erected  after  April  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred
  twenty-nine,  except  that  in  non-fireproof multiple dwellings erected
  after such date which are three stories or less in height  and  occupied
  by  not  more  than two families on any story, any stair leading to such
  cellar or lowest story may be located inside the dwelling provided it is
  enclosed in fireproof walls and fireproof doors and assemblies with  the
  doors self-closing, at both the level of such cellar or lowest story and
  that  of  the  story  above.  No  such  outside entrance existing in any
  multiple dwelling on April  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine,
  shall be obstructed.






   §  55.  Wainscoting.  1.  Whenever the surface of walls, partitions or
  ceilings in any  apartment  or  suite  of  rooms  of  any  non-fireproof
  multiple  dwelling  is covered, sheathed or wainscoted wholly or in part
  after April eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine,  such  covering
  shall  be  backed  solidly with plaster. In fireproof multiple dwellings
  such covering shall be backed solidly and continuously  or  filled  with
  incombustible  material.    In  the  case  of  walls  and  partitions in
  fireproof dwellings, such  backing  and  filling  shall  extend  to  the
  fireproof floor construction and in non-fireproof dwellings to the floor
  beams. All such backing and filling shall be fire-stopped.
    2.  No wood wainscoting other than fireproofed wood complying with the
  provisions of section fifty-eight shall be erected in any  public  hall,
  stair or shaft of any multiple dwelling.






   § 56. Frame buildings and extensions. 1. Except as provided in section
  one hundred ninety-three and subdivision seven of this section, no frame
  multiple  dwelling  shall be erected and no frame dwelling not used as a
  multiple dwelling on April  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine,
  shall be altered or converted to such use or occupancy.
    2.  No  existing  frame multiple dwelling shall be increased in height
  nor shall it be altered to permit a greater occupancy on any story  than
  provided  for  on April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine; except
  that, if the walls of such a frame dwelling are faced with brick  veneer
  or  with  another  material  or  combination  of materials having a fire
  resistive rating of at least one hour, and the entrance story thereof is
  occupied by not more than one family, such entrance story may be altered
  so that it may be occupied by not more than two families.
    3. No frame building of any kind whatsoever shall be placed  or  built
  upon the same lot with any multiple dwelling.
    4.  No  multiple  dwelling  shall be placed or built upon the same lot
  with any frame building.
    5. No frame multiple dwelling, no wooden  structure  of  any  kind  or
  class  on  the  same  lot  with  any frame dwelling or with any multiple
  dwelling, and no other building on the same lot with any frame dwelling,
  shall be altered  or  converted  so  as  to  be  enlarged,  extended  or
  increased  in  height  or  bulk or in the number of rooms, apartments or
  dwelling units therein; except that:
    a. An extension seventy square feet or less in ground  area  the  side
  walls  of which are of frame and brick filled or of masonry construction
  may be added to any existing frame multiple dwelling if used solely  for
  bathrooms or waterclosets; and
    b.  An  extension  constructed  with  fireproof walls may be made to a
  frame building if the first story of such extension is used  solely  for
  business  not  prohibited  by  any  local  law  or ordinance, or if such
  extension contains not more than one living room on any story.  No  yard
  or court shall be diminished by such extension so that its area or least
  dimension is less than required by this chapter for a yard or court of a
  multiple  dwelling  erected  after  April  eighteenth,  nineteen hundred
  twenty-nine.
    6. None of the provisions of this section  shall  apply  to  dwellings
  erected under the provisions of article five-a of this chapter.
    7.  In any city the department may approve for any such dwelling three
  stories or less in height, the alteration and conversion of that portion
  of said dwelling used as a store or other non-residential use to no more
  than one additional dwelling unit; provided,  however,  that:  (a)  such
  space  has  been  vacant for at least one year, and (b) such space has a
  minimum of three  hundred  square  feet  of  floor  area,  and  (c)  the
  conversion  must be for a class "A" use, and (d) said unit shall contain
  a cooking space and a complete bathroom, and (e) all walls and  ceilings
  of  the  new  dwelling  unit  shall be fire-retarded with one hour rated
  fire-retarding materials, and (f) the height and bulk  of  the  dwelling
  shall  not be increased, and (g) the dwelling will be in full compliance
  with this chapter and other related and local  ordinances,  except  that
  the  owner  of  said  dwelling  shall  be  entitled to consideration for
  variances  permitted  in  subdivision  one  and  subparagraph  five   of
  paragraph  a  of  subdivision  two  of section three hundred ten of this
  chapter for multiple dwellings and buildings existing prior to  November
  first, nineteen hundred forty-nine.






   §  57. Bells; mail receptacles. 1. Whenever bells are installed at the
  entrance to any multiple dwelling  or  at  any  door  of  an  individual
  apartment  in  a  multiple  dwelling, they shall be kept in good working
  order.
    2. Whenever the owner of a multiple dwelling has not arranged for mail
  to be delivered to occupants thereof by himself, his agent or employees,
  arrangements shall be made for the delivery of such mail  in  conformity
  with regulations of the post office department.






   § 58. Incombustible materials.  Except as may be specifically provided
  otherwise   in  this  chapter,  all  required  incombustible  materials,
  including  fireproofed  wood,   shall   be   capable   of   withstanding
  successfully  standard fire tests as prescribed by the building code. In
  the absence of any such prescribed requirements,  the  department  shall
  have  the  power  to make supplementary regulations relative to standard
  fire tests for incombustible materials.






   §  59.  Bakeries and fat boiling. 1. It shall be unlawful to construct
  or maintain a bakery or a place of business where fat is boiled  in  any
  non-fireproof  multiple  dwelling or upon the lot on which such dwelling
  is situated, unless the ceiling, side walls  and  all  exposed  iron  or
  wooden  beams,  girders  and  columns within the said bakery or business
  place where fat is boiled, are covered with fireproof materials.
    2. There shall be no door, window, dumbwaiter shaft or  other  opening
  between  such  a  bakery  or  business place where fat is boiled and any
  other part of the dwelling, except that:
    a. There may be access to the public parts of the  dwelling  from  any
  bakery  maintained  therein  if  the  product of such bakery is consumed
  exclusively within such dwelling.
    b. In a fireproof hotel where a retail bakery is  maintained  therein,
  there  may be access to the public parts of the hotel, provided the door
  openings leading thereto from such bakery and the  door  assemblies  are
  fireproof  with the doors self-closing, and provided the public parts of
  such bakery premises are protected by one or more sprinkler heads.
    c. In bakeries in which no fat is boiled and on the premises of  which
  there  is  no  apparatus  for  fat  boiling,  a dumbwaiter communicating
  between the place where the baking is done and a bakery store above  may
  be  maintained  if  entirely  enclosed in a brick shaft with walls eight
  inches or more in thickness, without any openings  whatever  except  one
  door opening into the bakeshop and one into the bakery store. Every such
  opening shall be provided with a fireproof door and assembly so arranged
  that when one door is open, the other is entirely closed.
    3. Every part of a bakery, its plumbing, and the yards and open spaces
  adjoining  shall  be kept in good repair, in sanitary condition and free
  from rodents and vermin.






§ 60. Motor vehicle storage. A space may be provided and maintained in
  any  multiple  dwelling or upon the premises thereof, or a structure may
  be erected and maintained at the rear or side thereof, for  the  storage
  of passenger motor vehicles but only with a written permit therefor when
  required by local law and in accordance with every applicable local law,
  ordinance,  resolution,  code  provision  or  regulation  and  with  the
  following provisions:
    1. a. It shall be unlawful to sell, store, handle or furnish gasoline,
  oil or other fuel, or any article, accessory or service except  storage,
  or  to  construct or maintain repair or grease pits in any such space or
  structure. The provisions of this section shall not prevent the  keeping
  of  such  gasoline, oil or other fuel as may be contained in the tank of
  any such motor vehicle, and  the  cleaning  or  washing  of  such  motor
  vehicles.
    b.  Such  space  or  structure shall be used solely for the storage of
  passenger motor vehicles of the occupants of the multiple dwelling or of
  multiple dwellings under common ownership, except  that,  in  the  event
  such  space  or structure or part thereof is not used by such occupants,
  it may be rented by the owner or owners of such dwelling or dwellings to
  persons other than the occupants thereof. The space which has thus  been
  rented  shall  be made available to an occupant within thirty days after
  written request therefor. Except as otherwise provided  in  paragraph  d
  herein  transient  parking  for  any  period  of  less than one month by
  non-occupants is unlawful. However, such space may be used also for  the
  storage  of  any  type  of mechanical or motor-driven equipment or other
  accessory device or passenger bus required for the proper maintenance of
  the site and of the dwellings thereon.
    c. If any of the provisions contained in paragraphs a and  b  of  this
  subdivision  is violated, the department charged with the enforcement of
  this chapter or the fire department shall order and direct that no motor
  vehicle may be stored or kept in such space or structure thereafter  for
  such  period  as  either  department  shall determine, and thereupon the
  permit shall be suspended and no motor vehicle shall be stored  or  kept
  in such space or structure for such period.
    d.  A  city  may,  by  local law or ordinance, or the duly constituted
  planning or appeal board or commission of a  city  may  by  granting  an
  approval,  exception  or  variance,  authorize transient parking for any
  period of less  than  one  month  of  motor  vehicles  in  dwellings  by
  non-occupants  in  any  space that is not let to an occupant pursuant to
  the other provisions of this section. Such city may  require  a  license
  and  impose  a  fee therefor, and adopt supplementary rules, regulations
  and conditions under which such parking shall be permitted.
    2. a. Every such space or structure shall be designed and  constructed
  to  accommodate  not  more  than  two  passenger motor vehicles for each
  family in such multiple dwelling.
    b. Such space  or  structure  shall  have  a  floor  area  within  its
  enclosing  walls  not greater than three hundred square feet per vehicle
  for each such family, including car parking spaces and aisles.
    c.  Every  such  storage  space  or  structure  shall   be   fireproof
  throughout, except that any extension of such storage space or structure
  beyond  the  exterior  walls  of  a fireproof dwelling not exceeding one
  story in height and  any  separate  structure  on  the  same  lot  as  a
  fireproof   dwelling   may   be   of   uncombustible   material  with  a
  fire-resistive rating of at  least  two  hours,  if  such  extension  or
  separate  structure  complies with the provisions of paragraph e of this
  subdivision.
    d. When constructed within a  multiple  dwelling  such  storage  space
  shall  be  equipped  with  a  sprinkler system and also with a system of


 mechanical ventilation in no way connected with  any  other  ventilating
  system.  Such storage space shall have no opening into any other part of
  the dwelling except through a fireproof vestibule.  Any  such  vestibule
  shall have a minimum superficial floor area of fifty square feet and its
  maximum  area  shall  not  exceed  seventy-five square feet. It shall be
  enclosed with incombustible partitions having a fire-resistive rating of
  three hours.  The floor and ceiling of such vestibule shall also  be  of
  incombustible  material having a fire-resistive rating of at least three
  hours. There shall be two doors to provide access from the  dwelling  to
  the car storage space. Each such door shall have a fire-resistive rating
  of one and one-half hours and shall be provided with a device to prevent
  the  opening of one door until the other door is entirely closed. One of
  these doors shall swing into the vestibule from  the  dwelling  and  the
  other  shall  swing  from  the vestibule into the car storage space. The
  door from the vestibule to the dwelling shall be at  least  twenty  feet
  distant  in  a  non-fireproof  dwelling  or  twelve  feet in a fireproof
  dwelling from any stair enclosure, elevator shaft, or any opening to any
  other vertical  shaft.  Such  vestibule  shall  also  be  equipped  with
  sprinklers  and  with  an  exhaust duct having a minimum cross-sectional
  area of one hundred forty-four square inches and shall not be  connected
  with any other ventilating system.
    e.  Such  storage space may be extended beyond the exterior walls of a
  fireproof dwelling without any separating walls between its interior and
  exterior portion  provided  that  such  extension  is  roofed  over  and
  equipped with sprinklers throughout. Such extension shall be open to the
  outer  air  on  at least two sides and in no event shall more than fifty
  percent of its vertical surface area be enclosed in any manner. Any such
  extension shall not be deemed to be a storage space  within  a  multiple
  dwelling. Any enclosed sub-surface space beneath such an extension shall
  however,  comply  with  all the provisions of this section applicable to
  storage space within a multiple dwelling. Any portion of such  extension
  of  storage  space  or of a separate structure for such storage purposes
  appurtenant to a multiple dwelling which  face  any  dwelling  within  a
  distance  of twenty feet therefrom or which is within thirty feet of any
  living room window of any dwelling shall be unpierced  except  for  door
  openings  for  vehicles.  A separate structure for such storage purposes
  appurtenant to a multiple dwelling may  adjoin  such  dwelling  provided
  that  the  part  of  the wall separating such space from the dwelling is
  fireproof and unpierced, except by a fireproof vestibule as provided  in
  subdivision  d. Such extension or separate structure shall be adequately
  screened at grade level. That part of the roof of  an  extension  within
  thirty  feet of any living room window of any dwelling shall not be used
  for parking or storage of motor  vehicles  or  the  ingress  thereto  or
  egress therefrom by motor vehicles.
    f.  Any  such  structure  one  story  in  height or any extension of a
  storage space within a multiple dwelling beyond  the  exterior  wall  of
  such  dwelling where such extension is one story in height, shall not be
  deemed an encroachment upon a yard or its equivalent  or  a  court.  Any
  such  structure or extension in excess of such height shall be deemed an
  encroachment thereupon.
    g. In a completely enclosed  storage  structure  or  a  storage  space
  within a multiple dwelling except for vehicle entrance doors, all doors,
  windows  and their assemblies in the exterior walls of any such space or
  structure accommodating more than five motor vehicles shall be fireproof
  and such windows shall be either fixed windows or automatic fire windows
  and glazed with wire glass. Any door or vehicle entrance to  such  space
  or  structure  accommodating  more  than five motor vehicles shall be at
  least twenty feet distant from any door giving access  to  any  required


 entrance  hall  from outside of the dwelling and shall be at least eight
  feet distant from any other entrance or exit of such dwelling.  However,
  in such space the windows in an exterior wall which faces the street may
  be  of  incombustible  material and be glazed with plain glass, provided
  that such windows are thirty feet or  more,  measured  in  a  horizontal
  direction, from any opening in the exterior wall of the dwelling.
    h.  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  this section when such
  storage space  or  structure  is  designed  and  constructed  within  or
  appurtenant  to  a converted dwelling to accommodate not more than three
  motor vehicles, (1) the ceiling  and  the  enclosing  walls  may  be  of
  materials  having  a fire-resistive rating of not less than one hour and
  the floors shall be fireproof; (2) only one opening shall  be  permitted
  in  the enclosure partition between the garage and the dwelling and such
  opening shall be protected by a fireproof door  and  assembly  with  the
  door  self-closing;  (3)  a sprinkler system for such space shall not be
  required; and (4) in lieu of mechanical ventilation, such space may have
  fixed ventilation of not less than one  hundred  and  forty-four  square
  inches for each motor vehicle.
    3.  The  agency of a city authorized by law to make rules supplemental
  to laws regulating construction, maintenance, use and area of  buildings
  and  to grant variances of the zoning resolution shall have the power to
  make rules to supplement the requirements of  this  section  and,  after
  public  hearing,  may  grant  variances of local laws, resolutions, code
  provisions or regulations which are more restrictive than the provisions
  of this section, subject to such conditions as, in the opinion  of  such
  agency,  will  best promote health, safety and welfare and carry out the
  permissive intent of this section.  All  owners  of  property  within  a
  radius  of one hundred fifty feet of the entrance or entrance passage to
  such space or structure shall  be  duly  notified  of  any  such  public
  hearing  and shall be given due opportunity to be heard thereon. Nothing
  in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the use of a  part  of  such
  lot  or plot as a parking area for the exclusive use of the occupants of
  such dwelling.
    4. No parking area or space to  be  used  for  the  storage  of  motor
  vehicles  upon  the  premises of a multiple dwelling shall encroach upon
  any part of the lot or plot which is required by any provision  of  this
  chapter to be left open and unoccupied.
    5.  None  of  the  provisions  of  this  section shall be construed as
  permitting such space or structure or  part  thereof  to  be  rented  or
  leased for the storage or warehousing of passenger or commercial type of
  motor  vehicles,  which  are  part  of  stock  of  any  person,  firm or
  corporation engaged in the  purchase,  sale  or  rental  of  such  motor
  vehicles.




   §  61.  Business  uses.  1. Except as may be otherwise provided by any
  local law, ordinance, rule or regulation, business may be  conducted  in
  any multiple dwelling including:
    a. Baking and fat-boiling as provided in section fifty-nine,
    b.  Storage  of passenger motor vehicles as provided in section sixty,
  and
    c. Any manufacturing business in  which  seven  or  more  persons  are
  employed,  or  any  employment  agency as defined in section one hundred
  seventy-one  of  the  general  business  law  other  than  a  non-profit
  employment  agency  in  a  fireproof class B multiple dwelling owned and
  occupied  by  a  non-profit  corporation  organized  for   and   engaged
  exclusively in promoting religious, education or philanthropic purposes,
  provided  that every means of egress from such a business space shall be
  separate and distinct from and without means of communication  with  any
  means of egress from the dwelling portion of the building.
    2.  The  number  of  means  of egress from the portion of any multiple
  dwelling where business is conducted shall be in conformity  with  those
  provisions of the local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations covering
  means of egress from buildings in which a like business is conducted.
    3. There shall be no manufacturing business conducted above the second
  floor of any non-fireproof multiple dwelling.
    4. Where business is conducted in any multiple dwelling erected before
  April  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine,  such business space
  shall also comply with all the following requirements in a manner  which
  the department shall deem adequate to prevent the spread of fire:
    a.  Within  or appurtenant to such space, all pipe chases and openings
  around flues shall be fire-stopped, and such flues shall be kept in good
  order and repair.
    b. All other openings from such space  into  non-fireproof  shafts  or
  into  entrance  halls shall either be sealed with fire-retarded material
  or equipped with  a  self-closing  fire-retarded  door  or  window  with
  fire-retarded assemblies.
    5.  Where business is conducted in any non-fireproof multiple dwelling
  erected after April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, the  walls
  and  ceiling  of  such  business  space  shall  be  fire-retarded.   The
  department may also require the walls and ceilings of any business space
  in any multiple dwelling erected before such date  to  be  fire-retarded
  when  the  department  shall  deem  such  requirement  necessary for the
  protection of the occupants.
    6. If the ground story  of  any  non-fireproof  multiple  dwelling  is
  extended  for  business  purposes,  the  underside  of  the roof of such
  extension shall be fire-retarded. If there are fire-escapes  above  such
  extension, its roof shall be fireproof.






   §  62.  Parapets,  guard  railings  and wires. 1. Every open area of a
  roof, terrace, areaway, outside stair, stair landing, retaining wall  or
  porch  and every stair window of a multiple dwelling erected after April
  eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, shall be protected in a manner
  approved by the department by a parapet wall or a  guard  railing  three
  feet  six  inches or more in height above the level of such area, or, in
  the case of a stair window,  above  the  level  of  the  floor  adjacent
  thereto,  unless  the  department shall deem that such protection is not
  necessary for safety. In any multiple dwelling where a bulkhead door  or
  scuttle  cover opens within four feet of the edge of the roof, that part
  of the roof which is immediately adjacent to such door or cover shall be
  adequately protected. Such protection shall consist of  guard  rails  or
  parapet  walls  extending at least three feet six inches above the level
  of the roof, and shall be arranged and placed in a  manner  approved  by
  the  department,  but  shall  not  be required for such bulkhead door or
  scuttle  cover  when  the  bulkhead  or  scuttle  on  such  dwelling  is
  immediately  adjacent  to,  and  also on the same level as or on a lower
  level than, the roof of a contiguous building.  This  subdivision  shall
  not  apply  to  the  open  area  of  a  roof of a garden-type maisonette
  dwelling project.
    2. All radio, antennae or other wires  over  any  roof  shall,  unless
  otherwise  permitted  by  the department, be kept ten feet or more above
  such roof, and no radio, television antennae or  other  wires  shall  be
  attached  to any fire escape or to any soil or vent line extending above
  the roof.






   § 63. Sub-curb uses. 1. When any living room is below the level of the
  highest  curb  in  front  of  any  multiple dwelling erected after April
  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine,  in  accordance  with   the
  provisions of paragraph f of subdivision one of section thirty-four, all
  portions of such dwelling below such level shall be fireproof throughout
  except  that  windows  therein  need  not  be  fireproof but shall be of
  incombustible material and may be glazed with plain glass.
    2. Except in multiple dwellings which do not  exceed  eighty  feet  in
  height  measured  from the lowest point of any curb on which any part of
  the dwelling faces, at least one means of egress from any  apartment  or
  suite  of  rooms  below the level of the highest curb in front of such a
  dwelling shall lead directly to the street in front of said dwelling and
  at least one such means to the yard  or  street  in  the  rear  of  said
  dwelling.    Every  yard  in  the  rear of every such multiple dwelling,
  regardless of the height of such dwelling, shall at the lowest level  of
  such  yard  be  provided  with  a  fire  passage  in compliance with the
  requirements for such a passage in paragraph f of  subdivision  five  of
  section twenty-six.
    3. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section the department
  may  require  such  additional means of egress from the said dwelling or
  protection from fire as the department may deem necessary for the safety
  of the occupants.






   §  64. Lighting; gas meters; gas and oil appliances. 1. Every multiple
  dwelling  after  July  first,  nineteen  hundred  fifty-five,  shall  be
  adequately  equipped  throughout all stories and cellars for lighting by
  gas  or  electricity,  with  proper  fixtures  at  every  light  outlet,
  including  lighting for all means of egress leading to the street, yards
  or courts, and for every room, water-closet compartment, bathroom, stair
  or public hall.
    2. No gas meter, other  than  a  replacement  meter,  installed  in  a
  multiple  dwelling  after July first, nineteen hundred fifty-five, shall
  be located in any boiler room  or  other  room  or  space  containing  a
  heating  boiler, nor in any stair hall, nor in any public hall above the
  cellar or above the lowest story if there is no cellar, except  that  in
  any  multiple  dwelling  where there is an existing gas meter located in
  any boiler room or other room or space containing a heating boiler,  one
  additional  gas  meter  may be installed in such room or space, provided
  such additional gas meter is installed adjacent  to  such  existing  gas
  meter  and is used in conjunction with the supply of gas for a gas-fired
  heating boiler or a gas-fired water heater used as a central  source  of
  supply  of  heat  or hot water for the tenants residing in such multiple
  dwelling. Such additional gas meter may be installed only upon condition
  that space heaters  or  hot  water  appliances  in  the  apartments  are
  eliminated.  For  the purposes of this subdivision, the term "gas meter"
  shall not include any instrument, device or apparatus  used  to  measure
  the  consumption of gas where no gas, manufactured, natural or mixed, is
  contained in or flows through  such  instrument,  device  or  apparatus,
  provided  that  such  instrument, device or apparatus is approved by and
  installed under the supervision of the city agency vested  by  law  with
  jurisdiction  to  inspect  and  test  wiring and appliances for electric
  light, heat and power and provided further that  the  location  of  such
  instrument, device or apparatus is approved by the department.
    3.  It  shall be unlawful to place, use, or to maintain in a condition
  intended, arranged or designed for use, any gas-fired cooking appliance,
  laundry stove, heating stove, range or water heater  or  combination  of
  such  appliances in any room or space used for living or sleeping in any
  new or existing multiple dwelling unless such room or space has a window
  opening to the outer air or such gas appliance is vented  to  the  outer
  air.  All automatically operated gas appliances shall be equipped with a
  device which shall shut off automatically the gas  supply  to  the  main
  burners  when  the  pilot light in such appliance is extinguished. A gas
  range or the cooking portion of a gas  appliance  incorporating  a  room
  heater  shall  not  be  deemed  an automatically operated gas appliance.
  However, burners in gas ovens and broilers which can be  turned  on  and
  off or ignited by non-manual means shall be equipped with a device which
  shall  shut  off  automatically the gas supply to those burners when the
  operation of such non-manual means fails. All gas  appliances  shall  be
  connected  directly  to the gas supply by means of rigid piping or other
  approved connectors or connections of incombustible materials. All  such
  automatically  operated  gas appliances and devices shall be approved by
  the local agency empowered to grant the same.
    4. It shall be  unlawful  to  use,  or  to  maintain  in  a  condition
  intended,  arranged  or  designed  for use, in any multiple dwelling any
  oil-burning equipment for heating or cooking, unless such equipment  has
  been  approved  for  design,  manufacture  and  appropriate  safety  and
  ventilating requirements by the local board of  standards  and  appeals;
  provided,  however, that in a city having a population of one million or
  more, approval of such equipment for use in any multiple dwelling  shall
  be  made  by  the commissioner of buildings or the fire commissioner, as
  appropriate, in accordance with local law.


   5. All appliances  in  use  after  June  thirtieth,  nineteen  hundred
  fifty-five,  shall  conform  to the provisions of subdivisions three and
  four of this section except that appliances now in use shall conform  to
  such   provisions  not  later  than  June  thirtieth,  nineteen  hundred
  fifty-six.






   § 65. Boiler rooms. 1. Except as hereafter provided, in every multiple
  dwelling  erected  after April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine,
  which is four stories or more in height the boiler shall be enclosed  in
  a  room  or  space  constructed  with fireproof walls extending from the
  floor  construction  to  the  ceiling  construction,  and  all  openings
  therefrom  to  other  portions  of  the  dwelling shall be equipped with
  fireproof doors and assemblies with the doors self-closing. However,  in
  all  multiple  dwellings,  on  and after January first, nineteen hundred
  sixty-six, a room or space provided with a central heating  plant  shall
  be  completely  enclosed  with incombustible materials having a standard
  fire-resistive rating of at least one hour.
    2. In such a dwelling access to a cellar or lowest story  in  which  a
  boiler  is  located  shall not be through any boiler room, nor shall any
  cellar or basement stair or any shaft be installed within a boiler room.
    3.  The  department  shall  have  the  power  to  make   supplementary
  regulations relating to boiler or furnace rooms.






   §  66.  Lodging  houses. 1. It shall be unlawful to occupy any lodging
  house unless such dwelling conforms to the provisions  of  the  specific
  sections  enumerated  in  section  twenty-five  to  the  extent required
  therein, including the provisions of this  section,  and  to  all  other
  applicable provisions of this chapter.
    2.  a.  No  wood or other combustible facing shall be permitted on the
  walls, partitions or ceilings of entrance halls or other public halls or
  stairs, except a flat baseboard ten inches or less in height. The  stair
  string,  handrails,  soffits,  fascias,  railings, balustrades and newel
  posts shall be constructed of hard incombustible material and  shall  be
  of such sizes and secured in such manner as approved by the department.
    b. The walls and ceilings of all entrance halls, stair halls and other
  public halls and stairs shall be fire-retarded on the hall or stair side
  with  half-inch  plaster  board  covered  with twenty-six gauge metal or
  other materials approved by the department.
    c. Except partitions forming existing cubicles,  flat  baseboards  not
  more  than  ten inches high and door and window assemblies not otherwise
  required to be fire-retarded, all wood partitions  and  all  combustible
  coverings  on walls or partitions throughout the portion of the dwelling
  used for lodging-house purposes shall be  protected  with  incombustible
  material approved by the department.
    d.  The  cellar  ceiling  and  the  ceiling  of  every  story shall be
  fire-retarded. The department may accept an existing ceiling if it is in
  good condition and plastered, or covered with metal  or  with  half-inch
  plaster  board  covered  with  metal, or other materials approved by the
  department, except that the ceiling  over  and  the  floor  beneath  any
  furnace,  stove,  boiler  or hot-water heater shall be fire-retarded and
  such fire-retarding shall extend for a distance of at  least  four  feet
  beyond the sides and rear and eight feet in front of such furnace, stove
  or heater. Metal breechings and flues connected to such devices shall be
  made  secure  and be protected in conformity with regulations adopted by
  the department.
    e. Every window not opening to the outer air in an entrance, stair  or
  other  public  hall  shall  be  removed,  and  the  opening  closed  and
  fire-retarded, except that  interior  windows  or  similar  openings  in
  partitions  forming  the  enclosure  of  entrance, stair or other public
  halls may be retained if they are used in the operation and  maintenance
  of the lodging house and are protected by automatic fire windows.
    f.  There shall be one or more completely enclosed compartments remote
  from any stairway for the storage of mattresses,  linens,  brooms,  mops
  and  other  paraphernalia incidental to the occupancy and maintenance of
  the lodging house, and such paraphernalia shall be stored  in  no  other
  portion  of  such dwelling. The partitions forming each such compartment
  shall be fire-retarded and shall be provided with a fireproof  door  and
  door assembly with the door self-closing. Each such compartment shall be
  ventilated in accordance with regulations adopted by the department. Any
  space  which  is  used  for  the  storage  of mattresses, in addition to
  conforming to the other provisions of this section,  shall  be  provided
  with  a  window  ten  square feet or more in area, and such window shall
  open upon a street or yard.
    g. There shall be provided on each lodging-house  story  one  or  more
  containers   of   metal  or  other  hard  incombustible  material,  with
  self-closing lids, in which all scrap and refuse of a combustible nature
  shall be placed until its disposal.
    h. Insecticides and other fluids containing inflammable,  volatile  or
  combustible   material   shall   be  stored  in  a  completely  enclosed
  fire-retarded  room  or  compartment,  ventilated  in  accordance   with


 regulations  adopted  by  the  department, and only under authority of a
  permit from the fire department.
    3.   a.  In  non-fireproof  lodging  houses  there  shall  be  in  all
  dormitories, entrance and other public  halls,  stairs,  storage  rooms,
  cellars  and other parts of the dwelling an automatic wet-pipe sprinkler
  system, installed and maintained in conformity with regulations  adopted
  by  the department. In connection with such sprinkler system there shall
  be an automatic closed-circuit alarm system so arranged and installed as
  to give warning, at a recognized central  station  satisfactory  to  the
  fire department, of the closure of any valve controlling water supply to
  any  of  the sprinklers and of the operation of any sprinkler head. Such
  alarm system shall also be so  installed  and  maintained  that  when  a
  sprinkler  operates  an  alarm bell satisfactory to the fire department,
  eight inches in diameter or at least  capable  of  being  heard  clearly
  throughout  the  room, will sound in each dormitory and in the office of
  the lodging house, and that such  alarm  system  can  also  be  operated
  manually.  Such  sprinkler  and alarm systems shall have supervisory and
  maintenance  service  satisfactory  to  the  department  and  the   fire
  department  respectively.  Any  existing  fire alarm or sprinkler system
  which can be altered  or  adapted  to  meet  the  requirements  of  this
  paragraph may be so used instead of a completely new system.
    b.  In  fireproof  lodging  houses all dormitories, entrance and other
  public halls, stairs, storage rooms, cellars  and  other  parts  of  the
  dwelling  shall  either  be  equipped with a combined sprinkler and fire
  alarm system  as  required  for  the  lodging  houses  provided  for  in
  paragraph  a  or be equipped throughout with an automatic, thermostatic,
  closed-circuit fire alarm system. Such alarm system shall be so arranged
  and installed that it can also be operated manually  and  that  it  will
  give  warning,  at a recognized central station satisfactory to the fire
  department, of the operation of any part of the alarm system. Such alarm
  system shall also be so installed and maintained as to actuate an  alarm
  bell  satisfactory  to  the fire department and at least eight inches in
  diameter in each dormitory in the  dwelling  and  in  the  lodging-house
  office  when  the  alarm  system  operates. Such alarm system shall have
  supervisory and maintenance service satisfactory to the fire department.
    4. a. There shall be at least two means of  unobstructed  egress  from
  each  lodging-house  story,  which  shall be remote from each other. The
  first means of egress shall be to a street  either  directly  or  by  an
  enclosed  stair having unobstructed, direct access thereto. If the story
  is above the entrance story, the second means of egress shall be  by  an
  outside  fire-escape  constructed  in  accordance with the provisions of
  section fifty-three or by an additional enclosed  stair.    Such  second
  means  of  egress  shall be accessible without passing through the first
  means of egress.
    b. All doors opening upon entrance halls, stair  halls,  other  public
  halls  or  stairs  or elevator, dumbwaiter or other shafts, and the door
  assemblies, shall be fireproof with the doors  made  self-closing  by  a
  device approved by the department, and such doors shall not be held open
  by  any  device  whatever.  All  openings on the course of a fire-escape
  shall be provided with such  doors  and  assemblies  or  with  fireproof
  windows  and  assemblies,  with the windows self-closing and glazed with
  wire glass, such doors or windows and their assemblies to be  acceptable
  to the department.
    c. There shall be unobstructed aisles providing access to all required
  means of egress in all dormitories. Main aisles, approved as such by the
  department  to  provide  adequate  approaches  to  the required means of
  egress, shall be three feet or more in width, except that no aisle  need
  be  more than two feet six inches wide if it is intersected at intervals


 of not more than fifty feet by crossover aisles at least three feet wide
  leading to other aisles or to an approved means of egress.
    d.  Every  required means of egress from the lodging-house part of the
  dwelling shall be indicated by a sign reading "EXIT" in red  letters  at
  least  eight  inches high on a white background illuminated at all times
  during the day and night by a light of at  least  twenty-five  watts  or
  equivalent  illumination.  Such  light  shall be maintained in a keyless
  socket. On all lodging-house stories where doors, openings,  passageways
  or  aisles  are  not  visible  from all portions of such stories, and in
  other parts of the dwelling which may be used in entering or leaving the
  lodging-house part and in which a similar need exists, signs with easily
  readable letters as least eight inches in height, and  continuously  and
  sufficiently  illuminated  by  artificial  light  at  all times when the
  natural light is not sufficient to make them easily readable,  shall  be
  maintained  in conspicuous locations, indicating the direction of travel
  to the nearest means of egress. At least one such sign shall  be  easily
  visible from the doorway of each cubicle.
    e.  Access  from the public hall at the top story to the roof shall be
  provided by  means  of  a  bulkhead  or  a  scuttle  acceptable  to  the
  department.  Every  such scuttle and the stair or ladder leading thereto
  shall be located within the stair enclosure.
    5. The number of persons accommodated on any story in a lodging  house
  shall not be greater than the sum of the following components.
    a.  Twenty-two  persons for each full multiple of twenty-two inches in
  the smallest clear width  of  each  means  of  egress  approved  by  the
  department, other than a fire-escape.
    b.  Twenty  persons  for  each lawful fire-escape accessible from such
  story if it is above the entrance story.
    6. Existing cubicles complying  with  all  other  provisions  of  this
  section  may  be  maintained, provided the top of the enclosure of every
  cubicle is at least two feet from  the  ceiling.  Any  rearrangement  of
  existing  cubicles  that may be made necessary by the provisions of this
  section shall be lawful. Cubicles authorized by this section  shall  not
  be  considered rooms or alcoves but parts of the rooms in which they are
  constructed.
    7. The department shall cause all lodging houses to  be  inspected  at
  intervals  of  three  months  or  less.  All sections and parts of every
  lodging house shall also be inspected by a  clerk  or  watchman  in  the
  employ of the owner at least once in every two hours.
    8.   a.   The  department  shall  have  power  to  make  supplementary
  regulations relating to fire-escapes,  protection  from  fire,  and  the
  installation  of  sprinkler  systems  in  lodging  houses  and  the fire
  department shall have power to make such regulations  relating  to  fire
  alarms therein.
    b.  Nothing  in this section shall be deemed to abrogate any powers or
  duties vested in the fire commissioner or the  fire  department  of  the
  city  of  New York by chapter nineteen of the administrative code of the
  said city.


   §  67.  Hotels  and certain other class A and class B dwellings. 1. It
  shall be unlawful to occupy any class A or class  B  multiple  dwelling,
  including  a hotel, unless it conforms to the provisions of the specific
  sections enumerated  in  section  twenty-five  to  the  extent  required
  therein,  including  the  applicable  provisions of this section and all
  other applicable provisions of this chapter except that  the  provisions
  of this section shall not apply to:
    a. Converted dwellings;
    b. Tenements;
    c. Lodging houses;
    d.  Class  A  multiple  dwellings  erected  under plans filed with the
  department after April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine.
    2. Any such multiple dwelling, altered or erected after  April  fifth,
  nineteen  hundred  forty-four,  and  which is required to conform to the
  provisions of articles one, two, three,  four,  five,  eight,  nine  and
  eleven,   shall  not  be  required  to  conform  to  the  provisions  of
  subdivisions three, six, nine and ten of this section.
    3. The walls and ceiling of every entrance hall, stair hall  or  other
  public  hall,  every hall or passage not within an apartment or suite of
  rooms, every dumb-waiter, elevator, and, except as provided in paragraph
  d of subdivision six, every other shaft,  including  stairs,  connecting
  more  than  two successive stories, shall be sealed off from every other
  portion of the dwelling with fire-retarding materials  approved  by  the
  department,  or, in lieu thereof, except in the case of elevator shafts,
  shall be equipped with one or more automatic  sprinkler  heads.  Nothing
  contained  herein  shall  be deemed to exempt from enclosure an interior
  required means of egress. The provisions of this subdivision and similar
  requirements of section sixty-one shall not apply to a  store  or  space
  used  for  business on any story where there are no sleeping rooms, when
  such store or space is protected with sprinkler heads.
    4. There shall be one or more completely enclosed compartments for the
  storage of mattresses, furniture, paints,  floor  wax,  linens,  brooms,
  mops  and other such inflammable or combustible paraphernalia incidental
  to the occupancy and maintenance of the dwelling, and such paraphernalia
  shall be stored in no other portion of such dwelling. Such  compartments
  shall  be completely protected by one or more automatic sprinkler heads.
  Every door from any such  compartment  shall  be  self-closing.  Closets
  which  do  not  exceed one hundred square feet in floor area may be used
  for the temporary storage  of  such  paraphernalia,  except  mattresses,
  furniture,  paints and insecticides containing inflammable materials and
  are excluded from the requirements of this subdivision.
    5. All kitchens and pantries serving restaurants in such non-fireproof
  dwellings shall be equipped with one or more automatic sprinkler heads.
    6. Except in fireproof class A multiple dwellings erected under  plans
  filed  after January first, nineteen hundred twenty-five, and which were
  completed before December thirty-one, nineteen hundred thirty-three, and
  except as otherwise provided in paragraph  c  of  this  subdivision,  in
  every  such dwelling three or more stories in height there shall be from
  each story at least two independent means of unobstructed egress located
  remote from each other and accessible to each room, apartment or suite.
    a. The first means of egress shall  be  an  enclosed  stair  extending
  directly  to  a  street,  or  to  a  yard, court or passageway affording
  continuous, safe and unobstructed access to a street, or by an  enclosed
  stair  leading  to  the  entrance  story,  which story shall have direct
  access to a street. That area of  the  dwelling  immediately  above  the
  street  level  and commonly known as the main floor, where the occupants
  are registered and the usual business  of  the  dwelling  is  conducted,
  shall  be  considered a part of the entrance story; and a required stair


 terminating at such main floor or  its  mezzanine  shall  be  deemed  to
  terminate  at the entrance story. An elevator or an unenclosed escalator
  shall never be accepted as a required means of egress.
    b. The second means of egress shall be by an additional enclosed stair
  conforming  to  the  provisions  of  paragraph  a of this subdivision, a
  fire-stair, a fire-tower or an outside fire-escape. In  a  non-fireproof
  dwelling  when  it  is necessary to pass through a stair enclosure which
  may or may not be a required means of egress to reach a  required  means
  of  egress,  such  stair  enclosure  and that part of the public hall or
  corridor leading thereto from a  room,  apartment  or  suite,  shall  be
  protected  by  one or more sprinkler heads; in a fireproof dwelling only
  that part of the hall or corridor leading to such stair  enclosure  need
  be so protected.
    c.  Where  it  is  impractical in such existing dwellings to provide a
  second means of egress, the department may order  additional  alteration
  to  the  first  means of egress and to shafts, stairs and other vertical
  openings as the department may deem necessary to safeguard the occupants
  of the dwelling, may require the public halls providing  access  to  the
  first  means  of  egress  to  be equipped on each story with one or more
  automatic sprinkler heads, and, in  non-fireproof  dwellings,  may  also
  require  automatic sprinkler heads in the stair which serves as the only
  means of egress.
    d. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require the enclosure of
  a stair which is ornamental provided such stair does  not  connect  more
  than two stories.
    e.   A   stair,   fire-stair,   fire-tower  or  fire-escape  which  is
  supplementary to the egress requirements of paragraphs a,  b  and  c  of
  this  subdivision need not lead to the entrance story or to a street, or
  to a yard or a court which leads to a  street,  provided  the  means  of
  egress therefrom is approved by the department.
    7.  a.  All  doors  opening from shafts, stair halls or stairs and the
  door assemblies shall be fire-resistive with the doors self-closing  and
  without transoms or any other opening.
    b.  All  other doors opening upon entrance halls or other public halls
  or corridors in every part of the dwelling  shall  be  self-closing.  In
  non-fireproof  dwellings  any existing openings in such doors, except in
  doors to public toilet rooms or bathrooms, shall be closed and sealed in
  such  manner  as  to  provide  a  fire-resistive  rating  equal  to  the
  fire-resistive  rating  of the remainder of the door. Except as provided
  in this paragraph,  any  existing  transoms  over  such  doors  in  such
  non-fireproof dwellings shall be firmly secured in a closed position, or
  removed  and  the  openings  closed,  in  a  manner  satisfactory to the
  department. If such doors or transoms are glazed with plain glass,  such
  glass  shall  be  removed and replaced with wire glass one-quarter of an
  inch in thickness or replaced with material approved by the  department.
  In  non-fireproof  dwellings existing transoms or ventilating louvres in
  public halls or corridors, and any  openings  in  partitions  separating
  sleeping  rooms  from  public halls or corridors to provide ventilation,
  need not be replaced, closed or sealed provided  such  public  halls  or
  corridors  are  protected  by  automatic  sprinkler heads. When existing
  ventilating louvres are located in the lower half of any such door  they
  may  be  retained  and  new  ventilating louvres may be installed in the
  lower half of any new or existing doors provided the  openable  area  of
  every  such  louvre does not exceed one hundred forty-four square inches
  and the bottom of the opening is one foot or  more  above  the  finished
  floor  of the public hall or corridor upon which such door opens and, in
  such case, no sprinkler system shall be required.


   c. Every existing interior glazed sash, window or opening, other  than
  a  door,  in  any partition forming required enclosures around stairs or
  shafts shall be removed and the openings closed  up  and  fire-retarded.
  Where  an  existing  sash  provides  borrowed  light to a public hall or
  corridor  from  a  living  room  and there is no glass panel in the door
  providing access to such room, such sash shall be made stationary  in  a
  closed  position  and  be  glazed  with  wire  glass one-quarter inch in
  thickness, or be  entirely  removed  and  the  opening  closed  up  with
  incombustible material.
    d.  All  openings  which provide direct access to a fire-escape from a
  public hall or corridor shall  be  equipped  with  fireproof  doors  and
  assemblies  with  the door self-closing or fireproof windows glazed with
  clear wire glass. Doors providing access  to  fire-escapes  from  public
  halls or corridors may be glazed with clear wire glass.
    e.  It shall be unlawful to attach to or maintain on or about any door
  required to be self-closing any device which prevents  the  self-closing
  of such door.
    8.  a.  (i) Every means of egress shall be indicated by a sign reading
  "EXIT" in red letters at least eight inches high on a white  background,
  or  vice  versa,  illuminated at all times during the day and night by a
  red light of at least twenty-five watts or equivalent illumination. Such
  light shall be maintained in a keyless  socket.  On  all  stories  where
  doors,  openings or passageways giving access to any means of egress are
  not visible from all portions of such  stories,  lighted  or  reflective
  directional   signs   shall  be  maintained  in  conspicuous  locations,
  indicating in red on a white background, or vice versa, the direction of
  travel to the nearest means of egress. In addition to  being  posted  in
  conspicuous  locations,  such  signs  located  near  the  floor,  giving
  direction to the nearest means of egress, shall also be  maintained.  At
  least  one  sign shall be visible from the doorway of each room or suite
  of rooms. Existing signs and illumination may be  accepted  if,  in  the
  opinion  of  the  department, such existing signs and illumination serve
  the intent  and  purpose  of  this  subdivision.  Supplementary  stairs,
  fire-stairs,  fire-towers  or  fire-escapes  which  do  not  lead to the
  entrance story or to a street or to  a  yard  or  court,  leading  to  a
  street,  shall be clearly marked "NOT AN EXIT" in black letters at least
  four inches high on a yellow background and at the termination  of  each
  such  stair,  fire-stair,  fire-tower  or  fire-escape, there shall be a
  directional sign indicating the nearest means of  egress  leading  to  a
  street.  All  signs  shall  be constructed, located and illuminated in a
  manner satisfactory to the department.
    b. On each floor of every hotel or motel having two  or  more  stories
  where the rooms or suites of rooms are connected by an interior hallway,
  there  shall  be  posted  by  each  stairway, elevator or other means of
  egress a printed scale floor plan of the particular story,  which  shall
  show  all  means of egress, clearly labeling those to be used in case of
  fire. Such signs shall be posted in other conspicuous  areas  throughout
  the  building.  Said floor plan shall be no smaller than eight inches by
  ten inches and shall be posted in  such  a  manner  that  it  cannot  be
  readily removed.
    9. The ceiling of the story immediately below the entrance story shall
  be  fire-retarded  or  be equipped with one or more sprinkler heads. Any
  boiler or furnace room within  the  dwelling  used  in  connection  with
  supplying  heat  or  hot  water  shall  be  enclosed  with fire-retarded
  partitions and every door opening therefrom and its  assembly  shall  be
  fireproof  with  the  door  self-closing. The ceiling of such room shall
  also be fire-retarded or be equipped with one or more sprinkler heads.


   10. a. There shall be provided in the roof directly over  each  stair,
  fire-stair,  fire-tower,  dumb-waiter,  elevator  or similar shaft which
  extends to or within one story of a roof, a ventilating  metal  skylight
  having  horizontal  dimensions equal at least to seventy-five per centum
  of  the  cross-sectional  area  of  such  shaft. Such skylight need not,
  however, exceed twenty square feet in area. Where an  existing  skylight
  is  smaller than the dimensions or area prescribed in this paragraph, no
  structural change shall be required, but a  ventilating  metal  skylight
  fitting  the  existing  opening  in  the roof shall be sufficient. Every
  skylight shall be glazed with plain glass in the roof of  such  skylight
  and shall be equipped with metal screens over and under the skylight. In
  lieu  of  a skylight a window of the same area at the top story shall be
  accepted.
    b. Whenever there is a flooring of solid construction at  the  top  of
  any  enclosed  stair, fire-stair, fire-tower, elevator or similar shaft,
  openings shall be left near the top of such shaft for ventilation.  Such
  openings  shall  provide at least two hundred eighty-eight square inches
  of unobstructed ventilation and  shall  communicate  directly  with  the
  outer  air, or be otherwise ventilated in accordance with the provisions
  of the local building code.
    c. It  shall  be  unlawful  to  discharge  into  any  such  shaft  any
  inflammable  or  volatile  gases, liquids or other thing or matter which
  would endanger life.
    11. a. There shall be a fire-retarded bulkhead in the  roof  over,  or
  connecting  directly  by means of a public hall with the highest portion
  of, every stair extending to the highest  story  below  the  main  roof.
  Stairs  leading to such bulkheads shall be fire-retarded as required for
  other public stairs and shall  have  at  the  top  fireproof  doors  and
  assemblies with the doors self-closing. All stairs to required bulkheads
  shall  be provided with a guide or handrail. A scuttle so constructed as
  to be readily opened may be substituted for a bulkhead in such dwellings
  two stories or less in height. Such scuttle shall be at least twenty-one
  inches in width and  twenty-eight  inches  in  length,  covered  on  the
  outside  with  metal and provided with a stationary iron or steel ladder
  leading thereto.
    b. When a dwelling has a pitched or sloping roof with a pitch or slope
  of more than fifteen degrees, no bulkhead or scuttle, or stair or ladder
  leading thereto shall be required.
    c. A bulkhead door or scuttle shall never be self-locking and shall be
  fastened on the inside with movable rustproof bolts, hooks,  or  a  lock
  which does not require a key to open from the inside of the dwelling.
    d.  Bulkheads  and  stairs  leading  thereto  existing on April fifth,
  nineteen hundred forty-four, shall be permitted provided the stairs have
  such angle of ascent and treads of such dimensions as may be approved by
  the department.
    12. In every such dwelling containing thirty or more  rooms  used  for
  living  or  sleeping  purposes  by  transient occupants there shall be a
  closed-circuit interior fire alarm system. Such alarm system shall be so
  installed and maintained that it can be operated manually from any story
  to sound an alarm or alarms capable of being heard clearly in all  parts
  of  the  dwelling.  Such  alarm  system shall be installed, arranged and
  maintained in a manner satisfactory to the fire department.
    13. When the local building code  requires  a  standpipe  system  such
  system  shall  comply  with  all  of the applicable requirements of such
  code.
    14. In every such fireproof dwelling containing fifty  or  more  rooms
  used for living or sleeping purposes by transient occupants and in every
  such  non-fireproof  dwelling  containing thirty or more such rooms, the


 owner shall employ one or more watchmen or clerks whose duty it shall be
  to visit every portion of the dwelling at frequent regular intervals for
  the purpose of detecting fire or other  sources  of  danger  and  giving
  immediate  and  timely warning thereof to all the occupants. There shall
  be provided a watchman's clock system or  other  device  to  record  the
  movements  of  such watchman. Such system shall be installed, supervised
  and maintained in a manner satisfactory to the fire department. However,
  the provisions of this subdivision shall not apply where, throughout the
  dwelling,  a  closed-circuit,  automatic,  thermostatic   fire-detecting
  system  is  installed  which actuates a fire alarm, or where, throughout
  the dwelling, an approved-type automatic sprinkler system  is  installed
  which actuates a fire alarm by the flow of water through such system.
    15.  a.  Nothing  in  this  section  shall  be construed as permitting
  partitions or  materials  which  are  not  fireproof  in  any  fireproof
  dwelling;  nor  shall anything in this section be deemed to abrogate any
  powers or duties  vested  by  law  in  the  fire  commissioner  or  fire
  department,  except  that an existing sprinkler installation, fire alarm
  or  standpipe  system  which  has  been  approved  or  accepted  by  the
  department having jurisdiction and installed before July first, nineteen
  hundred  forty-eight, shall, after inspection by the said department, be
  deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this section or  may
  be  altered or adapted to meet such requirements instead of a completely
  new installation or system.
    b. All automatic sprinkler heads required by  this  section  shall  be
  constructed  to  fuse  at  a  temperature  not  higher  than one hundred
  sixty-five degrees Fahrenheit, spaced so as to protect the area which is
  required to be sprinklered, and installed, arranged  and  maintained  in
  conformity with regulations adopted by the department.
    c.  For  the  purposes  of  subdivisions  twelve  and fourteen of this
  section, the term "transient occupancy" shall mean the  occupancy  of  a
  room  for  living purposes by the same person or persons for a period of
  ninety days or less.
    16. a. Notwithstanding any other provision of  law  to  the  contrary,
  within  a  dwelling  to  which  this  section  is  applicable the use of
  dwelling units as a hotel for other than permanent  residence  purposes,
  as  defined  in paragraph a of subdivision eight of section four of this
  chapter, that would  otherwise  be  prohibited  shall  be  permitted  to
  continue  for  a  period  of  two years after the effective date of this
  subdivision provided that:
    (1) such dwelling units were used for other than  permanent  residence
  purposes  on  January first, two thousand nine and on the effective date
  of this subdivision and fifty-one percent or more of the total number of
  dwelling units in such dwelling  were  used  for  other  than  permanent
  residence purposes on such dates;
    (2)  such  dwelling  was  occupied as a hotel for other than permanent
  residence purposes on December fifteenth, nineteen hundred sixty-one;
    (3) such dwelling is of fireproof construction and  was  of  fireproof
  construction on January first, two thousand nine;
    (4)  such  dwelling  units  used  for  other  than permanent residence
  purposes have at least  two  lawful  means  of  egress,  including  exit
  stairs,  fire  towers  or exterior stairs but excluding fire escapes and
  had such lawful means of egress on January first, two thousand nine;
    (5) such dwelling has operational exit signs and a fire  alarm  system
  complying  with  the  provisions  for  existing transient occupancies in
  accordance with local law and had such exit signs and fire alarm  system
  on January first, two thousand nine; and
    (6)  such  dwelling  units  used  for  other  than permanent residence
  purposes are registered with the department within  one  hundred  eighty


 days  after  the effective date of this subdivision in a form and manner
  to be provided by such department,  including  a  requirement  that  the
  applicant  submit  certification of compliance with subparagraphs three,
  four  and  five  of  this  paragraph,  signed and sealed by a registered
  architect or licensed professional engineer in good standing  under  the
  education  law.    The  department  may  assess  fees to cover all costs
  associated with such registration. The department may refuse to register
  dwelling units or may revoke such registration  if  it  determines  such
  dwelling  units  or  dwelling  do  not  comply  with  the conditions for
  registration set  forth  in  subparagraphs  one  through  five  of  this
  paragraph.
    b.  The  owner  shall obtain a certificate of occupancy for the use of
  registered dwelling units for other than  permanent  residence  purposes
  within  two  years  after  the  effective date of this subdivision. Upon
  application prior to  the  expiration  of  such  two  year  period,  the
  department  may,  for  good  cause,  extend  such  time  for  up  to one
  additional year but no  such  extension  shall  be  granted  unless  the
  department finds that:
    (1)  the  owner  has  obtained the necessary permit or permits for all
  work  necessary  to  bring  such  dwelling  into  compliance  with   the
  requirements  of  this  chapter and all local housing, building and fire
  codes for the use of dwelling units for other than  permanent  residence
  purposes;
    (2)  all  construction  authorized  by such permit or permits has been
  substantially completed; and
    (3) there are no considerations of public safety, health  and  welfare
  that  have  become  apparent  since  the issuance of the above described
  permit or permits that indicate an overriding benefit to the  public  in
  enforcing  the  requirement  that  the applicant obtain a certificate of
  occupancy for the use  of  registered  dwelling  units  for  other  than
  permanent  residence  purposes within two years after the effective date
  of this subdivision.
    c. Upon application prior to the expiration of the time for  obtaining
  a  certificate  of  occupancy, as extended by the department pursuant to
  paragraph b of this subdivision, the board of standards and appeals  may
  grant  a  further extension of time to obtain a certificate of occupancy
  in a case where there are circumstances beyond the  applicant's  control
  or  hardship  in  the  way of obtaining such certificate within the time
  allowed by the department but no more than one such extension of fifteen
  months shall be granted for a building and no such  extension  shall  be
  granted unless the board finds that there are no outstanding building or
  fire code violations of record at the property.
    d. The department shall issue such certificate of occupancy upon proof
  that  said dwelling conforms in all respects to the requirements of this
  chapter and all local housing, building and fire codes for  the  use  of
  dwelling  units  for other than permanent residence purposes. If no such
  certificate of occupancy is issued within two years after the  effective
  date  of this subdivision or, if applicable, within the time as extended
  by the department or as further extended by the board of  standards  and
  appeals,  all  use  of dwelling units for other than permanent residence
  purposes shall thereafter cease.
    e. If after a certificate of occupancy is issued pursuant to paragraph
  d of this subdivision, the use of such dwelling  units  for  other  than
  permanent   residence   purposes   is   discontinued,  nothing  in  this
  subdivision shall be construed to limit the  application  of  the  local
  zoning resolution with respect to such discontinuance.






   §  68.  Smoke  detecting  devices.  1. This section shall apply to all
  multiple dwellings, whenever constructed, provided however, that for the
  purposes of this section the term "multiple dwelling" shall also include
  any dwelling accommodation used as a temporary  or  permanent  residence
  located in any building owned as a condominium or cooperative.
    2. (a) The owner of every multiple dwelling to which the provisions of
  this  section  apply shall equip each apartment or other separate living
  unit in such multiple  dwelling  with  approved  and  operational  smoke
  detecting  devices  in  conformity  with  the  state fire prevention and
  building code; provided, however, that any multiple dwelling not subject
  to the provisions of such code may, in the alternative, be equipped with
  battery-operated smoke detecting devices  of  a  type  accepted  by  the
  division of housing and community renewal.
    (b) In hotels and other class B multiple dwellings, and in any portion
  of  a class A multiple dwelling used for single room occupancy, at least
  one smoke detecting device shall be located within each  room  used  for
  sleeping  purposes.  In  any other multiple dwelling or portion thereof,
  there shall be at least one smoke detecting device located  within  each
  apartment  or  separate  living  unit,  in an area so that it is clearly
  audible in each bedroom or other room used for sleeping  purposes,  with
  intervening  doors  closed;  provided,  however, that no smoke detecting
  device be located more than ten feet from the entrance to any bedroom or
  other room used for sleeping purposes.
    (c) Each smoke detecting device shall include a test device to  permit
  the occupant to readily determine if it is operational.
    (d)  In addition to complying with the provisions of this section, the
  type, location, number, and manner of installation  of  smoke  detecting
  devices  shall  be  in accordance with standards prescribed by the state
  fire prevention and building code council.
    3. (a) With respect to class A  multiple  dwellings,  other  than  any
  portion  of  any  such  dwelling  used  for  single  room occupancy, and
  notwithstanding the provisions of section  seventy-eight  or  any  other
  provision of this chapter, or of any law or requirement, state or local,
  the  duties  of  the  owner  and  tenant with respect to smoke detecting
  devices installed pursuant to this  section  shall  be  as  provided  in
  subdivisions four and five of this section.
    (b)  With  respect to a class B multiple dwelling, or any portion of a
  class A multiple dwelling used for single room occupancy, the provisions
  of subdivision five of this section shall not apply, and smoke detecting
  devices installed as required by this section shall be  subject  to  the
  provisions of section seventy-eight of this chapter.
    (c)  The  owner  of every multiple dwelling shall keep such records as
  the state fire prevention and  building  code  council  shall  prescribe
  relating  to the installation and maintenance of smoke detecting devices
  in the building and make  such  records  available  to  any  local  code
  enforcement official on request.
    4.  In  addition  to  initially  providing  and  installing  the smoke
  detecting devices, the owner shall:
    (a) replace within thirty days after the receipt of written notice any
  such device which becomes inoperable within one year of the installation
  of such device due to a defect in the manufacture  of  such  device  and
  through no fault of the occupant of the apartment or other unit;
    (b)  upon  the  occurrence of a vacancy, replace or properly equip any
  such device which has been removed or  rendered  inoperable,  so  as  to
  provide operational smoke detecting devices for any new tenant; and
    (c)  notify  tenants  in writing, individually or through posting of a
  notice in a common area of the building, of  the  respective  duties  of
  owners and tenants under this section.


   5.  Except  as  provided in paragraph (b) of subdivision three of this
  section, the tenant shall keep and maintain any smoke  detecting  device
  installed  pursuant  to this section in good repair and replace any such
  device which becomes inoperable during his occupancy.
    6. An owner need not furnish or install a smoke detecting device where
  one  has  already  been  installed,  provided  that (a) the type of such
  device and the manner of its installation comply with the provisions  of
  this  section  and the standards prescribed by the state fire prevention
  and building code council, (b) the existing device is tested  and  found
  to  be  operational,  and (c) the existence of such device in lieu of an
  owner-furnished device is  noted  on  the  records  kept  by  the  owner
  pursuant to paragraph (c) of subdivision three of this section.
    7. This section shall not apply within cities with a population of one
  million or more, provided however, any local law in such cities relating
  to  smoke  detecting  devices  shall  provide  for  the installation and
  maintenance  of  smoke  detecting  devices  in  dwelling  accommodations
  located in buildings owned as condominiums or cooperatives




   §  68.  Smoke  detecting  devices.  1. This section shall apply to all
  multiple dwellings, whenever constructed, provided however, that for the
  purposes of this section the term "multiple dwelling" shall also include
  any dwelling accommodation used as a temporary  or  permanent  residence
  located in any building owned as a condominium or cooperative.
    2. (a) The owner of every multiple dwelling to which the provisions of
  this  section  apply shall equip each apartment or other separate living
  unit in such multiple  dwelling  with  approved  and  operational  smoke
  detecting  devices  in  conformity  with  the  state fire prevention and
  building code; provided, however, that any multiple dwelling not subject
  to the provisions of such code may, in the alternative, be equipped with
  battery-operated smoke detecting devices  of  a  type  accepted  by  the
  division of housing and community renewal.
    (b) In hotels and other class B multiple dwellings, and in any portion
  of  a class A multiple dwelling used for single room occupancy, at least
  one smoke detecting device shall be located within each  room  used  for
  sleeping  purposes.  In  any other multiple dwelling or portion thereof,
  there shall be at least one smoke detecting device located  within  each
  apartment  or  separate  living  unit,  in an area so that it is clearly
  audible in each bedroom or other room used for sleeping  purposes,  with
  intervening  doors  closed;  provided,  however, that no smoke detecting
  device be located more than ten feet from the entrance to any bedroom or
  other room used for sleeping purposes.
    (c) Each smoke detecting device shall include a test device to  permit
  the occupant to readily determine if it is operational.
    (d)  In addition to complying with the provisions of this section, the
  type, location, number, and manner of installation  of  smoke  detecting
  devices  shall  be  in accordance with standards prescribed by the state
  fire prevention and building code council.
    3. (a) With respect to class A  multiple  dwellings,  other  than  any
  portion  of  any  such  dwelling  used  for  single  room occupancy, and
  notwithstanding the provisions of section  seventy-eight  or  any  other
  provision of this chapter, or of any law or requirement, state or local,
  the  duties  of  the  owner  and  tenant with respect to smoke detecting
  devices installed pursuant to this  section  shall  be  as  provided  in
  subdivisions four and five of this section.
    (b)  With  respect to a class B multiple dwelling, or any portion of a
  class A multiple dwelling used for single room occupancy, the provisions
  of subdivision five of this section shall not apply, and smoke detecting
  devices installed as required by this section shall be  subject  to  the
  provisions of section seventy-eight of this chapter.
    (c)  The  owner  of every multiple dwelling shall keep such records as
  the state fire prevention and  building  code  council  shall  prescribe
  relating  to the installation and maintenance of smoke detecting devices
  in the building and make  such  records  available  to  any  local  code
  enforcement official on request.
    4.  In  addition  to  initially  providing  and  installing  the smoke
  detecting devices, the owner shall:
    (a) replace within thirty days after the receipt of written notice any
  such device which becomes inoperable within one year of the installation
  of such device due to a defect in the manufacture  of  such  device  and
  through no fault of the occupant of the apartment or other unit;
    (b)  upon  the  occurrence of a vacancy, replace or properly equip any
  such device which has been removed or  rendered  inoperable,  so  as  to
  provide operational smoke detecting devices for any new tenant; and
    (c)  notify  tenants  in writing, individually or through posting of a
  notice in a common area of the building, of  the  respective  duties  of
  owners and tenants under this section.


   5.  Except  as  provided in paragraph (b) of subdivision three of this
  section, the tenant shall keep and maintain any smoke  detecting  device
  installed  pursuant  to this section in good repair and replace any such
  device which becomes inoperable during his occupancy.
    6. An owner need not furnish or install a smoke detecting device where
  one  has  already  been  installed,  provided  that (a) the type of such
  device and the manner of its installation comply with the provisions  of
  this  section  and the standards prescribed by the state fire prevention
  and building code council, (b) the existing device is tested  and  found
  to  be  operational,  and (c) the existence of such device in lieu of an
  owner-furnished device is  noted  on  the  records  kept  by  the  owner
  pursuant to paragraph (c) of subdivision three of this section.
    7. This section shall not apply within cities with a population of one
  million or more, provided however, any local law in such cities relating
  to  smoke  detecting  devices  shall  provide  for  the installation and
  maintenance  of  smoke  detecting  devices  in  dwelling  accommodations
  located in buildings owned as condominiums or cooperatives


§  75. Water supply. 1. In every multiple dwelling erected after April
  eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, where space  is  provided  for
  cooking  there  shall  be  in every apartment a proper sink with running
  water and with a two-inch waste and trap.
    2.  The  owner  of  every  multiple  dwelling  shall  provide   proper
  appliances to receive and distribute an adequate supply of water, to and
  in  every  apartment  or suite of rooms at all times of the year, during
  all hours. Failure in the  general  supply  of  water  from  the  street
  service  main  shall  not  be  construed as a failure on the part of the
  owner, if suitable appliances to receive and distribute such water  have
  been provided in the dwelling.
    3.  For  dwellings three or more stories in height erected on or after
  April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, and  for  all  dwellings
  erected  after  January  first,  nineteen hundred fifty-one, such supply
  shall include both hot and cold water at all times of the  year,  during
  all  hours,  except that hot water service shall not be required by this
  section in a dwelling erected before April eighteenth, nineteen  hundred
  twenty-nine,  if  the  owner  establishes  to  the  satisfaction  of the
  department that such service was not furnished or required  before  such
  date.
    4. No multiple dwelling shall be erected unless it is connected with a
  street service water main.
    5.   No   required  sink  shall  be  placed  within  any  water-closet
  compartment or within any bathroom containing a water-closet.






   §  76.  Water-closet and bath accommodations. 1. General requirements.
  This section shall apply to all dwellings whenever erected or  converted
  except as herein provided.
    a. No water-closet shall be installed, kept or maintained in any yard,
  court or other open space, and every water-closet or other receptacle to
  receive fecal matter, urine or sewerage, located in any such yard, court
  or  other  open  space, shall be completely removed, and the place where
  they were located shall  be  disinfected  under  the  direction  of  the
  department.
    b.  No water-closet shall be installed, kept or maintained in a cellar
  or basement unless it is provided for lawful cellar or  basement  living
  rooms, or is supplementary to the required water-closet accommodations.
    c. No water-closet shall open directly into any kitchen or kitchenette
  in  a multiple dwelling erected after April eighteenth, nineteen hundred
  twenty-nine.
    d. Every water-closet compartment shall be  at  least  two  feet  four
  inches in clear width and, except in a general toilet or bathroom, shall
  be  enclosed  with  partitions  which shall extend from the floor to the
  ceiling and which shall be plastered or tiled or  covered  with  similar
  materials approved by the department.
    e.  The  floor  of  every such compartment, bathroom or general toilet
  room shall be made waterproof with material approved by the  department,
  and  such  waterproofing  material shall extend six inches or more above
  the floor, except at doors.
    f. The use of drip trays is unlawful.
    g. No plumbing fixture or water-closet shall be enclosed wholly or  in
  part with woodwork.
    h.  Every  water-closet  compartment,  bathroom  and general or public
  toilet room, and every other room containing one or  more  water-closets
  or  urinals,  except as specifically provided otherwise in this section,
  shall have at least one window opening upon a street  or  lawful  court,
  yard or space above a setback. Every such window shall be at least three
  square  feet  in  area  and  shall  be made so that half its area can be
  readily opened.
    i. No window shall be required when each such compartment, bathroom or
  general toilet room is located on the top story or underneath the bottom
  of a lawful shaft or court and is lighted and ventilated in either  case
  by  a  skylight the roof of which contains at least three square feet of
  glazed surface and is arranged to be readily opened.
    j. In lieu of a required window or skylight, it  shall  be  lawful  to
  install   a   system  of  ventilation,  approved  for  construction  and
  arrangement by the department, for water-closet  compartments  used  for
  the  business  portions  of  any dwelling or for compartments containing
  water-closets, bathrooms or general toilet room in  any  dwelling.  Such
  system  of  ventilation shall be maintained and operated continuously to
  provide at least four changes per hour of the air volume  of  each  such
  water-closet  compartment,  bathroom  or  general toilet room daily from
  seven o'clock in the  morning  until  seven  o'clock  at  night  in  any
  business  parts  of  such  dwelling  and from six o'clock in the morning
  until midnight in all parts used for dwelling purposes.
    k. Every water-closet compartment or bathroom shall be  provided  with
  electricity and fixtures to light the same properly.
    l.  In  a  fireproof dwelling in which two or more rooms, all of which
  open directly upon the same public hall,  are  occupied  exclusively  by
  persons employed by the tenants thereof, there shall be provided for the
  occupants  of  such  rooms  and accessible therefrom directly or through
  such public hall, at least one water-closet compartment  for  the  first
  four  such  rooms  or  fraction  thereof  and  at  least  one additional


 water-closet  compartment  for  each  additional  seven  such  rooms  or
  fraction  thereof,  and  no further water-closet accommodations for such
  rooms shall be required.
    m.  Water-closets  may  be  placed  together  in a general toilet room
  provided they are supplementary to required water-closet  accommodations
  or are solely for the use of business portions of the dwelling.
    n.  Except  as  herein  provided  if  any  living rooms in a fireproof
  dwelling open directly upon a public hall without any intervening  room,
  foyer  or  passage,  or  if  any  suites  of  two living rooms in such a
  dwelling open upon a foyer giving direct access to a public  hall,  only
  one  water-closet  compartment  shall  be  required for every three such
  living rooms on each story. Every such water-closet compartment shall be
  accessible to one or more of said rooms without passage through a public
  hall or any bedroom.
    2. Class A dwellings.
    a. Every apartment in a class A dwelling,  except  old-law  tenements,
  shall  be  provided  with  a  water-closet  which  shall  be placed in a
  compartment completely separated from any other water-closet.
    b. Every apartment in a class A dwelling,  except  old-law  tenements,
  shall  also  contain  a  bath, which may be in a separate compartment or
  together with the water-closet in a bathroom. There shall be  access  to
  at  least  one  such  compartment or bathroom from every bedroom without
  passing through any other bedroom.
    3. Class B dwellings.
    a. The requirements of paragraph n, of subdivision one of this section
  shall not apply to a fireproof class B dwelling, every  living  room  of
  which,  except  those used only by employees employed exclusively in the
  management and maintenance of such dwelling,  has  direct  access  to  a
  public  hall  without  passing  through any other room, foyer or private
  hall and in which water-closet accommodations are provided in accordance
  with the provisions of this subdivision.
    b. In such a fireproof dwelling there shall  be  on  each  story  upon
  which  there  is  any living room at least two water-closet compartments
  for the first twenty such living rooms or fraction thereof and at  least
  one additional water-closet compartment for each additional fifteen such
  living   rooms   or   fraction  thereof,  and  no  further  water-closet
  accommodations for such rooms shall be required.
    c. There shall be  on  each  story  of  such  fireproof  dwelling,  in
  addition  to  the water-closet accommodations required in paragraph n of
  subdivision one hereof, at least one water-closet compartment for  every
  fifteen  living  rooms  or  fraction  thereof  not  having  access  to a
  water-closet compartment  without  passage  through  a  public  hall  or
  bedroom,  and  every  such  room shall have access to such a compartment
  through a public hall. If two or more such compartments be  required  on
  any  story  by the provisions of this paragraph, they may be placed in a
  general toilet room.
    d. For every urinal supplied on any story of such  fireproof  dwelling
  on  which seventeen rooms or more are occupied exclusively by males, one
  water-closet compartment less than the number otherwise required may  be
  provided   on  such  story;  except  that  the  number  of  water-closet
  compartments  on  such  story  may  not  be   reduced   to   less   than
  three-quarters of the number otherwise required.
    e.  The  water-closet  compartments  on  each story of such a dwelling
  shall  be  accessible  from  every  living  room  on  the  story.   Such
  compartments may be placed in one or more general toilet rooms.
    f.  In  a  non-fireproof  class B dwelling there shall be at least one
  water-closet compartment and one wash basin  for  every  seven  sleeping
  rooms  and  there  need  not  be more than that number except that there


 shall be at least one on each story.  At  least  one  such  water-closet
  compartment  and  one wash basin on each story of such dwelling shall be
  accessible from every living room on the same story.
    4. Converted dwellings.
    a.  Every  apartment in a class A converted dwelling shall be provided
  with a water-closet which shall be placed in a compartment  or  bathroom
  within  each apartment completely separated from any other water-closet.
  Every such apartment shall also contain a bath  or  shower  and  a  wash
  basin.
    b.  In  every  class  B converted dwelling there shall be at least one
  water-closet compartment on any floor containing any room used for class
  B occupancy and at least one bathroom or shower room and one wash  basin
  for every six persons and for any remainder of less than six persons who
  may lawfully occupy any room or rooms for class B occupancy.
    (c)  Additional  required  water-closets  and  wash  basins  which are
  installed in order to comply  with  the  provisions  of  this  paragraph
  whether provided separately or in combination, shall be in a compartment
  separate  and  apart  from  every  bath  or  shower  required  under the
  provisions of paragraph b, and each such  additional  required  bath  or
  shower  shall  be  in  a  compartment  separate  and  apart  from  every
  water-closet and wash basin required under the provisions  of  paragraph
  b, except that any such additional required water-closet, bath or shower
  or  wash basin may be included in a single compartment containing any or
  all of such facilities, if such compartment is accessible only  from  or
  only  within  a  room,  apartment  or suite of rooms and the occupant or
  occupants of such room, apartment or suite are exclusively  entitled  to
  use all such facilities contained in such compartment.
    5.  Old-law  tenements.  In  every  old-law  tenement  there  shall be
  provided for the exclusive use of each family at least one  water-closet
  compartment  located  within  the  dwelling.  Such  compartment shall be
  constructed and ventilated  as  approved  by  the  department  but  such
  compartment  shall  be  located  on  the same story as that on which the
  apartment occupied by each such family is situated and shall be equipped
  with lock and key. The provisions of this subdivision  shall  not  apply
  (a)  to  any dwelling which the department of city planning certifies is
  in an area to be acquired for a  public  improvement  and  for  which  a
  request for acquisition has been submitted to the board of estimate by a
  public  agency;  or  (b)  to  any dwelling in an area for which an urban
  renewal plan has been submitted to the planning commission, as  provided
  in  section  five  hundred  five  of  the  general municipal law, if the
  planning commission shall certify that compliance with the provisions of
  this subdivision would be inconsistent with the plan; or (c) for which a
  demolition permit has been  or  shall  be  issued  by  the  municipality
  pursuant  to local law or ordinance. The exemption provided in (a), (b),
  and (c) of this subdivision shall be valid for a period  of  six  months
  after  the date of the acquisition request or the date of the submission
  of the urban renewal plan to the commission or the date of the  issuance
  of  the  demolition  permit  as  the  case may be. Such exemption may be
  extended from time to time by the  department  provided,  however,  that
  such  exemption shall not extend beyond November first, nineteen hundred
  sixty-five.
    6. Single room occupancy.
    a. Every apartment used for single room occupancy shall have at  least
  one  bath  or  shower,  one wash-basin and one water-closet for each six
  adult persons who may lawfully occupy the rooms  in  such  apartment  as
  provided  in  section  two hundred forty-eight, and for any remainder of
  less than six persons. If additional baths or showers  or  water-closets
  are installed within an apartment in order to comply with the provisions


 of  this  paragraph  each water-closet shall be in an enclosure separate
  and apart from every bathroom or shower room and  each  bath  or  shower
  shall be in an enclosure separate and apart from every water-closet.
    b.  There  shall  be access to each required water-closet and bathroom
  without passing through any sleeping room, except that any water-closet,
  wash-basin or bathroom which connects directly with  any  sleeping  room
  shall  be  deemed to be available only to the occupants of such room and
  shall not be included in the computations for  the  required  number  of
  water-closets and bathrooms.
    7.  Saving clause. No change need be made in the number, construction,
  arrangement,  lighting  or  ventilation  of  water-closet  compartments,
  bathrooms  or general toilet rooms in any portion of any dwelling if the
  number, construction,  arrangement,  lighting  or  ventilation  of  such
  water-closet  compartments, bathrooms or general toilet rooms was lawful
  on July first, nineteen hundred sixty-one.






§  77. Plumbing and drainage. 1. In every multiple dwelling all liquid
  or water-borne waste from plumbing fixtures shall be conveyed by a house
  drain and house sewer  to  a  street  sewer  or  to  a  combined  street
  storm-water  main  and  sewer,  unless  no such sewers are available. It
  shall be unlawful to erect a multiple dwelling which is to  be  occupied
  by five families or more unless a connection is made with a street sewer
  or combined street storm-water main and sewer.
    2.  For  every  multiple  dwelling  where  neither  kind  of  sewer is
  available, provision shall be made for disposing of such waste as may be
  required by local law.
    3. All roofs, terraces, shafts,  courts,  areas  and  yards  in  every
  multiple dwelling shall be properly graded, drained and connected with a
  street storm-water main or combined sewer and street storm-water main so
  that  all  storm  water  may  pass  freely into it, except that where no
  street storm-water main or combined sewer and  street  storm-water  main
  exists,  the  department  may permit the storm water from such areas and
  spaces to drain into a street gutter which leads to a natural channel or
  water course, or into a dry well. When required by the  department,  the
  shafts,  courts, areas and yards shall be properly concreted. Every roof
  shall be so drained that all storm water shall be conveyed therefrom  in
  a  manner  that  will  prevent  dripping to the ground or the causing of
  dampness in walls, ceilings, yards, shafts or  areas.  Nothing  in  this
  section shall be deemed to prevent the turfing over of any yard or court
  space  or  the  planting of shrubs or trees therein when approved by the
  department.
    4. The  owner  of  every  multiple  dwelling  or  part  thereof  shall
  thoroughly  cleanse and keep clean at all times, and in good repair, the
  entire plumbing and drainage system including every water-closet, toilet
  and sink and every other plumbing fixture therein.
    5. Whenever  the  plumbing,  sewerage  or  drainage  of  any  multiple
  dwelling or part thereof or of the lot on which it is situated is in the
  opinion  of  the department in a condition or in its effect dangerous to
  life or health, the department may order or  cause  any  such  plumbing,
  sewerage  or  drainage  to  be purified, cleansed, disinfected, removed,
  altered, repaired or improved, or, as provided in section three  hundred
  nine,  take  such  other  action as it may deem necessary to remove such
  danger to life or health.






   §  78.  Repairs.  1.  Every  multiple  dwelling, including its roof or
  roofs, and every part thereof and the lot upon  which  it  is  situated,
  shall  be  kept  in  good  repair.  The  owner  shall be responsible for
  compliance with the provisions of this  section;  but  the  tenant  also
  shall  be  liable  if  a  violation  is  caused  by  his own wilful act,
  assistance or negligence  or  that  of  any  member  of  his  family  or
  household  or  his guest. Any such persons who shall wilfully violate or
  assist in violating any provision of this section shall also jointly and
  severally be subject to the civil penalties provided  in  section  three
  hundred four.
    2.  Whenever,  the  light,  ventilation,  or any matter or thing in or
  about a multiple dwelling or part thereof, or in or  about  the  lot  on
  which it is situated, is in the opinion of the department in a condition
  or  in  its effect dangerous to life or health, the department may order
  or cause any such light, ventilation, matter or thing to be repaired  or
  improved  or, as provided in section three hundred nine, take such other
  action as it may deem necessary to remove such danger to life or health.






   §  79.  Heating.  1.  Every multiple dwelling exceeding two stories in
  height and erected after April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine,
  and every garden-type maisonette dwelling project  erected  after  April
  eighteenth, nineteen hundred fifty-four, shall be provided with heat. On
  and  after  November  first, nineteen hundred fifty-nine, every multiple
  dwelling shall be provided with heat  or  the  equipment  or  facilities
  therefor.  During the months between October first and May thirty-first,
  such  heat  and  the  equipment  or  facilities  shall  be sufficient to
  maintain the minimum temperatures required by local law, ordinance, rule
  or regulation, in all portions of the  dwelling  used  or  occupied  for
  living  purposes provided, however, that such minimum temperatures shall
  be as follows:   (a) sixty-eight degrees  Fahrenheit  during  the  hours
  between  six  o'clock  in  the  morning  and ten o'clock in the evening,
  whenever  the  outdoor  temperature  falls  below   fifty-five   degrees
  Fahrenheit, notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of subdivision
  four  of  section  three  of  this  chapter, and (b) at least fifty-five
  degrees Fahrenheit during the hours between ten o'clock in  the  evening
  and  six  o'clock in the morning, whenever the outdoor temperature falls
  below forty degrees Fahrenheit. Nothing in this section shall be  deemed
  to  relieve  any  owner  of  the duty of providing centrally supplied or
  other approved source of heat prior to November first, nineteen  hundred
  fifty-nine  in  any  case where such heat is required by this chapter or
  any other law, ordinance,  rule  or  regulation  to  be  supplied  in  a
  dwelling  prior  to  said date. The heating system in dwellings used for
  single room occupancy shall be in conformity with  the  requirements  of
  section two hundred forty-eight.
    2.  The  provisions of subdivision one shall not apply to any dwelling
  (a) which is located in a resort community and is rented or occupied  on
  a  seasonal  basis between April fifteenth and October fourteenth during
  any calendar year and is not occupied for  living  purposes  during  the
  remainder  of  such  year, except that occupancy of any such dwelling by
  the family of a caretaker thereof or by the family of the owner  thereof
  during  the  remainder  of the year shall be permitted; or (b) which the
  department of city planning certifies is in an area to be acquired for a
  public improvement or for development or redevelopment and for which (1)
  a request for acquisition has been submitted to the mayor  by  a  public
  agency  or  (2)  a  plan  for a development or redevelopment project has
  received preliminary or first approval of the city planning  commission;
  or  (c) for which a demolition permit has been or shall be issued by the
  municipality pursuant to local law or ordinance.
    3. The exemption provided in subdivisions two (b) and two (c) of  this
  section  shall be valid for a period of six months after the date of the
  approval of the slum clearance or urban renewal plan or the date of such
  certification or the date of the issuance of the demolition  permit,  as
  the case may be, but such exemption may be extended from time to time by
  the  department  provided, however, that such exemption shall not extend
  beyond November first, nineteen hundred sixty-one.






§  80.  Cleanliness.  1.  The owner shall keep all and every part of a
  multiple dwelling, the lot on which  it  is  situated,  and  the  roofs,
  yards,  courts, passages, areas or alleys appurtenant thereto, clean and
  free from  vermin,  dirt,  filth,  garbage  or  other  thing  or  matter
  dangerous to life or health.
    2.  The  owner  of  every  multiple  dwelling  or  part  thereof shall
  thoroughly cleanse and keep clean at all times, to the  satisfaction  of
  the  department,  every  public or service part thereof, including every
  room, passage, stair, floor, window, door, wall,  ceiling,  water-closet
  or  toilet  compartment, cesspool, drain, hall and cellar in such public
  or service part.
    3. All carpets and rugs which are permitted in any public  part  of  a
  multiple  dwelling  shall  be taken up and cleaned by the owner at least
  once a year or as much oftener as the department shall deem necessary.
    4. The interior surfaces of  walls  throughout  every  part  of  every
  multiple  dwelling, whether in public or in tenant-occupied parts, shall
  be painted or papered and the ceilings  kalsomined  or  painted  by  the
  owner.  The  walls  and  ceilings  shall  be  rekalsomined, repapered or
  repainted by the owner whenever necessary to keep the said surfaces in a
  sanitary condition. No wall paper shall be placed upon such  a  wall  or
  ceiling  surface  unless  all existing wall paper shall be first removed
  therefrom and such wall or ceiling thoroughly cleaned and repaired.
    5. Any tenant shall be punishable as provided in section three hundred
  four for the existence of conditions in violation of the  provisions  of
  this chapter within his apartment to the extent that such conditions are
  caused  by him, by members of his family or by his guests, and are under
  his control; but this provision shall not be construed  to  relieve  the
  owner  of  any  liability  or  duty  under  this section, except where a
  violation is caused and continued solely by the tenant  or  those  under
  his control.
    6.  Every  dwelling  erected  after  January  first,  nineteen hundred
  forty-seven, shall be so constructed as to be rat-proof. The agency of a
  city authorized by law to make rules  supplemental  to  laws  regulating
  construction,  maintenance,  use  and  area  of buildings shall have the
  power to make rules and regulations to supplement  the  requirements  of
  this subdivision.


   §  81.  Receptacles  for  waste matter. 1. The owner of every multiple
  dwelling shall provide proper and suitable conveniences  or  receptacles
  for  ashes,  rubbish,  garbage,  refuse and other waste matter and shall
  arrange for the removal of such waste matter daily.
    2. No person shall place ashes,  garbage,  rubbish,  filth,  urine  or
  fecal  matter  in  any place in a multiple dwelling other than the place
  provided therefor, or keep any such matter in his apartment or upon  his
  premises  such  length  of  time  as  to create a nuisance as defined in
  section three hundred nine.






   §  82.  Privacy.  In  every  apartment of three or more rooms in every
  class A multiple  dwelling  erected  after  April  eighteenth,  nineteen
  hundred  twenty-nine,  there  shall  be  access to every living room and
  bedroom without passing through any bedroom.






   §  83.  Janitor  or  housekeeper.  Whenever there are thirteen or more
  families occupying any multiple dwelling and the owner does  not  reside
  therein,  there  shall  be  a  janitor, housekeeper or some other person
  responsible on behalf of the owner who shall reside in said dwelling, or
  within a dwelling located within a distance of  two  hundred  feet  from
  said  dwelling,  and have charge of such dwelling, except that where two
  or three multiple dwellings are connected  or  adjoining,  one  resident
  janitor  shall  be  sufficient. In every garden-type maisonette dwelling
  project erected after April  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred  fifty-four,
  adequate personnel shall be provided for the lawful care and maintenance
  of such project.






   §  84.  Construction  standards for the control of noise. On or before
  January  first,  nineteen  hundred  sixty-nine,  the  department   shall
  formulate,  adopt,  promulgate  and  thereafter  from time to time amend
  standards of sound retardation for the walls, partitions and floors  and
  ceilings  between  apartments  and  between apartments and public spaces
  situated therein based on the direct measurement of  sound  transmission
  loss  determined  in  decibels  for various frequencies or in accordance
  with the ASTM sound transmission class system or in accordance with such
  other recognized method or  system  for  measuring  reduction  of  sound
  transmission  as  the  department  may  determine to be appropriate. Any
  construction of a  multiple  dwelling  commenced  after  January  first,
  nineteen  hundred  seventy  shall  comply with the standards promulgated
  pursuant to this section in effect at the time of commencement  of  such
  construction.






   §  100.  Application  of  article four. The provisions of this article
  shall  apply  to  fireproof  multiple  dwellings  erected  after   April
  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine, and to such dwellings only.
  They  shall  apply  to  all  such  fireproof  dwellings   unless   their
  application  is  expressly  limited  to dwellings of a particular class.
  They shall apply in addition  to,  and  not  in  substitution  for,  the
  provisions of article three.






   § 101. Requirements for fireproof construction. 1. Every such dwelling
  exceeding six stories or seventy-five feet in height shall be fireproof.
  No  multiple  dwelling  shall  be altered so as to exceed either of such
  heights without being made fireproof.
    2. In a fireproof multiple dwelling the walls,  floors,  roof,  stairs
  and   public  halls  shall  all  be  fireproof  except  as  provided  in
  subdivision three. No beams, lintels or other structural  members  shall
  be  of wood.  No wood or other inflammable material shall be used in any
  of the partitions, furrings or ceilings. For the portion of  a  multiple
  dwelling  more than one hundred fifty feet above the curb level, no wood
  shall be used except as provided in subdivision  three  and  except  for
  interior trim of windows.
    3. The foregoing requirements shall not be construed as prohibiting:
    a.  Elsewhere  than  within,  or in the openings to, the public halls,
  stairs and shafts, the  use  of  wood  for  sleepers,  grounds,  nailing
  blocks,  underflooring,  finish  flooring,  interior  doors  with  their
  assemblies and saddles, floor base not more than  one  foot  in  height,
  picture  and  wall  moulding,  shelving,  closet  and  kitchen fixtures,
  cupboards, cabinets and wardrobes.
    b. The use of wood for windows and for interior trim and finish backed
  solidly against, or filled with, incombustible material when located not
  more than one hundred fifty feet above the curb level and elsewhere than
  within, or in the openings to, the public halls, stairs and shafts.
    c. The use within apartments of wood for  decorative  wall  panelling,
  wainscoting,  mantels  or  other  interior  finish,  and  the  use in an
  entrance hall of wall panelling or wainscoting made of fireproof wood or
  other material capable of successfully withstanding standard fire  tests
  prescribed  in  the  local building code and in a manner approved by the
  department.
    d. Where fireproof doors are required, the use for  such  doors,  with
  their  assemblies  and  saddles, of material and construction capable of
  successfully withstanding a one-hour standard fire  test  prescribed  in
  the  local  building  code  and  in a manner approved by the department.
  Should any door required to be fireproof be found to  have  deteriorated
  so that it shall after installation fail to conform to the standard fire
  tests  prescribed,  such door shall be removed by the owner and replaced
  by him with a door capable of successfully withstanding such tests.
    4.  All  materials  combustible  in  their  natural  state  which  are
  constructed,  processed  or  protected  so  that  they  will not support
  combustion shall, before being installed in a multiple dwelling for  any
  of  the  uses  herein  specified,  be permanently identified by label or
  marking with the name of the manufacturer and the year of manufacture in
  a manner approved by the department.
    5. When required to be fireproof,  any  outer  wall  or  any  wall  or
  partition  which  carries  any load in addition to its own weight shall,
  unless otherwise in this chapter expressly required, be  constructed  of
  materials capable of successfully withstanding a four-hour standard fire
  test  prescribed  in the local building code and in a manner approved by
  the department. When required to be fireproof,  any  wall  or  partition
  which  carries  only  its own weight, other than an outer wall, shall be
  constructed of materials capable of successfully withstanding a one-hour
  standard fire test prescribed in the local building code and in a manner
  approved by the department.




   §  102.  Stairs.  1.  Except  as  otherwise  specifically  provided in
  subdivisions three and four and  in  paragraphs  b  to  j  inclusive  of
  subdivision  six,  every  multiple dwelling which exceeds two stories in
  height shall have at  least  two  fire-stairs.  Such  fire-stairs  shall
  extend  from  the  entrance  story  to  the  roof  and  be equipped with
  fireproof  self-closing  doors  glazed  with  wire  glass  and   without
  transoms.  No windows shall be required in such stairs, but any openings
  in exterior walls, except any window openings facing a street  or  yard,
  shall  be equipped with fireproof frame and sash glazed with wire glass.
  Entrances to such fire-stairs shall be at  least  fifteen  feet  distant
  from  each  other  and  from  the  entrance to every other fire-stair or
  fire-tower, except that the distance between two such entrances  may  be
  less  if  they  are  on opposite sides of an elevator vestibule or other
  public hall or are separated by an elevator shaft.    The  doors  giving
  access to such stairs shall not be held open by any device whatever.
    2.  Every such fire-stair shall have an entrance on the entrance story
  from a street or an entrance at the side or rear of the dwelling from  a
  yard,  court  or  passageway  having  continuous,  safe and unobstructed
  access to a street. Except as otherwise expressly provided in paragraphs
  b to j inclusive of subdivision six, in a  dwelling  not  exceeding  one
  hundred   twenty-five   feet  in  height  every  stair,  fire-stair  and
  fire-tower shall be at least three feet in clear width, and  where  only
  one  fire-stair  or fire-tower is required such fire-stair or fire-tower
  shall be at least three feet eight inches in clear width. In a  dwelling
  exceeding   one  hundred  twenty-five  feet  in  height  every  required
  fire-stair shall be at least three feet eight inches in clear width from
  the entrance story up to a floor level not more than  one  hundred  feet
  below  the  ceiling  of  the  highest  story, and above such level every
  fire-stair shall be at least three feet  in  clear  width.  Every  stair
  landing  at  every floor level shall be at least three feet eight inches
  in clear width in every direction.
    3. Except in dwellings erected under plans filed with  the  department
  before  April  twenty-eighth,  nineteen  hundred  thirty,  and except as
  otherwise provided in paragraphs b to j  inclusive  of  subdivision  six
  there  shall  be  horizontal access from every apartment to at least two
  fire-stairs, at least one of which shall  be  within  seventy-five  feet
  horizontally  in the line of travel from a required means of egress from
  such apartment.
    4. Except as provided in paragraphs b, c and d of subdivision  six,  a
  fire-tower  may  be  substituted  for  any  required  fire-stair. When a
  fire-tower is substituted for a fire-stair, such fire-tower shall comply
  with all the applicable requirements for the fire-stair it replaces  and
  shall  have  its  means  of  egress directly to a street or to a yard or
  court having direct, unobstructed access to  a  street  without  passing
  through  any  entrance hall; except that a fire-tower may have its means
  of egress into a public vestibule if such means is not more than fifteen
  feet from a street in the line of travel.
    5. The stairs in a tower or dwelling containing a  passenger  elevator
  and  meeting  the  conditions of paragraphs f, g or h of subdivision six
  may conform to the provisions of such paragraph and paragraph i of  such
  subdivision in lieu of the different provisions which would otherwise be
  applicable thereto.
    6.  Under  the  special  conditions  described  in  paragraphs  a to j
  inclusive and in the following table, which  applies  only  to  class  A
  dwellings,  stairs  shall  conform  to the applicable provisions of such
  paragraphs and table.
    NOTE: TABLE FOUND IN CHAP. 234 OF THE LAWS OF 1964


   a. Except as otherwise expressly provided in  this  paragraph  and  in
  paragraphs  b to j inclusive of subdivision six, if the number of living
  rooms on any story above the entrance story exceeds forty,  there  shall
  be  an  additional  fire-stair  for each twenty living rooms or fraction
  thereof  in excess of forty on any story above the entrance story.  Such
  an additional fire-stair shall not be required if the number  of  living
  rooms on no story above the entrance story exceeds fifty and in addition
  the clear width of one fire-stair is at least one and one-half times the
  width  specified for a fire-stair in subdivision two, the clear width of
  every public hall connected with such fire-stair is  at  least  one  and
  one-half  times  the  width  specified  for a public hall in section one
  hundred seven and the clear width of every entrance hall connected  with
  such  fire-stair  is at least one and one-half times the width specified
  for an  entrance  hall  in  section  fifty.  Any  additional  fire-stair
  constructed  pursuant to this paragraph need not be carried to a greater
  height than the level of a roof, or of a terrace formed  by  a  setback,
  above  the  highest  story  on  which  the number of rooms requires such
  additional stair. When any fire-stair  terminates  at  the  level  of  a
  setback  of  any  outer wall, such setback shall form a terrace at least
  four feet in depth measured between the inside of the parapet  wall  and
  the  wall  of  the  dwelling  and  at  least ten feet in length measured
  parallel to the wall of the dwelling.
    b. In a class A dwelling or section thereof not exceeding six  stories
  in  height,  for  which  plans  shall  have been filed in the department
  before September first, nineteen hundred fifty-one, only one stair shall
  be required, provided the number of apartments  having  access  to  such
  stair  on  each  story  does  not exceed six and the aggregate number of
  living rooms in such apartments does not exceed twenty, except that  the
  total number of rooms above the first story shall not exceed one hundred
  and  the  total  number  of  apartments  above the first story shall not
  exceed thirty.   Such stair  shall  in  addition  comply  with  all  the
  provisions  of  section  one  hundred  forty-eight relating to stairs in
  non-fireproof dwellings, except that in lieu of a window such stair  may
  have  at  each story an opening to a street or to a lawful yard or court
  other than a court on a lot line. Such opening shall be at  least  forty
  square  feet in area and five feet in width, and shall be furnished with
  a properly secured guard railing  at  least  five  feet  in  height  and
  approved  by  the  department.   Such opening shall be kept continuously
  open to the outer air. No means of egress from  any  apartment  to  such
  stair shall be more than twenty-five feet distant therefrom.
    c.  In a class A dwelling or section thereof not exceeding six stories
  in height only one stair shall  be  required,  provided  the  number  of
  living  rooms  on  any  story  above  the entrance story does not exceed
  twenty.  If the number of living rooms on any story or  section  thereof
  above  the  entrance  story exceeds twenty, there shall be an additional
  stair for each twenty rooms or fraction thereof on  any  such  floor  or
  section  in  excess of twenty, except that if the number of living rooms
  on no such story or section above the entrance story exceeds thirty,  in
  lieu  of  an  additional stair one stair and every public hall connected
  therewith may be four feet six inches in clear width. Such  stair  shall
  be  completely separated from every other stair, fire-stair, fire-tower,
  public hall and shaft by fireproof walls. Doors to  stairs,  fire-stairs
  and  fire-tower  balconies  from  any  public hall in such a dwelling or
  section shall be at least three feet wide, self-closing  and  fireproof,
  with  their  assemblies  also  fireproof.  The panels of every such door
  shall be glazed with clear wire glass and no pane thereof  shall  exceed
  three  hundred  sixty  square  inches  in  area.  Those  portions of the
  enclosure partition which separate the public hall from the stair  shall


 be glazed with wired plate glass at least one-quarter inch in thickness,
  with  no pane more than three hundred sixty square inches in area, so as
  to provide so far as practicable an unobstructed view of the stair  from
  each  public  hall. Glass panels shall be at least twelve inches and not
  more than sixteen inches above the floor  of  the  public  hall.  Public
  halls  providing  access to any such enclosed stair shall be lighted and
  ventilated as prescribed for  non-fireproof  dwellings  in  section  one
  hundred  forty-nine.  No  means  of  egress from any apartment to such a
  stair shall be more than fifty feet distant therefrom.
    d. In a class A dwelling or section thereof not exceeding six  stories
  in  height  only  one  stair  shall  be required, provided the number of
  apartments having access to such stair at each  story  does  not  exceed
  eight  and  the aggregate number of living rooms in such apartments does
  not exceed twenty-five, except that the total  number  of  living  rooms
  above  the  first story shall not exceed one hundred twenty-five and the
  total number of apartments above the first story shall not exceed forty.
  No means of egress from any apartment to such stair shall be  more  than
  twenty-five  feet  distant  therefrom.  Doors and stair enclosures shall
  conform to the provisions of paragraph c.
    e. In a dwelling conforming to the provisions of paragraph b, c  or  d
  the  lowest  story  may be designated as a basement if such story is not
  used for living purposes but is used solely for storage or other general
  utility purposes accessory to the occupancy, use and management  of  the
  dwelling.   Such a basement shall not be deemed a story in computing the
  height of the dwelling.
    f. Every  tower  erected  pursuant  to  plans  on  or  after  December
  fifteenth,  nineteen  hundred sixty-one in a fireproof dwelling shall be
  provided with at least one passenger elevator. Such  elevator  shall  be
  operated  between  the  ground story and the highest story of such tower
  containing any living  room  and  horizontal  access  thereto  shall  be
  provided  at each story for every apartment in the tower. Stairs in such
  a tower may comply with the following provisions of  this  paragraph  in
  lieu  of  the  different  provisions  otherwise applicable. In such case
  there shall be provided at least one fire-stair. If there are more  than
  fifteen  living  rooms  on  any  story  of  the tower, there shall be an
  additional fire-stair for each additional fifteen such rooms or fraction
  thereof. Every fire-stair so required shall extend from the top story of
  the tower to the entrance hall  of  the  dwelling  and  be  horizontally
  accessible from each story of every apartment in the tower. If the tower
  was  erected  under  plans  filed  with the department on or after April
  twenty-eighth, nineteen hundred thirty, it shall also have an additional
  means of egress as provided in paragraph i of this subdivision.
    g. In a dwelling in which one or more passenger elevators are operated
  with horizontal access from every apartment in the dwelling and in which
  every story has an area of not more than twenty-five hundred square feet
  exclusive of elevator shafts, public halls, stairs and  fire-stairs  and
  contains  not more than fifteen living rooms, stairs may comply with the
  provisions of  this  paragraph  in  lieu  of  the  different  provisions
  otherwise  applicable.  In  such  case  there  shall  be  at  least  one
  fire-stair, and there need not be more than one,  accessible  from  each
  apartment  on  each  story  and  extending from the roof to the entrance
  story with unobstructed access to a street. If the dwelling was  erected
  under  plans  filed with the department on or after April twenty-eighth,
  nineteen hundred thirty, it shall  also  have  an  additional  means  of
  egress as provided in paragraph i.
    h.  When  a  dwelling  is divided into sections by unpierced fireproof
  construction extending from the second tier of beams  above  the  ground
  story  to  the roof, and one or more passenger elevators are operated in


 each such section with horizontal access from  each  apartment  therein,
  and  every  story of each such section above the entrance story contains
  not more than ten living rooms where there are four or  more  apartments
  on  such  story  or  not  more than fifteen living rooms where there are
  three apartments or less on such  story,  stairs  may  comply  with  the
  provisions  of  this  paragraph  in  lieu  of  the  different provisions
  otherwise applicable. In such case there shall be in each  such  section
  at  least one fire-stair, and there need not be more than one, extending
  from the roof to the  entrance  story  with  unobstructed  access  to  a
  street.  If  the  dwelling  was  erected  under  plans  filed  with  the
  department on or after April  twenty-eighth,  nineteen  hundred  thirty,
  each  such  section  shall  also  have  an additional means of egress as
  provided in paragraph i.
    i. The main means of  egress  from  every  apartment  in  a  tower  or
  dwelling  erected  pursuant  to  the  provisions of paragraph f, g, or h
  shall  be  within  twenty-five  feet  of  a   fire-stair   meeting   the
  requirements  of  such  paragraph.  If the tower or dwelling was erected
  under plans filed with the department on or  after  April  twenty-eight,
  nineteen  hundred  thirty, egress shall also be provided, in addition to
  the required fire-stairs, by means of another stair extending  from  the
  main  roof  of  the dwelling, or in the case of a tower from the highest
  story thereof, to the entrance story,  with  unobstructed  access  to  a
  street. Such additional stair shall be horizontally accessible from each
  apartment  at  each  story  through a vestibule or other public hall and
  shall conform with all the requirements for a fire-stair except that its
  clear width may be reduced to a  minimum  of  twenty-eight  inches,  its
  risers  may  be increased to a maximum of nine inches in height, and its
  treads, exclusive of nosing, may be reduced to a minimum of eight inches
  in width. No door giving access thereto shall swing into such stair.
    j. A class B dwelling in which at  least  eighty  per  centum  of  the
  living  rooms  above  the  second story open directly upon a public hall
  without any intervening foyer or private hall, shall have at  least  two
  fire-stairs  accessible  at  each  story from each room through a public
  hall. Such fire-stairs shall be so located that at least one  fire-stair
  shall  be  not  more than one hundred twenty-five feet along the line of
  travel from the means  of  egress  from  any  living  room.  Every  such
  fire-stair shall have a clear width of at least three feet eight inches.
  Two  such  fire-stairs shall be deemed adequate for seventy living rooms
  on any story. For each thirty-five living rooms or fraction  thereof  in
  excess of seventy on any story there shall be one additional fire-stair;
  except that if such fractional excess number of living rooms is not more
  than  twenty per centum of the total number of living rooms provided for
  by the required two fire-stairs and one additional fire-stair  for  each
  thirty-five  living  rooms,  if  any,  in  excess of seventy, in lieu of
  another fire-stair for such fractional excess number  of  living  rooms,
  the  area  of every fire-stair landing at such story may be increased by
  not less than two square feet for each living room  of  such  fractional
  excess  number  of living rooms. In every such dwelling each living room
  which is occupied by three persons or  more  shall  be  counted  as  one
  additional  room for each four hundred cubic feet or fraction thereof in
  excess of eight hundred cubic feet in the cubic content of such room.






   §  103. Egress from apartments.  1. a. Except as provided in paragraph
  b of this subdivision, there shall be at least one means of egress  from
  each  apartment  on each and every story of such apartment, and a second
  means of egress if the first means is not within  fifty  feet  of  every
  living  room  in  such apartment on such story. When two means of egress
  are required, they shall open from different rooms.
    b. In any class A fireproof dwelling or section thereof erected  under
  plans  filed  in  the department after September first, nineteen hundred
  fifty-one, an apartment occupying parts of not  more  than  two  stories
  shall  have  at least one means of egress. Such required means of egress
  shall be not more than forty feet from any room  within  such  apartment
  and  shall  open  directly  upon  a  public hall. Such public hall shall
  provide access  to  at  least  two  fire-stairs.  Any  stair  within  an
  apartment  shall be at least two feet six inches in width and a terminus
  shall be not more than twenty feet from  the  door  which  provides  the
  required  egress  to  a  public hall, provided, however, that such stair
  within an apartment shall extend downwards or upwards to the story which
  provides the required access to at least two fire-stairs.  In the  event
  of  but  one such means of egress, and if the stair within the apartment
  extends downwards to provide egress to a public hall, there shall  be  a
  balcony  upon  the upper story of the apartment. If, however, such stair
  extends upwards to provide egress to a public hall, the balcony shall be
  located on the lower story of the apartment.  Such balcony shall provide
  access from the apartment to a room of an  adjoining  apartment  on  the
  same  story. Such balcony shall be constructed of incombustible material
  and be capable of sustaining a load of at least eighty pounds per square
  foot. Access to such balcony shall not be obstructed by sinks or kitchen
  fixtures or in any other way, and shall be  maintained  unobstructed  at
  all  times.  Bars,  gates,  grilles  or other obstructing devices on any
  window or door giving access to or egress from  such  balcony  shall  be
  unlawful.
    2.   Except   as  otherwise  expressly  provided  in  paragraph  b  of
  subdivision six of section one hundred two  for  certain  dwellings  six
  stories  or  less  in  height,  at  least one fire-stair shall be within
  seventy-five feet of at least one means of egress from each apartment on
  each story thereof.
    3. When any such fire-stair serving any apartment as a required  means
  of  egress from the dwelling opens on the entrance story of the dwelling
  exclusively into an entrance hall, no other fire-stair serving the  same
  apartment  as a required means of egress from the dwelling shall open on
  such story  exclusively  into  the  same  entrance  hall.  Any  required
  fire-stair  not  opening on such story exclusively into an entrance hall
  shall open on a street or in  a  yard,  court  or  passageway  affording
  continuous,  safe  and  unobstructed  access  to  a street; but any such
  required fire-stair serving any apartment as a means of egress from  the
  dwelling  may  have a supplementary entrance into the same entrance hall
  as that into which any other fire-stair serving the same apartment as  a
  required means of egress from the dwelling opens exclusively.
    4.  When any apartment occupies parts or all of three or more stories,
  every stair within such apartment leading to the  third  or  any  higher
  story of such apartment shall be enclosed with fireproof partitions with
  a  fireproof  door and assembly with the door self-closing at the second
  story landing of such stair and at every higher story landing from which
  the stair continues upward within the apartment;  or  in  lieu  of  such
  fireproof  partitions  and  doors at least two means of egress from such
  apartment opening from different rooms shall be provided on  the  first,
  third and alternate higher stories, if any, of such apartment.


   5.  No  means  of egress from any apartment shall open into any stair,
  fire-stair or fire-tower required under the provisions of  this  section
  except through a vestibule or public hall.






   §  104.  Bulkheads. 1. Every stair, fire-stair and fire-tower required
  by this chapter to extend to the level of the roof  or  to  any  terrace
  formed  by a setback shall extend to and through a fireproof bulkhead or
  other fireproof enclosure in  such  roof  or  terrace  approved  by  the
  department.    Such bulkhead or enclosure shall give unobstructed access
  at all times to such roof or terrace by means of a  fireproof  door  and
  door  assembly  with  the  door self-closing. Such a door shall never be
  self-locking and shall be fastened on the inside by movable bolts, hooks
  or a lock which does not require a key to open from the  inside  of  the
  dwelling. Stairs to a bulkhead or enclosure shall have a handrail.  When
  a  dwelling  has a pitched or sloping roof with a pitch or slope of more
  than fifteen degrees, no bulkhead or  stair  leading  thereto  shall  be
  required.
    2.  The  roof  of any penthouse may for the purpose of this section be
  deemed part of the main roof if  unobstructed  access  be  provided  and
  maintained  between  all  required  fire-stair landings on the main roof
  adjoining such penthouse, on the roof of such penthouse and on the  roof
  of any other penthouse extending above such main roof. Such unobstructed
  access,  where horizontal, shall be by means of a passage at least three
  feet in clear width. It may include one  or  more  stairs  necessary  to
  provide  access  from any penthouse roof to any main roof adjoining such
  penthouse. Such stairs shall conform to all the requirements of  section
  fifty-three  for stairways of fire-escapes.  There shall be a passageway
  at least four feet in clear width between such stairs  and  the  parapet
  wall or guard railing of the main roof.






   § 105. Separation and ventilation of stairs. 1. In a dwelling in which
  one or more passenger elevators are maintained and operated opening upon
  a  public  hall  at every story, all stairs, fire-stairs and fire-towers
  shall be completely separated from one another and from  every  elevator
  shaft  by  fireproof  walls.  They  shall  be  constructed  of fireproof
  material throughout and shall  contain  no  wood  or  other  inflammable
  material of any kind, except that handrails of hardwood may be provided.
    2.  Access  to  stairs,  fire-stairs and fire-tower balconies from any
  public vestibule or other public hall shall be through  fireproof  doors
  and  assemblies,  with  the  doors  self-closing and at least three feet
  wide, or through pairs of such doors at least four feet wide, containing
  in either case a fixed sash  glazed  with  wire  glass  at  least  three
  hundred sixty square inches in area.
    3.  Every  stair  hall  shall be ventilated by a window, or by movable
  louvres in the skylight having  an  opening  of  at  least  one  hundred
  forty-four  square  inches,  or  by  an  opening of at least one hundred
  forty-four  square  inches  near  the  top  of  the  stair   shaft   and
  communicating directly with the outer air. If a window is provided which
  does  not  open  upon a street or yard, it shall be fireproof and glazed
  with wire glass of good quality and have no pane more than three hundred
  sixty square inches in area.






   §  106. Cellar and basement stairs.  A cellar or basement stair may be
  located inside the dwelling, but shall not be located underneath a stair
  leading to the upper stories unless  it  is  a  basement  stair  leading
  upward from a basement which is the main entrance story of the dwelling,
  or  unless  it is a stair leading downward from the entrance story which
  is separated by a fireproof arch from the stair leading upward from  the
  entrance  story.    Except  as otherwise provided in subdivision five of
  section fifty-two,  all  inside  cellar  or  basement  stairs  shall  be
  entirely  enclosed  with  fireproof walls and be provided with fireproof
  doors and assemblies, with the doors self-closing, at all openings.






	   §  107.  Public halls.  1. Every public vestibule or other public hall
  shall  comply  either  with  the  provisions  of  section  one   hundred
  forty-nine  for  non-fireproof multiple dwellings, so far as applicable,
  or with the provisions of subdivision two of this section,  except  that
  the  provisions  as  to  ventilation  shall  not apply to any part of an
  entrance hall within sixty feet in a  straight  line  from  an  entrance
  door.
    2.  If  such a dwelling does not comply with the applicable provisions
  of section one hundred forty-nine, it  shall  comply  with  all  of  the
  following:
    a.  Every  public vestibule or hall shall be everywhere at least three
  feet eight inches in clear width.
    b. Every such public vestibule or hall shall  be  separated  from  all
  other parts of the dwelling by fireproof walls.
    c.  All  openings  from  such  a  public  vestibule or hall to stairs,
  fire-stairs, fire-tower balconies, shafts, apartments or suites of rooms
  shall be protected by fireproof doors and  assemblies,  with  the  doors
  self-closing,  except  that  such  doors  and  assemblies  shall  not be
  required in any fireproof class B multiple dwelling  for  any  apartment
  consisting  of  one  room opening directly upon a public hall or for any
  apartment of three rooms or less in a college or school dormitory.
    d. Such a public vestibule or hall shall not be  required  to  have  a
  window,  but  if  it  does not have a window opening to the outer air it
  shall be equipped for artificial lighting and be properly lighted at all
  times.
    e. Except for that part of an entrance hall within  sixty  feet  in  a
  straight  line  from  an  entrance  door such a public vestibule or hall
  without a window to the outer air shall be ventilated to the  outer  air
  by  means of gravity vent flues at least twelve inches in each dimension
  or by mechanical means approved by the department.  There  shall  be  at
  least  one vent flue opening of at least twelve inches in each dimension
  for each one thousand cubic feet of air content of such public vestibule
  or hall. Such vent flues shall be  continuous  for  the  height  of  the
  dwelling  and  the  openings  at  each story shall be equipped with fire
  dampers held open by a fusible link at each opening and properly  hooded
  or provided with louvres at the top above the roof.
    f.  If  a  window  to  the  outer  air  is provided in any such public
  vestibule  or  hall,  such  vestibule  or  hall  shall  nevertheless  be
  ventilated  as provided in paragraph e, except that if such a window has
  a glazed area of at least twelve square feet and at least one  tenth  of
  the  superficial floor area of the vestibule or hall, readily accessible
  to the outer air to the extent of at least five and one-half square feet
  of its area, no vent flues need be provided within a distance  of  forty
  feet from each side of such window.
    3.  The  requirements of this section as to ventilation shall apply to
  all parts of an entrance hall more than sixty feet distant in a straight
  line from an entrance door, to all returns  or  recesses  that  lead  to
  elevators  and  extend farther from the hall which they adjoin than four
  times their width, and to all other returns or  recesses  from  entrance
  halls that extend farther than their width.
    4.  Any  part of a public hall that is shut off from any other part of
  such hall by a door or doors shall be deemed a separate hall.




§  108.  Partitions.    All  partitions  shall  rest directly upon the
  fireproof floor construction and never upon any wood flooring, and shall
  extend to the fireproof construction of the floor or roof above.






   §  115.  Interior  water-closets  and bathrooms. Interior water-closet
  compartments and bathrooms contained  in  fireproof  multiple  dwellings
  shall comply with the applicable provisions of section seventy-six.






   §   116.   Water-closets   in  certain  class  B  multiple  dwellings.
  Water-closets contained in certain  class  B  multiple  dwellings  shall
  comply with the applicable provisions of section seventy-six.






   §  117.  Employees'  water-closets. Water-closet compartments provided
  for domestic servants of tenants in multiple dwellings shall comply with
  the applicable provisions of section seventy-six.


   § 121. Prohibiting advertising that promotes the use of dwelling units
  in  a  class  A  multiple  dwelling  for  other than permanent residence
  purposes. 1. It shall be unlawful  to  advertise  occupancy  or  use  of
  dwelling  units  in a class A multiple dwelling for occupancy that would
  violate subdivision eight of section four of  this  chapter  defining  a
  "class  A" multiple dwelling as a multiple dwelling that is occupied for
  permanent residence purposes.
    2. Any person found to have violated the provisions of subdivision one
  of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than one
  thousand dollars for the first violation, five thousand dollars for  the
  second  violation  and seven thousand five hundred dollars for the third
  and subsequent violations.
    3. For the purposes of this section, the term "advertise"  shall  mean
  any  form  of  communication  for  marketing  that is used to encourage,
  persuade or manipulate viewers, readers or  listeners  into  contracting
  for  goods  and/or  services  as  may  be  viewed  through various media
  including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, flyers, handbills,
  television commercials, radio, signage, direct mail,  websites  or  text
  messages.
    4.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions of section three hundred three of
  this chapter, in a city with a population of one  million  or  more  the
  provisions  of  this  section shall be enforced by the mayor's office of
  special enforcement.






   §  120. Use of dwelling units in a class A multiple dwelling for other
  than  permanent  residence  purposes.  1.  Notwithstanding   any   other
  provision  of law to the contrary, within a class A multiple dwelling to
  which this article is applicable the use of dwelling units  as  a  hotel
  for  other  than permanent residence purposes, as defined in paragraph a
  of subdivision eight  of  section  four  of  this  chapter,  that  would
  otherwise  be  prohibited shall be permitted to continue for a period of
  two years after the effective date of this section provided that:
    a. such dwelling units were used for other  than  permanent  residence
  purposes  on  January first, two thousand nine and on the effective date
  of this subdivision and fifty-one percent or more of the total number of
  dwelling units in such dwelling  were  used  for  other  than  permanent
  residence purposes on such dates;
    b.  (1)  such  dwelling was initially constructed as and identified on
  its initial certificate of occupancy as "apartment hotel"  or  "class  A
  hotel"  and  occupied  as  a  hotel  for  other than permanent residence
  purposes on December fifteenth, nineteen hundred sixty-one or,  if  such
  dwelling  was  under construction and not yet complete on such date, was
  occupied as a hotel for other than permanent residence purposes  at  the
  time  the  dwelling  was  completed,  or  (2) such dwelling is in zoning
  district C5 as designated in the New York city zoning resolution and was
  initially constructed as a hotel  for  other  than  permanent  residence
  purposes  prior  to  December  fifteenth, nineteen hundred sixty-one and
  occupied as a hotel for  other  than  permanent  residence  purposes  on
  December fifteenth, nineteen hundred sixty-one, or (3) such dwelling (A)
  is within twelve hundred feet of zoning district C5 as designated in the
  New  York  city  zoning  resolution,  (B) was initially constructed as a
  hotel for other than permanent residence purposes in accordance  with  a
  permit  that  was  issued  prior to December fifteenth, nineteen hundred
  sixty-one, and (C) was  completed  after  December  fifteenth,  nineteen
  hundred  sixty-one  and was initially occupied as a hotel for other than
  permanent residence purposes;
    c. such dwelling is of fireproof construction  and  was  of  fireproof
  construction on January first, two thousand nine;
    d.  such  dwelling  units  used  for  other  than  permanent residence
  purposes have at least  two  lawful  means  of  egress,  including  exit
  stairs,  fire  towers  or exterior stairs but excluding fire escapes and
  had such lawful means of egress on January first, two thousand nine;
    e. such dwelling has operational exist signs and a fire  alarm  system
  complying  with  the  provisions  for  existing transient occupancies in
  accordance with local law and had such exit signs and fire alarm  system
  on January first, two thousand nine; and
    f.  such  dwelling  units  used  for  other  than  permanent residence
  purposes are registered with the department within  one  hundred  eighty
  days after the effective date of this section in a form and manner to be
  provided  by such department, including a requirement that the applicant
  submit certification of compliance with  paragraphs  d  and  e  of  this
  subdivision,  signed  and  sealed  by a registered architect or licensed
  professional engineer in good standing  under  the  education  law.  The
  department  may  assess  fees  to  cover  all costs associated with such
  registration. The department may refuse to register  dwelling  units  or
  may  revoke  such  registration  if it determines such dwelling units or
  dwelling do not comply with the conditions for registration set forth in
  paragraphs a through e of this subdivision.
    2. The owner shall obtain a certificate of occupancy for  the  use  of
  registered  dwelling  units  for other than permanent residence purposes
  within two  years  after  the  effective  date  of  this  section.  Upon
  application  prior  to  the  expiration  of  such  two  year period, the


 department may,  for  good  cause,  extend  such  time  for  up  to  one
  additional  year  but  no  such  extension  shall  be granted unless the
  department finds that:
    a. the owner has obtained the necessary permit or permits for all work
  necessary  to  bring such dwelling into compliance with the requirements
  of this chapter and all local housing, building and fire codes  for  the
  use of dwelling units for other than permanent residence purposes;
    b.  all  construction  authorized  by  such permit or permits has been
  substantially completed; and
    c. there are no considerations of public safety,  health  and  welfare
  that  have  become  apparent  since  the issuance of the above described
  permit or permits that indicate an overriding benefit to the  public  in
  enforcing  the  requirement  that  the applicant obtain a certificate of
  occupancy for the use  of  registered  dwelling  units  for  other  than
  permanent  residence  purposes within two years after the effective date
  of this section.
    3. Upon application prior to the expiration of the time for  obtaining
  a  certificate  of  occupancy, as extended by the department pursuant to
  subdivision two of this section, the board of standards and appeals  may
  grant  a  further extension of time to obtain a certificate of occupancy
  in a case where there are circumstances beyond the  applicant's  control
  or  hardship  in  the  way of obtaining such certificate within the time
  allowed by the department but no more than one such extension of fifteen
  months shall be granted for a building and no such  extension  shall  be
  granted unless the board finds that there are no outstanding building or
  fire code violations of record at the property.
    4. The department shall issue such certificate of occupancy upon proof
  that  said dwelling conforms in all respects to the requirements of this
  chapter and all local housing, building and fire codes for  the  use  of
  dwelling  units  for other than permanent residence purposes. If no such
  certificate of occupancy is issued within two years after the  effective
  date  of  this section or, if applicable, within the time as extended by
  the department or as further extended by  the  board  of  standards  and
  appeals,  all  use  of dwelling units for other than permanent residence
  purposes shall thereafter cease.
    5.  If  after  a  certificate  of  occupancy  is  issued  pursuant  to
  subdivision  four  of  this  section, the use of such dwelling units for
  other than permanent residence purposes is discontinued, nothing in this
  section shall be construed to limit the application of the local  zoning
  resolution with respect to such discontinuance.




   §  140.  Application  of  article five. The provisions of this article
  shall apply to non-fireproof  multiple  dwellings  erected  after  April
  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine, and to such dwellings only.
  They shall apply  to  all  such  non-fireproof  dwellings  unless  their
  application  is  expressly  limited  to dwellings of a particular class.
  They shall apply in addition  to,  and  not  in  substitution  for,  the
  provisions  of  article  three.  However  the provisions of this article
  shall not apply to a multiple dwelling three stories or less  in  height
  to  be  occupied  by not more than three families in all, with a maximum
  occupancy of two families on each floor in a two story building and  one
  family  on  each  floor in a three story building, provided however that
  all the provisions of article six are complied with,  including  section
  one hundred seventy-a of said article.


§ 141. Height. Any such dwelling which is seventy-five feet or less in
  height  above  the  curb  level  and  has  six stories or less may be of
  non-fireproof construction.






   § 142. Sub-curb uses. 1. When such a dwelling is more than eighty feet
  in  height  measured from the lowest point of the yard or of any curb on
  which any part of the dwelling faces, whichever is lower, and  any  room
  in  such  dwelling below the level of the highest curb which any part of
  such dwelling faces is occupied for  living  purposes  as  permitted  in
  paragraph  f  of subdivision one of section thirty-four, the yard at the
  level of such highest curb shall be set back so as to be at least  eight
  feet  greater  in  depth  than the yard below such level unless the yard
  opens directly upon a street.
    2. If such a dwelling is erected upon an interior lot running  through
  from street to street, the wall of the dwelling facing the lowest street
  shall,  at  the  level  of  the  highest  curb on which any part of such
  dwelling faces, be set back at least eight feet.
    3. The setback of the yard  or  wall  required  by  each  of  the  two
  preceding subdivisions shall be a fire-terrace. Nothing herein contained
  shall  be  construed  to  permit  a yard of smaller dimensions below the
  level of such fire-terrace than required by paragraph f  of  subdivision
  one of section thirty-four.
    4.  From  each apartment below the level of such highest curb at least
  one means of egress shall lead directly to such fire-terrace in a manner
  approved by the department. Such fire-terrace shall be  protected  by  a
  guard  railing  approved  by  the  department, and shall afford safe and
  unobstructed access  either  directly  to  a  street  or  to  a  covered
  fireproof  passage at least three feet in width and seven feet in height
  leading directly and without obstruction to a street.
    5. In all portions of such dwellings below the level  of  the  highest
  curb  all structural members, partitions, furrings and ceilings shall be
  constructed of incombustible materials.
    6. Apartments may also be occupied for living purposes in cellars  and
  basements  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  subdivision six of
  section thirty-four.






   §  143.  Construction  of  first  floor.  1. The first floor above the
  lowest cellar, or, if there be no cellar, above the lowest story,  shall
  be  fireproof  or,  if  the dwelling be three stories or less in height,
  fire-retarded. Said first floor shall be unpierced except  for  a  stair
  leading to a cellar as provided in section one hundred fifty, for lawful
  pipes,  conduits  and  ducts and for dumbwaiter and elevator shafts. Any
  such dumbwaiter and elevator shafts shall be equipped  at  all  openings
  below  the said first floor with fireproof doors and assemblies with the
  doors self-closing.
    2. Whenever the lowest cellar does not extend over more than half  the
  area of the dwelling, that portion of the first floor directly over such
  cellar   and  the  entire  second  floor  above  such  cellar  shall  be
  constructed as in this section prescribed for the first floor above  the
  lowest  cellar.  Whenever the lowest cellar extends over more than half,
  but not all, of the area of the dwelling, only that portion of the first
  floor directly over such cellar need be constructed as in  this  section
  prescribed for the first floor above the lowest cellar.






§  144.  Egress from dwellings. 1. A dwelling three or more stories in
  height shall have at least two means of egress  extending  to  the  roof
  from  an  entrance  story,  street, court or yard. The entrances to such
  means of egress at every story shall be at least  fifteen  feet  distant
  from  each other unless they are on opposite sides of a public hall. One
  means of egress shall be a stair constructed as provided in section  one
  hundred  forty-eight.  The other means of egress shall be either another
  such  stair  or  a  fire-escape  constructed  as  provided  in   section
  fifty-three.
    2.  If  the  number of living rooms on any story, or in any section of
  any story, above the entrance story exceeds twenty, there  shall  be  an
  additional  stair,  or  fire-stair, extending from the entrance story to
  the roof for each twenty rooms or fraction  thereof  on  such  story  or
  section thereof in excess of twenty, except that no additional stair, or
  fire-stair,  shall  be  required for such excess on any story or section
  thereof if the number of living rooms thereon does not exceed thirty and
  if in addition one  stair  serving  such  story  or  section  and  every
  entrance  hall  or  other public hall connected therewith are everywhere
  four feet six inchs or more in clear width.
    3. There shall be accessible from every apartment two means of  egress
  from  the dwelling, one of which shall be a stair within fifty feet from
  a means of egress from such apartment. For such dwellings erected  under
  plans  filed  in  the department after September first, nineteen hundred
  fifty-one, such stair  shall  also  be  enclosed  and  comply  with  the
  provisions of section one hundred forty-eight.
    4.  Whenever  more  than  two stairs are required, one or more of such
  stairs may be fire-stairs or  fire-towers,  provided  that  there  shall
  never  be more than one such fire-stair or fire-tower for each two other
  required stairs.






   §  145.  Fire-escapes.  Every  fire-escape shall be located, arranged,
  constructed and maintained as provided in section fifty-three.




   § 146. Egress from apartments. 1. There shall be at least two means of
  egress  from  every  apartment or suite. Such means shall be remote from
  each other.  Except  where  it  opens  into  a  stair  as  permitted  in
  subdivision three, one means shall be to a public hall connecting with a
  stair,  fire-stair  or fire-tower, not more than fifty feet distant from
  such means. In dwellings erected under plans  filed  in  the  department
  after   September   first,   nineteen  hundred  fifty-one,  such  stair,
  fire-stair or fire-tower shall be enclosed. The other required means  of
  egress  shall  open  either directly upon a fire-escape or directly on a
  fire-tower balcony or a public vestibule or other public hall connecting
  with a stair, fire-stair or fire-tower balcony.
    2. Except as hereinafter provided for dwellings two stories or less in
  height such balcony, vestibule, hall or stair shall  be  separated  from
  the  public  hall or stair on which the first means of egress opens by a
  fireproof wall, unpierced unless by an opening equipped with a fireproof
  door and assembly with the door self-closing. Such  door  shall  not  be
  held  open  by any device whatever. In a dwelling two stories or less in
  height, the separating wall may be fire-retarded on both sides  in  lieu
  of being fireproof.
    3.  In a dwelling three stories or less in height and occupied by four
  families or less on each story, and in any section of a class A dwelling
  which is two stories or less in height and occupied by four families  or
  less  on  each  story,  a  means  of  egress  from an apartment may open
  directly into a stair without the intervention of a public hall.




   §  147.  Bulkheads  and  scuttles.  1. Except as otherwise provided in
  subdivision two of this section, every required  stair,  fire-stair  and
  fire-tower  in  dwellings  three  stories or more in height shall have a
  bulkhead constructed as provided for fireproof dwellings in section  one
  hundred  four,  except  that the bulkhead of any required stair which is
  not required to be fireproof may be built of wood covered on the outside
  with twenty-six gauge metal and on the inside with wire  or  metal  lath
  covered  with  two  coats  of  cement  plaster  or  other fire-retarding
  material approved by the department.
    2. Such a dwelling which is two stories or less in height, or is three
  stories  in  height  and  erected  pursuant  to  plans  filed  with  the
  department  on  or  after  May  first,  nineteen  hundred fifty-nine and
  occupied by not more than one family on each story, shall be provided at
  each required  stair,  fire-stair  or  fire-tower  either  with  such  a
  bulkhead  or  with  a  scuttle  at least two feet by three feet in size,
  located in the ceiling of the public  hall  on  the  top  story  and  so
  arranged  as  to  provide  direct  and uninterrupted access to the roof.
  Every such scuttle shall be arranged to  be  readily  opened,  shall  be
  covered on the outside with metal and shall be provided with stairs or a
  stationary  iron ladder or ladders leading thereto and easily accessible
  to all the tenants of the dwelling.
    3. No bulkhead or other superstructure on the roof shall be  used  for
  human occupancy.
    4. When a dwelling has a pitched or sloping roof with a pitch or slope
  of  more than fifteen degrees, no bulkhead or scuttle or stair or ladder
  leading thereto shall be required.






   § 148. Public stairs. 1. Every stair, fire-stair and fire-tower shall,
  except  as  otherwise  provided  in  subdivisions three and four of this
  section and section one hundred forty-nine, be constructed  as  provided
  for  fire-stairs  in  sections  one hundred two and one hundred five for
  fireproof dwellings.
    2. Every stair, fire-stair and fire-tower shall be at least three feet
  in clear width throughout, and at all floor levels shall  have  landings
  at least three feet six inches in clear width.
    3.   Every  stair,  fire-stair  and  fire-tower  shall  be  completely
  separated from every other stair, fire-stair  and  fire-tower  and  from
  every public hall and shaft by fireproof walls, with fireproof doors and
  assemblies,  with  the  doors  self-closing and without transoms, at all
  openings, except that in dwellings two stories or less  in  height  such
  walls may be fire-retarded on both sides in lieu of being fireproof. The
  doors  giving access to such stairs shall not be held open by any device
  whatever.
    4. Except in the case of an interior enclosed stair separated from and
  directly accessible to the public hall by a self-closing fireproof  door
  and  except  as provided in subdivision five, there shall be provided to
  light and ventilate every stair at  every  story  a  window  or  windows
  opening  on a street, court, yard or space above a setback. At least one
  such window shall be at least two feet six inches  wide  and  five  feet
  high unless it opens on a street, in which case its minimum height shall
  be four feet. The aggregate area of such window or windows at each story
  shall  be  at least eighteen square feet. On the top story a ventilating
  skylight may be substituted for a window. At the entrance  story  or  at
  the  roof  level  a sash door, such as described in section thirty-five,
  opening to the outer air may be substituted for such window.
    5. In a dwelling occupied by two families or less on every story:
    a. If such dwelling is three stories or less in height, there  may  be
  provided  for  any stair, in lieu of windows, a stairwell sixteen inches
  or more in clear width extending from the entrance story to the roof.
    b. If such dwelling is a class A dwelling and is two stories  or  less
  in  height,  there  may be provided for any stair, in lieu of windows, a
  stairwell six inches or more in clear width. For the  purposes  of  this
  paragraph  a  section  of  a  class  A multiple dwelling may be deemed a
  separate multiple dwelling.
    c. If such dwelling is two stories in height and has no public hall on
  the first story, no stairwell or stair windows need be provided.






   § 149. Public halls. 1. Every public hall shall be everywhere at least
  three feet in clear width.
    2.  Every  public  hall  shall  be  completely enclosed with fireproof
  floor, ceiling and walls, and, in dwellings erected under plans filed in
  the department after September first, nineteen hundred  fifty-one,  such
  hall  shall  be  separated  from  every stair by fireproof partitions or
  walls. All doors and their assemblies opening from such hall  or  stairs
  shall  be  fireproof,  with the doors self-closing and without transoms,
  except that in a dwelling three stories or less in  height  occupied  by
  not  more  than four families on each story, or in a class A dwelling or
  any section thereof two stories or less in height, any such  hall  which
  furnishes access to only one stair need not be separated from such stair
  by  any  partition  or  door  and  the  walls  of  a  public hall may be
  fire-retarded and the floors may be provided with three inches  or  more
  of  incombustible deafening materials between the beams instead of being
  fireproof.
    3. Except in dwellings three stories or less in height and occupied by
  two families  or  less  on  every  story,  and  except  as  provided  in
  subdivisions  four  to  seven inclusive, every public hall shall have at
  least one window opening directly upon a street or upon a lawful yard or
  court. There shall be such a window at the end of each such hall and  at
  right angles to its length, with an additional window in each forty feet
  of  hall  or  fraction thereof beyond the first sixty feet from such end
  window; or the hall shall have one window opening directly upon a street
  or upon a lawful yard or court in every forty  feet  of  its  length  or
  fraction thereof measured from one end of the hall.
    4.  When the length of any recess or return off a public hall does not
  exceed twice the width of such recess or  return,  no  window  shall  be
  required  therein. But whenever the length of a recess or return exceeds
  twice its width, there shall be an additional window or windows  meeting
  the requirements for a separate public hall. No entrance hall shall have
  a return or recess which exceeds in length twice its width.
    5.  The  foregoing  provisions of this section with regard to lighting
  and ventilation shall not apply to a  vestibule  or  other  public  hall
  which  serves  as  a means of access from one or more apartments opening
  thereon to a  fire-stair  or  fire-tower  meeting  the  requirements  of
  section  one  hundred  forty-four  if  such  vestibule or public hall is
  lighted and ventilated as required for fireproof dwellings  by  sections
  thirty-seven and one hundred seven.
    6.  The  foregoing  provisions of this section with regard to lighting
  and ventilation shall not apply to that  portion  of  an  entrance  hall
  between  the  first  flight  of  stairs  and  the  entrance provided the
  entrance door contains five square feet or more  of  glazed  surface  or
  such  entrance  hall  does  not  extend  from  the outer entrance of the
  dwelling more than sixty feet.
    7. A passenger elevator vestibule not exceeding in  length  twice  the
  parallel length of the elevator shaft or shafts opening into it need not
  be equipped with a window if it conforms to the requirements of sections
  thirty-seven  and  one  hundred  seven  for  public  halls  in fireproof
  multiple dwellings. Every  door  and  its  assembly  separating  such  a
  vestibule  from  any  public  hall connected with a stair, fire-stair or
  fire-tower shall be fireproof, with the  door  self-closing  and  glazed
  with  good  quality  wire glass ten square feet or more in area. No such
  door shall be kept open by any device whatever.
    8. Any part of a public hall that is shut off from any other  part  of
  such hall by a door or doors shall be deemed a separate hall.


   §  150. Cellar and basement stairs. 1. Except as otherwise provided in
  this section, there shall be no inside stair communicating  between  the
  lowest  cellar or the lowest story, if there be no cellar, and the floor
  next above, but any stair communicating between  such  floors  shall  be
  located  outside  the  dwelling  and if enclosed shall be fireproof in a
  fireproof enclosure with fireproof doors and door assemblies,  with  the
  doors self-closing, at all openings.
    2. This provision, however, shall not apply to any stair not extending
  through  more  than  one  story and leading from an entrance hall to the
  upper stories where the walls enclosing  such  hall  are  fireproof  and
  unpierced  except  for openings to stairs, elevators, apartments, public
  reception rooms, professional offices and the outer  air.  In  no  event
  shall  there  be  any  other opening from such an entrance hall, and all
  apartments and such professional  offices  opening  therefrom  shall  be
  entirely  separated  from  any  space  within such dwelling used for any
  other purposes by fireproof walls which shall be  unpierced  except  for
  means  of  egress  into  the  entrance  hall.  The  provisions  of  this
  subdivision shall  not  apply  to  openings  which  are  protected  with
  fireproof   vestibules.   Any   such  vestibule  shall  have  a  minimum
  superficial floor area of fifty square feet and its maximum  area  shall
  not   exceed  seventy-five  square  feet.  It  shall  be  enclosed  with
  incombustible partitions having a fire-resistive rating of three  hours.
  The  floor  and ceiling of such vestibule shall also be of incombustible
  material having a fire-resistive rating of at least three  hours.  There
  shall  be  two  doors  to  provide access from the entrance hall and any
  other space not used for  openings  to  stairs,  elevators,  apartments,
  public  reception  rooms  and the outer air. Each such door shall have a
  fire-resistive rating of one and one-half hours and  shall  be  provided
  with a device to prevent the opening of one door until the other door is
  entirely  closed. One of these doors shall swing into the vestibule from
  the entrance hall and the other shall  swing  from  the  vestibule  into
  space  which  it  serves.    Such  vestibule shall also be equipped with
  sprinklers and  with  an  independent  exhaust  duct  having  a  minimum
  cross-sectional  area  of  one hundred forty-four square inches for each
  one thousand cubic feet, or fraction thereof, of air content,  and  such
  exhaust duct shall not be connected with any other ventilating system.
    3.  In dwellings three stories or less in height which are occupied by
  two families or less on every story, any stair leading to the cellar may
  be located inside the dwelling provided it  is  entirely  enclosed  with
  fireproof walls and with fireproof doors and door assemblies at both the
  cellar level and the story above, with the doors self-closing.
    4. The provisions of subdivision one shall not prohibit or apply to an
  inside  stair extending from a space used for commercial purposes in the
  cellar or lowest story to a store on the story next above, provided such
  stair is of incombustible materials,  has  closed  risers,  is  enclosed
  between  the  two  lowest  floors  with  walls  having a three-hour fire
  resistive rating and has fireproof doors and door assemblies at top  and
  bottom,  with the doors self-closing, and provided such commercial space
  in the cellar or lowest story is  completely  enclosed  with  partitions
  having  a  fire-resistive  rating  of at least two hours and there is no
  opening between the store on the story next above and any entrance  hall
  or other public hall or public portion of the dwelling.




   §  151.  Spaces under stairs. 1. It shall be unlawful to have a closet
  of any kind under any public stair.
    2. The space beneath every stair from the foot of the stair to a point
  where the soffit is four feet or more above the floor shall be  entirely
  enclosed with unpierced fire-retarded partitions. Such enclosure beneath
  a  flight  of public stairs leading from the entrance story to the story
  next above shall be fireproof.
    3. Any unenclosed portion of the space  beneath  a  flight  of  public
  stairs  leading from the entrance story to the story next above shall be
  left entirely open and kept clear and free from encumbrance.






   §  152.  Fire-stopping.  1. In every wall where wooden furring is used
  every course of masonry from the under side to  the  top  of  any  floor
  beams  shall  project a distance of at least two inches beyond each face
  of the wall that is not on the outside of  the  dwelling;  and  whenever
  floor  beams  run  parallel  to a wall and wooden furring is used, every
  such beam shall always be kept at least two inches away from  the  wall,
  and  the  space between the beams and the wall shall be built up solidly
  with brickwork from the under side to the top of the floor beams.
    2. Whenever a wall is studded off, the space between an inside face of
  the wall and the studding at any  floor  level  shall  be  fire-stopped.
  Every  space  between  beams  directly over a studded-off space shall be
  fire-stopped by covering the bottom of the beams  with  metal  lath  and
  plaster and placing a loose fill of incombustible material at least four
  inches  thick  on  the  plaster between the beams, or hollow-burned clay
  tile or gypsum plaster partition blocks, at least four inches  thick  in
  either  case  and  supported by cleats, shall be used to fill the spaces
  between beams.
    3. Partitions which are not parallel with the  wood  floor  beams  and
  which  separate  one  apartment  or suite from another or any part of an
  apartment or suite from a public hall or  other  part  of  the  dwelling
  outside  the  apartment  or  suite  shall  be  filled  in  solidly  with
  incombustible material between the floor beams from  the  plate  of  the
  partition below to the full depth of the floor beams.
    4.  If a dwelling is within ten feet of another non-fireproof building
  or of a side lot line, such dwelling shall have its  eaves  or  cornices
  built up solidly with masonry.
    5.  The  wooden frames in any cornice on any row of buildings shall be
  separated between buildings by a complete fire-stop.
    6. Every space between stair  carriages  of  any  non-fireproof  stair
  shall  be fire-stopped by a header beam at top and bottom. Where a stair
  run is not all in one room or open space, the stair carriages shall have
  an intermediate firestop, so located as to cut off communication between
  portions of the stair in different rooms or open spaces.  The  underside
  and stringers of every unenclosed stair of combustible material shall be
  fire-retarded.
    7.  All  partitions required to be fire-retarded shall be fire-stopped
  with   incombustible   material   at   floors,   ceilings   and   roofs.
  Fire-stopping  over  partitions  shall  extend  from  the ceiling to the
  underside of any roofing above. Any space between the top of a partition
  and the underside of roof boarding shall be completely fire-stopped.






   §   160.   Water-closets.   Water-closet   compartments   in  class  B
  non-fireproof  multiple  dwellings  shall  comply  with  the  applicable
  provisions of section seventy-six.


   §  161.  Application of article five-A. The provisions of this article
  shall apply to garden-type maisonette dwelling  projects  erected  under
  plans  filed  with the department on or after April eighteenth, nineteen
  hundred fifty-four. They shall apply to all such dwellings unless  their
  application  is  expressly  limited  to dwellings of a particular class.
  They shall apply in addition  to,  and  not  in  substitution  for,  the
  provisions  of  article  three.  Such dwellings need not comply with the
  provisions of sections  twenty-eight,  thirty-five,  thirty-six,  fifty,
  fifty-four, and sixty-five, or with articles four, five, six or seven of
  this chapter, but such dwellings shall comply with all of the provisions
  of  the  building  code applicable to residential buildings of this type
  and kind. A garden-type maisonette dwelling project, which is erected in
  accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter for  fireproof
  or  non-fireproof  dwellings  other  than the provisions of this article
  five-A, shall not be required to comply  with  the  provisions  of  this
  article.


   §  162.  Single  ownership. The owner of any site or plot upon which a
  garden-type maisonette dwelling project is proposed to be erected  shall
  execute  and  file  in the office of the recording officer in the county
  where deeds of conveyances are recorded an instrument in  writing  which
  shall  declare  that,  so  long  as  any of the buildings proposed to be
  erected remain standing, a conveyance of  any  part  or  parts  of  such
  project  shall,  thereupon, cause all the buildings on such site or plot
  to be and become unlawful  structures,  and  any  prior  certificate  of
  occupancy  issued  for  such  structures  shall  thereupon  become void.
  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the sale of any part
  of such project, provided, however, that the part which is  so  conveyed
  and  the remaining part of the project shall be made to comply to all of
  the applicable provisions of this chapter.






   §  163.  Construction and arrangement. Garden-type maisonette dwelling
  projects may be erected on condition that they comply with the following
  provisions:
    1. The  dwelling  units  in  such  projects,  together,  or  in  their
  aggregate,  do  not exceed in superficial area thirty-five per centum of
  the area of the site or plot upon which such projects are erected.
    2. The units in such projects do not exceed two stories in height.
    3. Each section contains not more than two apartments in any unit.
    4. Every one or two-family unit is separated from all other such units
  by  an  unpierced  partition   constructed   of   materials   having   a
  fire-resistive  rating  of  at least one hour and such partition extends
  from the first floor above the basement or cellar of the dwelling to the
  top of the roof boards in such manner as to prevent the passage of fire,
  smoke or gases between units.
    5. a. A project section shall  not  be  constructed  of  units  which,
  together,  are  of a greater area than three thousand square feet unless
  divided by unpierced fire walls of masonry or other materials  having  a
  fire-resistive  rating  of  at  least  three  hours.  Such wall shall be
  continuous from the floor of the lowest level of the dwelling to the top
  of the roof boards and be fire-stopped at floors and roof in such manner
  as to prevent the passage of fire, smoke or gas between areas.
    b. Fire walls shall extend at least two feet above the  level  of  the
  finished  roof  or,  in  lieu thereof, where there is a peaked or sloped
  roof, the ceiling of the attic of  all  units  comprising  such  section
  shall  be covered with gypsum plaster-boards three-eighths of an inch in
  thickness or with other materials having the same fire-resistive rating.
    6. The facing of the exterior walls shall be of brick veneer not  less
  than four inches in thickness or may be of one or a combination of other
  materials;  and  the interior facing of such walls shall be covered with
  one-half-inch thick plaster boards and three-eighths-inch  thick  sanded
  gypsum  plaster or a combination of other materials which, when combined
  with the exterior materials shall have a  fire-resistive  rating  of  at
  least one hour.
    7.  Cellar  ceilings  throughout  shall be covered with gypsum plaster
  boards three-eighths of an inch in thickness  or  with  other  materials
  having  the same fire resistive rating. A heating plant located within a
  section shall be completely enclosed with incombustible materials having
  a fire resistive rating  of  at  least  three  hours  and  all  openings
  therefrom  to  other  parts  of  the  dwelling  shall  be  equipped with
  fire-proof doors and assemblies with the doors self closing.
    8.  Concealed  vertical  and  horizontal  draft  openings   shall   be
  fire-stopped with incombustible materials.






   §  170.  Application  of article six and other provisions to converted
  dwellings.
    The provisions of this article shall apply to converted dwellings  and
  to  such  dwellings  only.  They  shall apply to all converted dwellings
  unless  their  application  is  expressly  limited  to  dwellings  of  a
  particular  class.  The following enumerated articles and sections shall
  also apply to all converted dwellings unless so limited:
  Article 1.   Introductory provisions; definitions.
          2.   Miscellaneous application provisions.
          7-a. Temporary provisions.
          8.   Requirements and remedies.
          9.   Registry of names and service of papers.
          10.  Prostitution.
          11.  Laws repealed; saving clause; legislative intent; effect.
  Sec. 28.     Two or more buildings on same lot
       29.     Painting of courts and shafts
       31.     Size of rooms--- subdivision six
       35.     Entrance doors and lights
       37.     Artificial hall lighting
       52.     Stairs
       55.     Wainscoting
       56.     Frame buildings and extensions
       57.     Bells; mail receptacles
       58.     Incombustible materials
       59.     Bakeries and fat boiling
       60.     Motor vehicle storage
       61.     Business uses
       62.     Parapets, guard railings and wires--- subdivision two
       75.     Water supply
       76.     Water-closet and bath accommodations
       77.     Plumbing and drainage
       78.     Repairs
       79.     Heating
       80.     Cleanliness
       81.     Receptacles for waste matter
       83.     Janitor or housekeeper






   §  170-a.    Notwithstanding  any  other  provision of this chapter, a
  dwelling, other than a frame dwelling, three stories or less  in  height
  erected after April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine as a one or
  two-family  dwelling  may  be  converted  to  a  multiple dwelling to be
  occupied by not  more  than  three  families  in  all,  with  a  maximum
  occupancy  of two families on each floor in a two story building and one
  family on each floor in a three story building,  provided  however  that
  all  the  provisions  of  this  article  are  complied with and provided
  further that
    1. No part of such dwelling shall be used for business purposes.
    2. No part of  such  dwelling  shall  be  arranged,  designed  for  or
  occupied by roomers, boarders or lodgers.
    3.  The  public hall or stair partitions and soffit of stairs shall be
  fire-retarded and said partitions fire-stopped. The  apartment  entrance
  doors  and  door  assemblies  in  such  hall  shall  be  fire-proof  and
  self-closing.
    4. The required stairs shall comply with the provisions of subdivision
  three of section fifty-two of this chapter.
    5. No door opening  shall  be  permitted  from  a  garage  within  the
  building to the stair hall or public hall. However, any other opening to
  the residential portion shall be provided with a fire-proof self-closing
  door, and the door assemblies shall be fire-proof.
    6.  The  cellar shall not be used for any purpose other than household
  storage and mechanical equipment or appliances, and the  cellar  ceiling
  shall be fire-retarded.




   §  171.  Alterations.  1.  A  building,  other  than a frame building,
  originally occupied as  a  one-family  or  two-family  dwelling  may  be
  altered  to  a  converted  dwelling  if its bulk and volume has not been
  increased since April eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine,  and  if
  it is converted in conformity with the other provisions of this article.
    2.  Except  as  permitted  in  subdivision  nine  of  section nine and
  subdivision  six  of  section  one  hundred  seventy-two,  it  shall  be
  unlawful:
    a.  To  increase  the  height  or  number  of stories of any converted
  dwelling or to increase the height or number of stories of any  building
  in converting it to a multiple dwelling.
    b. To reduce the room or window area of any converted dwelling or make
  any  other  alteration  therein  if such alteration decreases the light,
  ventilation, fire protection or sanitation thereof.
    c. To convert to a multiple dwelling any dwelling  which  exceeds  six
  stories in height unless it was occupied as a multiple dwelling on April
  fifteenth, nineteen hundred thirty;
    d.  To convert any dwelling to a class A multiple dwelling occupied by
  five families or more upon any story unless such dwelling  is  fireproof
  or is converted in conformity with the requirements of subdivision three
  or  was  occupied  as  a  class  A multiple dwelling on April fifteenth,
  nineteen hundred thirty.
    e. To combine any  converted  dwelling  with  another  building  which
  exceeds six stories in height.
    f. To enlarge or extend any converted dwelling so as to exceed by more
  than  twenty-five  per  centum  the  area which such dwelling had on any
  floor at the time of its conversion, except as provided in paragraph h.
    g. To convert to a multiple dwelling any  dwelling  not  so  converted
  before  April  fifteenth, nineteen hundred thirty, if after such date it
  has been increased  in  number  of  stories  or  combined  with  another
  building  more  than six stories in height or enlarged or extended so as
  to exceed by more than twenty-five per centum the area of such  dwelling
  or its area on any floor as shown by the plan approved by the department
  before its erection, except as provided in paragraph h.
    h.  Paragraphs  f  and g shall not apply to, or be deemed to prohibit,
  any rear  extension  of  the  first  story  of  any  converted  dwelling
  permitted under the provisions of section one hundred seventy-two.
    3.  Converted  dwellings six stories or less in height may be combined
  if such dwellings when combined conform  to  the  requirements  of  this
  subdivision.
    a. No frame building shall be a part of any such combination.
    b.  Every  entrance  hall,  stair  hall,  public hall, stair and stair
  enclosures shall be constructed of fireproof  materials  throughout  and
  every  door  opening therefrom and door assembly shall be fireproof with
  the door self-closing and without transoms. Every public hall  shall  be
  at  least three feet six inches in clear width and enclosed with masonry
  walls not less than eight inches in thickness.  Every  stair  and  stair
  hall  shall  be  constructed  and  arranged  throughout  as  provided in
  sections thirty-five, thirty-six, fifty and fifty-two, and  as  provided
  in  sections  one  hundred two, one hundred five and one hundred six for
  fireproof dwellings erected after  April  eighteenth,  nineteen  hundred
  twenty-nine,  and  shall  be at least three feet in clear width with all
  landings at floor levels at least three feet six inches in clear  width.
  In  every combination of three or more such dwellings, fire-stairs shall
  be located so that there shall be horizontal access in the  public  hall
  from  every  apartment  to two or more fire-stairs, one or more of which
  shall be within fifty feet horizontally in the line of travel of one  or
  more  required  means  of  egress  from  such  apartment.   Every stair,


 fire-stair and fire-tower shall extend to the roof through  a  fireproof
  bulkhead  constructed  in  compliance with the provisions of section one
  hundred four for fireproof multiple dwellings.
    c.  The  ceiling of the cellar, or of the lowest story, if there be no
  cellar, shall be fire-retarded.
    d. There shall be at least two means of egress from every apartment or
  suite of rooms containing three or more living rooms. Such  means  shall
  be remote from each other, with the first means opening to a public hall
  which  is  connected  with a stair not more than fifty feet distant from
  such means of egress. The second  means  of  egress  shall  be  directly
  accessible to a fire-tower or fire-stair, or to an outside fire-escape.
    e.  No  window  to  the  outer  air shall be required opening from any
  public hall, vestibule, stair, or stair hall  artificially  lighted  and
  ventilated  mechanically  as  provided  in section one hundred seven for
  fireproof multiple dwellings. If any  windows  are  provided,  they  and
  their  assemblies  shall be fireproof and glazed with wire glass, and if
  such windows are used in lieu of mechanical ventilation  and  artificial
  lighting,  they shall also be arranged as provided for stairs and public
  halls  in  non-fireproof  multiple   dwellings   erected   after   April
  eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine.
    f. No elevator shall be required, but should one be installed it shall
  conform to the provisions of section fifty-one relating to elevators and
  section one hundred five for fireproof dwellings.
    g.  None  of  the  combined dwellings shall be required to comply with
  sections one hundred seventy-eight, one hundred eighty-five, one hundred
  eighty-seven, one hundred eighty-eight and one hundred  ninety  or  with
  subdivisions one, two and three of section one hundred eighty-nine.
    h.  When  any  business  is  conducted  in any portion of dwellings so
  combined, the ceilings and walls of such portion shall be  fire-retarded
  and  every  door  and  door  assembly  shall  be fireproof with the door
  self-closing.
    4. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit  a  combination
  of class A and B occupancy in any converted dwelling. If more than fifty
  per  centum  of  the  rooms  therein are used for class A occupancy, the
  dwelling shall be deemed  a  class  A  dwelling,  otherwise  a  class  B
  dwelling.






   §  172.  Yards  and  courts. 1. Except as provided in subdivision two,
  there shall be a yard thirteen feet or more in depth across  the  entire
  lot  in  the  rear  of every converted dwelling, or an outer court three
  feet or more in width which alone or with any open space at the rear  of
  the dwelling equals the required area of such a yard.
    2.  On  a  corner  lot there shall be a yard ten feet or more in depth
  across the entire lot. Such yard shall be thirteen feet or more in depth
  for any part of the yard which is more than sixty  feet  from  any  side
  street  bounding  such  lot. The provisions of this subdivision need not
  apply to a dwelling situated on a corner lot if (a) the required windows
  of all living rooms in such a dwelling open directly upon a  street  (b)
  the  height  and bulk of the dwelling are not increased and (c) the bulk
  of the dwelling above the first story is not increased.
    3. The bottom of a yard may be as high as but  not  above  the  second
  tier of beams, provided the first story is used exclusively for business
  purposes  and  there  is no living room in or below the first story; and
  provided also that whenever any means of egress from the  upper  stories
  opens  into  such  yard, a portion of the yard ten feet or more in depth
  and open from the ground up shall be  maintained  at  the  rear  of  any
  extension of the dwelling.
    4.  In  the  rear  of  every  converted  dwelling  on  a corner lot an
  extension of the dwelling over the yard may be built up  to  the  second
  tier  of  beams,  provided such extension does not obstruct any required
  means of egress from the upper stories.
    5. Except as provided in subdivisions three  and  four,  the  required
  yard  or  court and unoccupied space shall be open and unobstructed from
  the ground up.
    6. The restrictions of this section and those of subdivisions one  and
  two  of  section  one  hundred  seventy-one in regard to bulk and volume
  shall not apply to extensions erected before April thirteenth,  nineteen
  hundred  forty,  in  conformity  with  the  provision  of a local zoning
  resolution which restricted bulk and volume.
    7. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to permit extensions in the
  yards or courts of any converted dwelling,  or  to  permit  business  or
  commercial  uses therein, which may be contrary to any local zoning law,
  ordinance or regulation.




   §  173. Windows in rooms. 1. Except as provided in subdivision four of
  section one hundred seventy-seven every living room shall  have  one  or
  more windows opening directly upon a street or upon a yard or court with
  dimensions   conforming  to  those  specified  in  section  one  hundred
  seventy-two, or upon an inner court or shaft three feet nine  inches  or
  more in width and eight feet or more in length.
    2.  Such windows shall be so located as to light properly all portions
  of the room and in each room shall have an aggregate glazed area  of  at
  least  one-tenth of the floor area of the room, unless in the opinion of
  the department such room is already adequately lighted  and  ventilated.
  The  top  of at least one window in each living room shall be seven feet
  or more above the floor except when such room is in the basement  or  on
  the top story, in which case the top of at least one window shall be six
  feet  or  more above the floor. Every such window shall be twelve square
  feet or more in area, and shall be so constructed that one-half or  more
  of  its  area  may  be  opened.  However, such window need not be twelve
  square feet in area provided that each  room  shall  have  an  aggregate
  glazed  window area of at least one-eighth of the superficial floor area
  of the room.
    3. Whenever a basement conforming to  the  provisions  of  subdivision
  four  of  section  one hundred seventy-seven is permitted to be occupied
  for  living  purposes,  every  living   room,   bathroom,   water-closet
  compartment,  kitchen  and  cooking space therein shall have one or more
  windows opening directly upon a street; or upon a yard which is at every
  point at least fifteen feet in depth and, above the window sill level of
  the first story above the basement, at least  twenty  feet;  or  upon  a
  court  at  least two feet in width and extending the entire depth of the
  lot from the street to the yard. All such  yards  and  courts  shall  be
  measured  at  the  ground  level  from the lot line to the building line
  opposite on the same lot. The windows in each such room  shall  have  an
  aggregate  glazed area of at least one-eighth of the total floor area of
  the room, and in no event less than twelve square feet. The top edge  of
  the  glazed  area of every window shall be nine inches or more below the
  finished ceiling and one foot or more above the level of  the  adjoining
  ground.  Every such window shall be so constructed that one-half or more
  of its area may be opened, and shall be  so  located  as  to  light  and
  ventilate adequately all portions of the room.
    4. Any room on a top story may be lighted and ventilated by a skylight
  of  the  dimensions  specified  for  windows  and  arranged  to  provide
  ventilating openings of six square feet or more. Such a  skylight  shall
  be  accepted  in  lieu of a window. Nothing in this subdivision shall be
  construed to prohibit the installation of a skylight without ventilating
  openings of six square  feet  or  more,  provided,  however,  that  such
  skylight  shall  be equipped with at least one hundred forty-four square
  inches of ventilation and provided that the glazed area of such skylight
  together with the glazed area of any existing window shall be  not  less
  than one-eighth the superficial floor area of such room.
    5.  When required by the department transoms, or louvres, or partition
  sash to private halls or to adjoining rooms in the same apartment  shall
  be  provided  to  secure  thorough  ventilation,  but no such transom or
  louvres or partition sash shall be required in rooms having two  windows
  opening  to the outer air if each window contains at least twelve square
  feet of area nor in rooms having a mullioned window  with  an  aggregate
  area of at least twenty-four square feet.






   §  174.  Size  of  rooms. Every living room shall contain five hundred
  fifty cubic feet or more of air, shall be at least six feet wide at  its
  narrowest  part  and  shall  have a minimum height of seven feet if such
  room is in the basement, of seven feet at all points more than six  feet
  from the front of such room if it is on the top story, and of eight feet
  if  on  any other story, except that whenever a basement conforms to the
  provisions of subdivision four of section one hundred seventy-seven  the
  living  rooms  in  such  basement  may have a minimum height of six feet
  eight inches from  the  finished  floor  to  the  bottom  of  any  beams
  projecting below the level of the finished basement ceiling and of seven
  feet to the ceiling between such beams.






   §  175.  Alcoves.  1.  Every  alcove, except a cooking space or foyer,
  shall be deemed a  living  room  and  shall  open  into  an  immediately
  adjoining  living  room  which opens directly on a yard or street and in
  buildings not over two stories in height,  such  living  room  may  open
  directly  on  an  outer  court or on a court, not less than four feet in
  width, extending from street to yard. Such an alcove shall be separately
  lighted and ventilated, and of such size as provided  for  other  living
  rooms,  unless it has an opening at least thirty-two and one-half square
  feet or more in area opening into a living room immediately adjoining.
    2. No part of any room shall be enclosed or subdivided  at  any  time,
  wholly or in part, by a curtain, portiere, fixed or movable partition or
  any  other  device  unless each enclosed or subdivided part meets all of
  the requirements for a separate living room or a lawful alcove.






   §  176.  Cooking  spaces.  If space exists or is provided for cooking,
  such space shall comply with the provisions of section thirty-three.






   §  177. Rooms in basements and cellars. 1. No room in any cellar shall
  be occupied for living purposes, except as provided in  subdivision  six
  of section thirty-four or in subdivision three of this section.
    2. A room occupied for living purposes in a basement shall comply with
  the  requirements  of sections one hundred seventy-three and one hundred
  seventy-four except as provided in subdivision four of this section.
    3. Where more than sixty per centum of the height of a cellar is below
  the level of the curb on which a dwelling faces, but the floor  of  such
  cellar  is  approximately at the level of the yard thereof and such yard
  is not less than thirty feet in depth at every point, the department may
  permit the use of such cellar for living purposes if it shall deem  such
  cellar adequately lighted and ventilated and habitable.  When permission
  is granted such a cellar shall be deemed a basement.
    4.  The  basement  of  a  converted  dwelling  may  be used for living
  purposes without meeting the requirements of subdivisions one and two of
  section one hundred seventy-three  if  such  dwelling  meets  the  other
  applicable  requirements  of such section and of this chapter, including
  the following:
    a. Such a dwelling shall  not  exceed  three  stories,  including  the
  basement, in height.
    b.  It  shall  be  occupied  by not more than one family on any story,
  including the basement. For the purposes of this  subdivision  a  family
  shall not be deemed to include any boarders, lodgers or roomers.
    c.  It  shall  have  at  least  one  court  two  feet or more in width
  extending across the entire depth of the lot  from  the  street  to  the
  yard.
    d. The department shall deem the basement to be adequately lighted and
  ventilated, free of any dampness, sanitary and habitable.
    e.  There  shall  be  a  separate  water-closet compartment within the
  basement apartment conforming to the provisions of section two hundred.
    f. Such dwelling shall not be required  to  comply  with  section  one
  hundred  eighty-seven if a scuttle is provided conforming to section one
  hundred eighty-eight.
    (g) This subdivision is applicable only to buildings noted, classified
  or recorded as such converted  dwellings  in  the  department  prior  to
  January first, nineteen hundred sixty-six.
    5.  Notwithstanding  any  provisions of this section or of subdivision
  five of section three hundred, an apartment or room in  a  cellar  which
  was  occupied for living purposes at any time on or after October first,
  nineteen hundred fifty-two may thereafter continue to  be  occupied  for
  such   purposes  until  July  first,  nineteen  hundred  sixty-seven  in
  accordance with the conditions imposed by subdivision  five  of  section
  two hundred sixteen.






   §  178. Lighting and ventilation of stairs. Where the stair and public
  halls are not provided on each story with windows opening to  a  street,
  yard  or  court,  a  skylight  equipped with ridge ventilators having an
  opening of forty square inches or more shall be  provided  in  the  roof
  over  the  stair,  except  as  otherwise  provided  in  paragraph  g  of
  subdivision three of section one hundred seventy-one. The glazed roof of
  such skylight shall not be less in area than nine square feet  nor  less
  than two feet in its least dimension, provided the ventilating and glass
  areas in such skylight are not less than herein required; except that in
  dwellings   converted   before   April   eighteenth,   nineteen  hundred
  twenty-nine, where a skylight smaller than  such  prescribed  dimensions
  was  in  existence on such date, no structural change shall be required,
  but a ventilating skylight fitting the existing skylight opening in  the
  roof beams shall be deemed sufficient.






   §  179.  Privacy.  In  every apartment of three or more rooms in every
  class A converted dwelling there shall be access to  every  living  room
  without  passing  through  any bedroom, and to at least one water-closet
  compartment within the apartment  from  every  bedroom  without  passing
  through any other bedroom.






   §  185.  Cellar  ceilings.  1.  Except  as  provided in paragraph g of
  subdivision three of section one hundred seventy-one, the ceiling of the
  cellar, or of  the  lowest  story  if  there  be  no  cellar,  shall  be
  fire-retarded  unless  such  dwelling is three stories or less in height
  and the ceiling has already been plastered in a manner  satisfactory  to
  the department.
    2.  In  lieu  of  the requirements set forth in subdivision 1. hereof,
  buildings existing  November  first,  nineteen  hundred  forty-nine,  in
  cities having a population between five hundred thousand and one million
  having  three  stories or less in height and containing no more than six
  families or eight roomers or lodgers, with no  human  occupancy  in  the
  cellar or basement may comply by:
    I.  providing  two means of egress to any area of the third floor used
  for human occupancy; and
    II. providing approved safety controls on all fuel burning devices  in
  basement or cellar; and
    III.  fire-stopping  of  all openings in cellar or basement ceiling or
  openings leading to the floors above from cellar or  basement  such  as,
  but  not  limited  to, stud channels, openings around conduits, soil and
  water pipes, ducts, pipe chases, and by complying with either  IV  or  V
  hereof;
    IV. providing an approved sprinkler system throughout entire cellar or
  basement area; or
    V. a. providing fire-retarded ceilings at the first floor level; and
    b.  providing  sprinkler  head  or  heads above each hot water heater,
  furnace and all other fuel burning devices in basement or cellar; and
    c. fire-stopping all the interior entrances to any area of  the  third
  floor   used  for  human  occupancy  at  the  second  floor  level  with
  fire-retarded partitions, or equal  construction,  and  a  fire-retarded
  self-closing door and assembly.






   § 186. Extension roofs. The under-surface of the roof of any extension
  shall  be  fire-retarded  or sprinklered unless such ceiling has already
  been plastered in a manner satisfactory to the department.






   §  187.  Egress.  1.  Except as provided in paragraph g of subdivision
  three of section one hundred seventy-one, egress from every apartment on
  each story shall be provided as follows:
    a. If a dwelling is two stories or less in height, or if it  is  three
  stories including a basement in height and conforms to the conditions of
  subdivision four of section one hundred seventy-seven, a single means of
  egress from each story to the street shall be sufficient.
    b.  Every  other  dwelling  shall have either two independent means of
  egress or one means of egress equipped with a sprinkler system.
    c. At least one means of egress shall be  a  stair  extending  to  and
  through  the  roof  by  a bulkhead, except that a scuttle may be used in
  lieu of a bulkhead if the dwelling does not exceed a basement and  three
  other  stories  in  height, or if it does not exceed a basement and four
  other stories in height and is occupied by not more than two families on
  any story, and except that no bulkhead or scuttle, or  stair  or  ladder
  leading  thereto, shall be required where the roof is a peak roof with a
  pitch of more than fifteen degrees.
    d. Whenever a second means of egress is required, it shall, except  as
  provided in paragraph f, extend from the entrance story to the roof, and
  shall  be  located  eight  feet  or  more from the first means of egress
  unless separated therefrom by a public hall or elevator vestibule.  Such
  second  means  of  egress  shall be directly accessible at each story to
  each apartment without having to pass through the first means of egress.
    e. A required second means of egress  shall  be  either  a  system  of
  outside  fire-escapes,  constructed  and arranged as provided in section
  fifty-three for fire-escapes erected after  April  eighteenth,  nineteen
  hundred  twenty-nine, a fire-stair, a fire-tower or a connection with an
  adjoining dwelling as provided in paragraph f below.
    f. If the department upon the application of the owner shall  deem  it
  feasible  and  so  permit,  the  owner  shall  provide, and at all times
  maintain unobstructed, a first means of egress extending by means  of  a
  stair from the street through a bulkhead to the roof and thence from the
  roof  of  such dwelling to the roof of an adjoining dwelling and through
  such adjoining dwelling to the street and a second means of egress  from
  each  apartment  to  a  room  on the same story or level in an adjoining
  dwelling by means of a balcony. Every such balcony shall comply with the
  requirements for a fire-escape balcony, except that  its  minimum  clear
  width  shall  be  two  feet  instead  of three feet. If at any time such
  access to  the  street  shall  in  the  opinion  of  the  department  be
  obstructed  or  be  otherwise  unsafe  the  department  shall revoke the
  permit, and upon such revocation the owner  shall  provide  one  of  the
  other types of egress permitted in this section.
    g.  When  the  department  shall  find  it  impractical  to  erect  an
  independent fire-escape and shall refuse to permit egress  by  means  of
  balconies  to  an  adjoining  dwelling,  the  department  may permit the
  erection or use of a fire-escape to which the occupants of such dwelling
  have safe, unobstructed access  in  common  with  the  occupants  of  an
  adjoining dwelling.
    h.  Where  a required means of egress leads to a yard less than thirty
  feet in depth, except as provided in paragraph f of subdivision four  of
  section  one hundred seventy-seven, there shall be access from such yard
  to the street through a court or fireproof passage, or to  the  yard  or
  court  of  adjoining  premises  by a gate or door through an intervening
  fence, or, if the department deems such gate or door  impracticable  and
  so  certifies, by a ladder to the top of an intervening fence or wall or
  by such other means as the department may require.
    2. Where a sprinkler system is required such system shall be  equipped
  on  each  story  with one or more automatic sprinkler heads with fusible


 struts which shall be constructed to fuse at a  temperature  not  higher
  than one hundred sixty-five degrees Fahrenheit and all of which shall be
  constructed,  located and arranged in every stair and entrance hall, and
  in  every closet opening therefrom, in such manner as the department may
  require. Such system may be attached to the city water  supply  main  if
  the  normal minimum pressure thereon, measured in pounds per square inch
  at the street level at the point of connection with said  main,  is  not
  less  than  the  number  of  stories  in  the  height  of  the dwelling,
  multiplied by five, plus fifteen. If such  normal  minimum  pressure  is
  less than the required amount or such system is not attached to the city
  water  supply  main, it shall be supplied with water from a tank located
  on the roof of the dwelling of such capacity  and  construction  as  the
  department   may  deem  necessary.    Such  sprinkler  system  shall  be
  maintained continuously in good repair and serviceable condition.






   §  187.  Egress.  1.  Except as provided in paragraph g of subdivision
  three of section one hundred seventy-one, egress from every apartment on
  each story shall be provided as follows:
    a. If a dwelling is two stories or less in height, or if it  is  three
  stories including a basement in height and conforms to the conditions of
  subdivision four of section one hundred seventy-seven, a single means of
  egress from each story to the street shall be sufficient.
    b.  Every  other  dwelling  shall have either two independent means of
  egress or one means of egress equipped with a sprinkler system.
    c. At least one means of egress shall be  a  stair  extending  to  and
  through  the  roof  by  a bulkhead, except that a scuttle may be used in
  lieu of a bulkhead if the dwelling does not exceed a basement and  three
  other  stories  in  height, or if it does not exceed a basement and four
  other stories in height and is occupied by not more than two families on
  any story, and except that no bulkhead or scuttle, or  stair  or  ladder
  leading  thereto, shall be required where the roof is a peak roof with a
  pitch of more than fifteen degrees.
    d. Whenever a second means of egress is required, it shall, except  as
  provided in paragraph f, extend from the entrance story to the roof, and
  shall  be  located  eight  feet  or  more from the first means of egress
  unless separated therefrom by a public hall or elevator vestibule.  Such
  second  means  of  egress  shall be directly accessible at each story to
  each apartment without having to pass through the first means of egress.
    e. A required second means of egress  shall  be  either  a  system  of
  outside  fire-escapes,  constructed  and arranged as provided in section
  fifty-three for fire-escapes erected after  April  eighteenth,  nineteen
  hundred  twenty-nine, a fire-stair, a fire-tower or a connection with an
  adjoining dwelling as provided in paragraph f below.
    f. If the department upon the application of the owner shall  deem  it
  feasible  and  so  permit,  the  owner  shall  provide, and at all times
  maintain unobstructed, a first means of egress extending by means  of  a
  stair from the street through a bulkhead to the roof and thence from the
  roof  of  such dwelling to the roof of an adjoining dwelling and through
  such adjoining dwelling to the street and a second means of egress  from
  each  apartment  to  a  room  on the same story or level in an adjoining
  dwelling by means of a balcony. Every such balcony shall comply with the
  requirements for a fire-escape balcony, except that  its  minimum  clear
  width  shall  be  two  feet  instead  of three feet. If at any time such
  access to  the  street  shall  in  the  opinion  of  the  department  be
  obstructed  or  be  otherwise  unsafe  the  department  shall revoke the
  permit, and upon such revocation the owner  shall  provide  one  of  the
  other types of egress permitted in this section.
    g.  When  the  department  shall  find  it  impractical  to  erect  an
  independent fire-escape and shall refuse to permit egress  by  means  of
  balconies  to  an  adjoining  dwelling,  the  department  may permit the
  erection or use of a fire-escape to which the occupants of such dwelling
  have safe, unobstructed access  in  common  with  the  occupants  of  an
  adjoining dwelling.
    h.  Where  a required means of egress leads to a yard less than thirty
  feet in depth, except as provided in paragraph f of subdivision four  of
  section  one hundred seventy-seven, there shall be access from such yard
  to the street through a court or fireproof passage, or to  the  yard  or
  court  of  adjoining  premises  by a gate or door through an intervening
  fence, or, if the department deems such gate or door  impracticable  and
  so  certifies, by a ladder to the top of an intervening fence or wall or
  by such other means as the department may require.
    2. Where a sprinkler system is required such system shall be  equipped
  on  each  story  with one or more automatic sprinkler heads with fusible


 struts which shall be constructed to fuse at a  temperature  not  higher
  than one hundred sixty-five degrees Fahrenheit and all of which shall be
  constructed,  located and arranged in every stair and entrance hall, and
  in  every closet opening therefrom, in such manner as the department may
  require. Such system may be attached to the city water  supply  main  if
  the  normal minimum pressure thereon, measured in pounds per square inch
  at the street level at the point of connection with said  main,  is  not
  less  than  the  number  of  stories  in  the  height  of  the dwelling,
  multiplied by five, plus fifteen. If such  normal  minimum  pressure  is
  less than the required amount or such system is not attached to the city
  water  supply  main, it shall be supplied with water from a tank located
  on the roof of the dwelling of such capacity  and  construction  as  the
  department   may  deem  necessary.    Such  sprinkler  system  shall  be
  maintained continuously in good repair and serviceable condition.






   §  188.  Bulkheads  and scuttles. Except as provided in paragraph g of
  subdivision three of section  one  hundred  seventy-one,  bulkheads  and
  scuttles  shall  conform  to the following provisions: 1. Every required
  bulkhead to and through the roof shall be fireproof  or  constructed  of
  wood  covered with metal on the outside and fire-retarded on the inside,
  and  shall  have  a  fire-retarded  door  and  assembly  with  the  door
  self-closing. Every stair extending through a bulkhead shall have a hand
  rail.
    2.  Every  scuttle  shall  be  at least twenty-one inches in width and
  twenty-eight inches in length, covered on the  outside  with  metal  and
  provided  with  a  stair or a stationary iron ladder leading thereto and
  easily accessible to all occupants of the dwelling. Every scuttle  shall
  be  located in the ceiling of the stair hall on the top story and access
  to the roof through the scuttle shall be direct  and  uninterrupted.  It
  shall  be  unlawful to enclose in any manner the ladder or stair leading
  to a scuttle.
    3. Every bulkhead door or scuttle shall not be self-locking and  shall
  be  fastened  on  the  inside with movable bolts, hooks, or a lock which
  does not require a key to open from the inside of the dwelling.
    4. Where a dwelling has a peak roof with a pitch of more than  fifteen
  degrees,  no  bulkhead  or  scuttle, or stair or ladder leading thereto,
  shall be required.






   §  189.  Stair  and  public  hall  construction. Except as provided in
  paragraph g of subdivision three of  section  one  hundred  seventy-one,
  stairs and public halls shall conform to the following provisions:
    1.  In  a  dwelling  more  than  a basement and three other stories in
  height or occupied by four families or more, the soffit and stringers of
  every stair between the lowest entrance story and the next higher  story
  and  the  walls  and  ceilings  of  every  lowest entrance hall shall be
  fire-retarded and in such dwellings converted on and after  July  first,
  nineteen  hundred  fifty-eight,  all doors opening to such entrance hall
  and stairs, and the door assemblies, shall be fireproof with  the  doors
  self-closing.  In  lieu  of  the  requirements  of  this  subdivision, a
  sprinkler system may be installed in accordance with the  provisions  of
  section one hundred eighty-seven.
    2.  Every  door  opening from any stair, entrance hall or other public
  hall to any other part of the  dwelling  shall  be  self-closing.  Every
  glazed  transom  over  any  such  door  shall be glazed with wire glass.
  Every transom shall be stationary. On and  after  July  first,  nineteen
  hundred  fifty-seven,  every glazed panel or other glazed opening in any
  such door shall be glazed with wire glass.
    3. Every stair, except a basement or cellar stair, shall be  two  feet
  six  inches  or more in clear width. Any wooden stair may be replaced by
  an iron stair of like dimensions. Every entrance hall shall be two  feet
  eight inches or more in clear width.
    4. If the number of rooms in a class B dwelling is increased and there
  are  sixteen  sleeping rooms or more above a basement or, if there be no
  basement, above the main entrance story,  all  partitions  and  ceilings
  enclosing public halls and stairs shall be fire-retarded throughout. All
  doors  opening  to  such  public halls and stairs, and their assemblies,
  shall be fireproof  with  the  doors  self-closing.    Stairs  shall  be
  fireproof  and  shall  extend  from  the  main  entrance story through a
  bulkhead to the roof.
    5. On and  after  July  first,  nineteen  hundred  fifty-seven,  every
  interior  sash, or opening other than a door, in the walls or partitions
  of any stair, entrance hall or  other  public  hall,  and  every  window
  therein  not opening to the outer air, shall be removed and the openings
  closed up with material similar to the adjacent walls.




   §  190.  Cellar  stairs.  1.  Except  as  provided  in  paragraph g of
  subdivision three of section one  hundred  seventy-one,  and  except  as
  otherwise provided in subdivision two hereof, every stair leading from a
  cellar  to  the  floor  above  shall  be  constructed  of  incombustible
  materials, shall have closed risers, shall be completely  enclosed  with
  partitions  of  incombustible  materials  and  shall  be equipped at the
  bottom with a fireproof door and assembly with the door self-closing.
    2. Every existing stair leading from a cellar to the floor above in  a
  converted  dwelling  accepted or approved by the department on or before
  July first, nineteen hundred sixty shall be deemed  in  compliance  with
  this section.






   §  191.  Wainscoting. Wainscoting in any stair or public hall shall be
  removed unless such wainscoting is backed against a  fire-retarded  wall
  or  the  stair or hall is equipped with a sprinkler system conforming to
  the provisions of section one hundred eighty-seven. Where wainscoting is
  removed in order to fire-retard a public hall or stair, such wainscoting
  may be replaced or additional wainscoting may be  applied  to  make  the
  surfaces  of  any new partitions or walls conform to existing partitions
  or walls provided such additional wainscoting is similarly  backed  with
  fire-retarded materials.




   §  192.  Cellar  entrance.  a. If there is a cellar, there shall be an
  independent entrance thereto from outside the dwelling  by  means  of  a
  metal  fire  ladder  or  fireproof  stair  leading  to an opening in the
  outside cellar wall at least two feet six inches in width and  six  feet
  in  height.  Such  entrance  to  the cellar may be through an areaway or
  through a fireproof passageway  leading  directly  to  the  street.  The
  entrance  to  the cellar may be closed off with a grating or doors which
  shall not be locked or bolted unless they can  be  readily  unbolted  or
  unlocked  from  the  inside  without  a  key  and  shall be arranged and
  constructed so as to be readily opened at all times.
    b. In lieu of the requirements set  forth  in  subdivision  a  hereof,
  buildings existing November first, nineteen hundred forty-nine in cities
  having  a  population  between five hundred thousand and one million may
  comply with the following:
    1. shall have an unobstructed entrance through a yard or court from  a
  street:
    (a)  directly  to exterior dwelling entrance with interior entrance to
  basement or cellar direct from said entrance, or from  a  fire  retarded
  public hall or stair landing, and
    (b)  to  one  or  more  cellar or basement walls containing accessible
  windows.
    2. The stairway leading to cellar or basement shall be  enclosed  with
  fire  retarded partitions or equal construction and shall have a minimum
  fire rating of one hour. Said  cellar  or  basement  entrance  shall  be
  equipped with a one hour self-closing fire door assembly.






   §  193.  Frame  buildings.  No  frame  building  shall  be  erected or
  maintained upon the same lot  with  a  dwelling  converted  after  April
  twenty-eighth, nineteen hundred thirty, nor shall any frame building not
  occupied  on  April  thirteenth,  nineteen  hundred forty, as a multiple
  dwelling be altered or converted to such use; except that if  the  walls
  of  a  frame converted dwelling are faced with a veneer of brick and the
  entrance story is occupied by not more than one  family,  such  entrance
  story may be altered so that it may be occupied by two families.


   §  194. Sprinkler heads in rooms. 1. On and after July first, nineteen
  hundred fifty-seven, in every room used for class B occupancy whether in
  a class A or class B non-fireproof converted dwelling,  there  shall  be
  one  or more sprinkler heads. Such sprinkler heads shall be installed in
  accordance  with  the  supplementary  rules  and  regulations   of   the
  department.  This  requirement shall not apply to dwellings which have a
  required second means of egress.
    2. The requirements of this section shall  not  apply  to  a  dwelling
  located within an area designated on the master plan as an area suitable
  for  development  and  redevelopment,  provided  (a)  that the agency in
  charge of such clearance shall have certified to the  department  on  or
  before  February  first,  nineteen  hundred fifty-nine that the dwelling
  will be demolished within one  year  after  the  service  of  notice  of
  violation and (b) that the dwelling is not in violation of any rules and
  regulations  relating  to overoccupancy, egress or fire protection. Such
  temporary exemption  from  the  requirements  of  this  section  may  be
  extended  for  an  additional  period  of  not more than six months upon
  renewal of such certification of demolition and safety.






   §   200.   Water-closets.   Water-closet   compartments  or  bathrooms
  containing water-closets in converted multiple  dwellings  shall  comply
  with the applicable provisions of section seventy-six.






   § 210. Application of article seven and other provisions to tenements.
  Except as provided in section two hundred forty-eight, the provisions of
  this  article  shall  apply only to tenements, as defined in subdivision
  eleven of section  four,  occupied  as  such  before  April  eighteenth,
  nineteen   hundred   twenty-nine.   Unless  in  this  article  otherwise
  specifically prescribed, none of  its  provisions  shall  be  deemed  to
  require  any  structural  alteration in any tenement erected after April
  eleventh, nineteen hundred one and lawfully occupied as  such  on  April
  eighteenth,  nineteen hundred twenty-nine. Nothing in this article shall
  apply to converted dwellings. In addition  to  the  provisions  of  this
  article,  the  following  enumerated articles and sections shall, to the
  extent required therein, apply to tenements:
  Article   1.    Introductory provisions; definitions
            2.    Miscellaneous application provisions
            7-a.  Temporary provisions
            8.    Requirements and remedies
            9.    Registry of names and service of papers
            10.   Prostitution
            11.   Laws repealed; saving clause; legislative intent; effect
  Sec.      28.   Two or more buildings on same lot
            29.   Painting of courts and shafts
            31.   Size of rooms--subdivision six
            33.   Cooking spaces
            34.   Rooms in basements and cellars
            35.   Entrance doors and lights
            37.   Artificial hall lighting
            51.   Shafts, elevators and dumbwaiters
            52.   Stairs
            53.   Fire-escapes
            55.   Wainscoting
            56.   Frame buildings and extensions
            57.   Bells; mail receptacles
            58.   Incombustible materials
            59.   Bakeries and fat boiling
            60.   Motor vehicle storage
            61.   Business uses
            62.   Parapets, guard railings and wires--subdivision two
            75.   Water supply
            76.   Water-closet and bath accommodations
            77.   Plumbing and drainage
            78.   Repairs
            79.   Heating
            80.   Cleanliness
            81.   Receptacles for waste matter
            83.   Janitor or housekeeper






   § 211. Height and bulk. 1. No tenement shall be increased in height so
  that  its  height  shall  exceed  by more than one-half the width of the
  widest street upon which it stands.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  in
  subdivision  four  of  this  section, no non-fireproof tenement shall be
  increased in height so that it shall exceed five  stories,  except  that
  any  tenement  may  be  increased  to  any height permitted for multiple
  dwellings erected after April eighteenth, nineteen hundred  twenty-nine,
  if  such  tenement  conforms to the provisions of this chapter governing
  like multiple dwellings erected after such date.
    2. If there are bulkheads, superstructures or penthouses exceeding ten
  feet in height or exceeding in aggregate area ten per centum of the area
  of the roof, the measurement of height shall be taken to the top of such
  bulkhead, superstructure or penthouse, except that this shall not  apply
  to  elevator  enclosures  not exceeding twenty-three feet in height used
  solely for elevator purposes, nor  to  open  pergolas  or  similar  open
  ornamental treatment of roof-gardens or playgrounds.
    3.  In  a  fireproof  tenement  house  in  which one or more passenger
  elevators are operated, penthouses may be  erected  on  the  main  roof.
  Such  penthouses  shall  be  set  back at least five feet from the front
  walls and ten feet from the rear walls of  the  dwelling  and  at  least
  three  feet  from  any  court  wall.  Such penthouses shall have a clear
  inside height of not less than nine feet from finished floor to finished
  ceiling, and shall not exceed twelve feet in height from the high  point
  of  the  main  roof  to  the  highest point of the penthouse roof.  Such
  penthouses shall not be deemed to affect the measurement  of  height  of
  the  dwelling.  All  such  penthouses shall be entirely fireproof except
  that windows shall not be required to be glazed with wire glass.
    4. Any non-fireproof old-law tenement five stories in  height  may  be
  increased  in  number  of  stories to six provided that such increase in
  number of stories does not result in an increase in the  height  of  the
  roof  beams  above the curb level. In any tenement so altered, the first
  floor above the lowest cellar, or, if there  be  no  cellar,  above  the
  basement or other lowest story, shall be fireproof. Any yard or court of
  such  altered  tenement  shall  not  be  less  in any dimension than the
  minimum dimensions prescribed in section twenty-six.






   §  212.  Yards and courts. 1. No tenement shall be enlarged or its lot
  diminished in any way which would leave any yard or court  less  in  any
  dimension  than the minimum dimensions prescribed for yards or courts in
  section twenty-six.
    The restrictions of this subdivision  shall  not  apply  to  tenements
  erected  after  April  twelfth,  nineteen hundred one, on lots which run
  through from one street to another street and do not exceed one  hundred
  feet in depth.
    2.  Any  court  constructed  on  or after December fifteenth, nineteen
  hundred sixty-one in a tenement to  ventilate  any  room,  public  hall,
  water-closet   compartment  or  bathroom  shall  be  of  the  dimensions
  prescribed  in  section  twenty-six,  and  such  court  shall  under  no
  circumstances be roofed or covered over at the top. Every such court, if
  an  inner  court,  shall  be  provided  at  the  bottom with one or more
  horizontal air-intakes constructed as provided in section twenty-six.
    3. Any shaft or court constructed  after  April  eighteenth,  nineteen
  hundred  twenty-nine,  which  is  used  to  light  or ventilate any room
  occupied for living purposes in any old-law tenement shall be  at  least
  twenty-five  square  feet  in area and four feet in width in every part,
  and shall under no circumstances be roofed or covered over at  the  top.
  Every  such  shaft  shall  be  provided  at the bottom with a horizontal
  air-intake or duct at least  four  square  feet  in  area  communicating
  directly with a street or yard and so arranged as to be easily cleaned.
    4.  In  every  old-law tenement there shall be a door at the bottom of
  every shaft and inner court giving access to  the  shaft  or  court  and
  whenever  the  shaft or inner court is less than two hundred square feet
  in area or ten feet in any dimension, such door and its  assembly  shall
  be fireproof with the door self-closing. Where a window or door existing
  on  April  eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, gives proper access
  to such  a  shaft  or  court,  such  window  or  door  shall  be  deemed
  sufficient.






   §  212.  Yards and courts. 1. No tenement shall be enlarged or its lot
  diminished in any way which would leave any yard or court  less  in  any
  dimension  than the minimum dimensions prescribed for yards or courts in
  section twenty-six.
    The restrictions of this subdivision  shall  not  apply  to  tenements
  erected  after  April  twelfth,  nineteen hundred one, on lots which run
  through from one street to another street and do not exceed one  hundred
  feet in depth.
    2.  Any  court  constructed  on  or after December fifteenth, nineteen
  hundred sixty-one in a tenement to  ventilate  any  room,  public  hall,
  water-closet   compartment  or  bathroom  shall  be  of  the  dimensions
  prescribed  in  section  twenty-six,  and  such  court  shall  under  no
  circumstances be roofed or covered over at the top. Every such court, if
  an  inner  court,  shall  be  provided  at  the  bottom with one or more
  horizontal air-intakes constructed as provided in section twenty-six.
    3. Any shaft or court constructed  after  April  eighteenth,  nineteen
  hundred  twenty-nine,  which  is  used  to  light  or ventilate any room
  occupied for living purposes in any old-law tenement shall be  at  least
  twenty-five  square  feet  in area and four feet in width in every part,
  and shall under no circumstances be roofed or covered over at  the  top.
  Every  such  shaft  shall  be  provided  at the bottom with a horizontal
  air-intake or duct at least  four  square  feet  in  area  communicating
  directly with a street or yard and so arranged as to be easily cleaned.
    4.  In  every  old-law tenement there shall be a door at the bottom of
  every shaft and inner court giving access to  the  shaft  or  court  and
  whenever  the  shaft or inner court is less than two hundred square feet
  in area or ten feet in any dimension, such door and its  assembly  shall
  be fireproof with the door self-closing. Where a window or door existing
  on  April  eighteenth, nineteen hundred twenty-nine, gives proper access
  to such  a  shaft  or  court,  such  window  or  door  shall  be  deemed
  sufficient.






   §  213.  Lighting and ventilation of rooms. 1. No tenement, its lot or
  any room, public hall or stairs therein shall be so altered as  to  have
  its  light  or  ventilation  diminished  in  any way not approved by the
  department.
    2. In every tenement erected after  April  twelfth,  nineteen  hundred
  one,  every  stair  hall,  public  hall and living room and at least one
  water-closet compartment or bathroom containing a water-closet  in  each
  apartment, shall have at least one window opening directly upon a street
  or  upon  a  lawful yard or court existing on April eighteenth, nineteen
  hundred twenty-nine. Such window shall be  so  located  as  to  properly
  light  all  portions of such hall, room or compartment. Every part of an
  apartment of three rooms or less in such  a  tenement  shall  be  within
  eighteen feet of a street or yard or have a window opening upon a lawful
  inner  or  outer  court  existing  on April eighteenth, nineteen hundred
  twenty-nine. When a room in a tenement opens upon an inner  court  on  a
  lot  line  and less than ten feet wide from the lot line to the opposite
  wall of the dwelling, such room shall be provided  with  a  sash  window
  communicating with another room in the same apartment. Such window shall
  contain  at least ten square feet of glazed surface and be made so as to
  open readily.
    3. No room in any  old-law  tenement  shall  be  occupied  for  living
  purposes  unless  it  meets  the  conditions  in  one  of  the following
  paragraphs:
    a. Such room has a window opening directly upon a street,  or  upon  a
  yard  at  least  four  feet  in depth, or above the roof of an adjoining
  building, or upon a court or shaft at least twenty square feet  in  area
  open to the sky.
    b.  Such room is located on the top story and is adequately lighted by
  a ventilating skylight opening directly to the outer air.
    c. Such room has a sash window opening directly  into  an  immediately
  adjoining room in the same apartment which latter room opens directly on
  a  street  or yard at least four feet in depth. Such window shall have a
  vertically sliding pulley-hung sash not less than  three  feet  by  five
  feet,  except  that  when it is impossible to construct a window of such
  size, the department may permit such window to be narrower. Both  halves
  of  the  sash  shall  be  made so as to open readily, and the lower half
  shall be glazed with translucent glass, or with obscure  wire  glass  if
  the department shall so require. So far as possible such window shall be
  in  line  with windows in outer rooms opening on a street or yard, so as
  to afford a maximum of light and ventilation.
    d. Such room has an alcove opening, of no less dimension than required
  for such a sash window, to such an adjoining room, in  addition  to  the
  usual door openings.
    4.  In  every  existing  tenement  the  department, in addition to the
  requirements of subdivision four of section eighty, may, as often as  it
  deems  necessary, require the walls and ceilings of every room that does
  not open directly on a street to  be  kalsomined  or  painted  white  to
  improve the lighting of such room.
    5.  Notwithstanding  anything in this section to the contrary, no room
  in any old-law  tenement  in  an  apartment  which  is  vacant  on  June
  thirtieth, nineteen hundred sixty, or thereafter becomes vacant, and, on
  and  after  June  thirtieth,  nineteen  hundred  seventy  no room in any
  old-law tenement shall be used for  living  purposes  unless  such  room
  shall have a window opening directly upon the street, or upon a yard not
  less than four feet deep, or above the roof of an adjoining building, or
  upon  a court or shaft of not less than twenty square feet in area, open
  to the sky without roof or skylight, unless such room is located on  the


 top floor and is adequately lighted and ventilated by a skylight opening
  directly to the outer air.
    An  alcove  shall  be  deemed  to comply with the requirements of this
  subdivision if (1) it opens directly into an immediately adjoining  room
  in  the  same apartment, and (2) such adjoining room opens directly on a
  street or yard, and (3) a single unbroken open space occupies  at  least
  sixty  per  centum  of the area of the vertical plane between the alcove
  and such adjoining room. The required open space between any such alcove
  and an adjoining room through which it receives  light  and  ventilation
  shall  not  be  obstructed  by  any  curtain, portiere,


   §  214.  Size  of  rooms.  1.  In  every  tenement erected after April
  twelfth, nineteen hundred one, the sizes of living rooms shall meet  the
  following requirements:
    a.  In  each  apartment  there  shall  be  at  least  one  living room
  containing at least one hundred twenty square feet of clear floor  area,
  and  every  other  living  room  except a kitchen shall contain at least
  seventy square feet of clear floor area.
    b. Every living room which contains less than eighty  square  feet  of
  clear  floor area or which is located in the cellar or basement shall be
  at least nine feet high, and every other living room at least eight feet
  high; these measurements to be taken from  finished  floor  to  finished
  ceiling.
    c.  Every  living  room  shall have a least horizontal dimension of at
  least six feet and, if the tenement was erected after April  eighteenth,
  nineteen hundred twelve, of at least seven feet; except that the minimum
  horizontal  dimension  of  any  kitchen  and  of  a  maid's or servant's
  sleeping room in a fire-proof tenement in which one  or  more  passenger
  elevators are operated, shall be six feet.
    2. In any tenement, apartments containing three or more rooms may have
  dining  bays,  which  shall  not  exceed fifty-five square feet in floor
  surface area and shall not be deemed separate rooms or  subject  to  the
  requirements  for separate rooms or alcoves. Every such dining bay shall
  be equipped with such appropriate permanent fittings as may be  required
  by  the  department  and shall also be provided with at least one window
  opening directly upon a street or upon a yard or court which was  lawful
  on  April  eighteenth,  nineteen hundred twenty-nine.   The area of such
  window shall be one-eighth at least of the floor surface  area  of  such
  dining bay. No dining bay shall be permitted in any apartment containing
  less than three rooms.






§  215.  Alcoves. No part of any room shall be enclosed or subdivided,
  wholly or in part, by a curtain, portiere, fixed or movable partition or
  other contrivance or device unless each such  enclosure  or  subdivision
  shall  contain a separate window conforming to the provisions of section
  thirty for rooms in multiple dwellings erected after  April  eighteenth,
  nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine,  and have a clear floor area of at least
  seventy square feet.