Section  1.  Short title. This chapter shall be known as the "multiple
  residence law."




   §  2.  Legislative  finding.    It  is  hereby declared that intensive
  occupation  of  multiple  dwellings  having  three  or  more   families,
  inadequate  provision for light and air, insufficient protection against
  and defective provisions for escape from fire, as well as the amount  of
  improper sanitation existing in multiple dwellings throughout this state
  are  a  menace  to  the  health, safety, morals, welfare, and reasonable
  comfort of its citizens; and that the establishment and  maintenance  of
  proper housing standards requiring sufficient light, air, sanitation and
  protection  from  fire  hazards  are  essential  to  the public welfare.
  Therefore the provisions hereinafter prescribed to provide more adequate
  protection in the event of fire, and sufficient light,  ventilation  and
  sanitation  for  certain  multiple  residence  buildings are enacted and
  their necessity in the public interest is hereby declared as a matter of
  legislative determination.




   §  3.  Application  to  certain  municipalities. 1. This chapter shall
  apply to all cities of less  than  three  hundred  twenty-five  thousand
  population and to all towns and villages.
    2.  Whenever  the word "municipality" occurs in this chapter, it shall
  mean a city, town or village to which the chapter is  applicable.    The
  words  "charter,"  "ordinance,"  "resolution,"  "regulation,"  "building
  code," "department of  health,"  "department  of  water  supply,"  "fire
  department,"  "department,"  "board,"  "municipal  engineer,"  "building
  official,"  "corporation  counsel,"  "municipal  treasury,"   or   "fire
  limits,"   shall   be   construed  as  if  followed  by  the  words  "or
  corresponding authority of any municipality in  which  the  dwelling  or
  location referred to is situated."
    3.  Wherever in this chapter the installation or maintenance of a fire
  alarm system, fire detecting system, watchman's clock system,  sprinkler
  system,  fire-escape  system  or  part thereof is required or permitted,
  such system or part thereof shall be  constructed,  installed,  arranged
  and  maintained in a manner satisfactory to the department in accordance
  with rules and regulations adopted by the commission pursuant to section
  three hundred twenty-six of this chapter.




   §  4. Definitions. Words and terms used in this chapter shall have the
  following meanings:
    1. "Alteration." Any  change  in  the  structural  parts  or  existing
  facilities  of  any  building  or  the  moving  of any building from one
  location or position to another.
    2. "Apartment," or "suite." That portion of a dwelling  consisting  of
  one or more living rooms, and occupied by the members of a family, which
  group of rooms is separated from all other groups within a dwelling.
    3. "Basement." A story partly below the curb level but having at least
  one-half of its height above the curb level. A basement shall be counted
  as  a  story in determining height, except as otherwise provided in this
  chapter.
    4. "Boarding house,"  "furnished  room  house,"  "rooming  house,"  or
  "tourist  house."  A  multiple  dwelling,  in  which there are less than
  thirty sleeping rooms occupied primarily by transients  who  are  lodged
  with  or without meals, and in which there are provided such services as
  are incidental to its use as a temporary residence. Also a dwelling  two
  or more stories in height, occupied by one or two families and with five
  or  more  transient  boarders,  roomers or lodgers residing with any one
  family.
    5. "Cellar." An enclosed space in a dwelling having more than one-half
  of its height below the curb level. However, where  a  dwelling  is  set
  back from the curb level in such a manner that the enclosed space in the
  dwelling  is above the curb level but at least one-half of its height is
  below the land immediately adjacent to the dwelling, such space shall be
  deemed a cellar. A cellar shall not be counted as a story.
    5-a. "Child caring institutions."  Institutions  for  the  residential
  care  of  children  operated  by  authorized  agencies as defined by the
  social welfare law.
    6. "Commission." The state building code commission in  the  executive
  department of the state of New York.
    7.  "Converted  or  conversion." A change from non-dwelling or private
  dwelling use to multiple dwelling occupancy after July  first,  nineteen
  hundred fifty-two.
    8.  "Court." A space, other than a yard, on the same lot as a dwelling
  and open to the sky. "Inner court." A court not extending to a street or
  yard. "Outer court." A court extending to a street or yard.
    9. "Curb level." The level of the curb at the center of the  front  of
  the  building, for the purpose of measuring the height of any portion of
  a building; except that where a building faces on more than one  street,
  the  curb  level is the average of the levels of the curbs at the center
  of each front. Where no curb elevation has  been  established  the  mean
  level  of  the  land  immediately  adjacent  to  the  dwelling  shall be
  considered the curb level, unless the municipal engineer shall establish
  such curb level or its equivalent.
    10. "Department." The department, bureau, division, agency  or  person
  charged with the enforcement of this chapter.
    11.  "Dining  bay,"  "dining  recess"  or "dinette." A recess used for
  dining purposes off a living room, foyer or kitchen.
    12. "Dormitory." Any room occupied for sleeping purposes  by  five  or
  more  persons. A "cubicle" is a small, partially enclosed sleeping space
  within a dormitory, with or without a window.
    13. "Dwelling." A building or structure which is occupied in whole  or
  in part as the home, residence or sleeping place of one or more persons.
    14. "Family." One or more persons with whom there may be not more than
  four  boarders,  roomers  or  lodgers  all  living  together in a common
  household. A boarder,  roomer  or  lodger  residing  within  the  family


 household  is  a  person  who  pays  a  consideration  therefor and such
  residence is not an incident of employment therein.
    15.  "Fire  alarm system." An approved system of sounding a fire alarm
  or alarms installed in such a manner that it can  be  operated  manually
  from any story.
    "Fire-detecting   system."  An  approved  system  which  automatically
  detects a fire or an abnormal rise in temperature and  actuates  a  fire
  alarm.
    16.  "Fire-escape."  A  combination of outside balconies and stairs of
  incombustible materials, providing an unobstructed means of egress  from
  a building.
    17.   "Fireproof."  Made  of  incombustible  materials  with  standard
  fire-resistive ratings not less than  those  required  for  a  fireproof
  multiple dwelling.
    18.  "Fireproof  multiple  dwelling." One in which the walls and other
  structural members are of incombustible materials or assemblies  meeting
  all  of  the  requirements  of  the  local  building  code for fireproof
  construction, if any, and if there be none, then of the  state  building
  construction  code  for  fireproof  construction  applicable to multiple
  dwellings.
    19. "Fire-retarded." Covered with metal lath  plastered  with  two  or
  more  coats  of  cement or gypsum plaster or otherwise protected against
  fire with materials of standard fire-resistive ratings of at  least  one
  hour.  Fireproof  or fire-resistive material shall always be accepted as
  meeting any requirement for fire-retarding.
    20.  "Fire-resistive."  Covered  or   protected   with   incombustible
  materials  of  standard  fire-resistive  ratings  of  at least one hour.
  Fireproofing or fire-retarding shall always be accepted as  meeting  any
  requirement for "fire-resistive" materials.
    21.  "Fire-stair."  A  fireproof  stair,  enclosed in fireproof walls,
  within the body of the building which it serves, to which access may  be
  had only through self-closing fireproof doors.
    22.  "Fire-stopping."  The  closing  of  concealed draft openings with
  brick or other incombustible materials to form an effectual fire barrier
  between stories, and between the ceiling of  the  upper  story  and  the
  space under the roof.
    23.  "Foyer." A space within an apartment or suite used as an entrance
  hall directly from a public hall.
    24.  "Frame  dwellings."  A  non-fireproof  dwelling  of   which   any
  structural  member of its exterior walls is of wood. A structural member
  shall not be deemed to include the veneer or facing of any such wall.
    25. "Height." The vertical distance of a dwelling from the curb  level
  to  the level of the highest point of the roof beams, except that in the
  case of pitched roofs, it is the vertical distance from the  curb  level
  to  the mean height level of the gable or roof above the vertical street
  wall. An attic not used or arranged to be used for human occupancy shall
  not be considered in measuring the height of a dwelling.
    26. "Hotel." A dwelling in which there are  thirty  or  more  sleeping
  rooms  in one building or structure occupied primarily by transients who
  are lodged with or without meals; and there are provided  such  services
  as are incidental to the use thereof as a temporary residence.
    27.  "Kitchen." A space, fifty-nine square feet or more in floor area,
  used for cooking or warming of food.
    28. "Kitchenette." A space, less than fifty-nine square feet in  floor
  area, used for cooking or warming of food.
    29. "Living room." Any room in a multiple dwelling except:
    a.  A  public hall, public vestibule, public room or other public part
  of a dwelling;


   b. A hall, corridor or passageway  entirely  within  an  apartment  or
  suite;
    c.  A  foyer, the floor area of which does not exceed ten percentum of
  the total floor area of the apartment or suite;
    d. A kitchenette;
    e. A dining bay, dining recess or dinette fifty-five  square  feet  or
  less in area;
    f. A bathroom or water-closet compartment.
    30.  "Local  building  code."  The  building  code, if any, adopted or
  enacted by a city, town or village and which is in force in  such  city,
  town  or  village, or in such town or portion thereof outside the limits
  of any village or city, respectively, or the state building construction
  code where applicable with respect thereto.
    31. "Lodging house." A dwelling, other than a hotel, in which  persons
  are  housed  in a dormitory or dormitories, whether or not the space for
  sleeping accommodations therein is divided into cubicles, for  a  single
  night or for less than a week at one time.
    32.  "Lot."  A  parcel  or  plot of ground which is or may be occupied
  wholly or in part by  a  dwelling,  including  the  spaces  occupied  by
  accessory or other structures and any open or unoccupied spaces thereon,
  but not including any part of an abutting public street or thoroughfare.
    a.  "Corner  lot." A lot of which at least two adjacent sides abut for
  their full length upon streets or public places not less than forty feet
  in width. Any other lot is an "interior lot." That portion of  a  corner
  lot  in  excess  of one hundred feet from the widest street on which the
  lot abuts shall be considered an interior lot.
    b. "Front of a lot." That boundary line which abuts on the street, or,
  if there be more than one street abutting, on the street  designated  by
  the owner. "Rear of a lot" is the side opposite the front.
    c.  "Depth  of  a  lot." The distance from the front of the lot to the
  extreme rear line of the lot. The depth of an  irregular-shaped  lot  is
  its mean depth.
    d.  "Lot running through from street to street." A lot where the front
  and rear lines abut for their entire lengths upon streets or open public
  places. When either of such lines exceeds the other in  length  by  more
  than  twenty  per  centum, that part of the lot contiguous to the excess
  length of the longer line shall be deemed an interior lot.
    e. "Back to back lots." Lots or portions of lots which are on opposite
  sides of the same part of a rear line common to both  and  the  opposite
  street  lines  on  which  the lots front are parallel with each other or
  make an angle with each other of not more than forty-five degrees.
    33. "Multiple dwelling." A dwelling which is  either  rented,  leased,
  let  or  hired  out,  to be occupied, or is occupied as the temporary or
  permanent  residence  or  home  of  three  or   more   families   living
  independently of each other, including but not limited to the following:
  a tenament, flat house, maisonette apartment, apartment house, apartment
  hotel,  tourist  house,  bachelor  apartment,  studio  apartment, duplex
  apartment, kitchenette apartment, hotel, lodging house,  rooming  house,
  boarding house, boarding and nursery school, furnished room house, club,
  sorority   house,   fraternity  house,  college  and  school  dormitory,
  convalescent, old age or nursing homes  or  residences.  It  shall  also
  include a dwelling, two or more stories in height, and with five or more
  boarders, roomers or lodgers residing with any one family.
    34.  "Non-fireproof  dwelling."  A  dwelling  which  does not meet the
  requirements for a fireproof dwelling.
    35. "Occupied" or "used." Such terms shall be construed as if followed
  by the words "or arranged, designed,  or  intended  to  be  occupied  or
  used."


   36. "Owner." Owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser
  estate  therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents,
  receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, agent, or any other person, firm or
  corporation, directly or indirectly in control of a dwelling.
    37.  "Premises."  Land,  improvements  and  appurtenances  or any part
  thereof.
    38. "Private dwelling." A dwelling occupied exclusively for  residence
  purposes  by one or two families and having not more than four boarders,
  roomers or lodgers residing with any one family.
    39. "Public hall." A hall,  corridor  or  passageway  not  within  any
  apartment  or  suite  of  private  rooms. "Public vestibule." A hall not
  within any apartment or suite or private rooms  providing  access  to  a
  stair  or  elevator  and not wider than seven feet nor longer than twice
  the width of the stair or elevator shaft opening upon such hall.
    40. "Public part" or "public room." A space available for common usage
  or used exclusively for storage purposes or for mechanical equipment  of
  the dwelling.
    41.  "Section."  A part of a multiple dwelling other than an apartment
  or suite, separated as  a  unit  from  the  rest  of  such  dwelling  by
  fireproof construction.
    42.  "Shaft."  A  space  extending  through  one  or more stories of a
  dwelling connecting a series of openings therein or any story or stories
  and the roof, and includes exterior and interior shafts whether for air,
  light, elevator, dumbwaiter or any other purpose.
    43. "Shall." The word "shall" is always mandatory.
    44. "Single-room occupancy." The occupancy by one or two persons of  a
  single  room,  or  two or more rooms which are joined together separated
  from all other rooms within an apartment in a multiple dwelling so  that
  the occupant or occupants thereof reside separately and independently of
  the other occupant or occupants of the same apartment.
    45.  "Sprinkler  system."  A system of piping connected to one or more
  sprinkler heads with fusible struts which will be constructed to fuse at
  a specified temperature so as to discharge an effective spray  to  cover
  the  area  to  be  sprinkled. Such system may be either an automatic wet
  pipe type in which all pipes and sprinkler heads are at all times filled
  with water when the building is occupied, or a dry pipe system in  which
  the  pipes and sprinkler heads are filled with air, either compressed or
  at atmospheric pressure,  and  the  water  supply  is  controlled  by  a
  dry-pipe valve.
    46.  "Stair."  A flight or flights of steps including any landings and
  parts of public halls through which it is necessary  to  pass  in  going
  from one level to another.
    47.  "Stair  hall."  A  part  of  a  public  hall  through which it is
  necessary to pass in going from the end of one flight of  steps  to  the
  beginning  of another but shall not include an area that is also used to
  provide direct ingress to and egress from an apartment or suite.
    48. "Story." A space between the level of one finished floor  and  the
  level  of  the  next higher finished floor, or, if the top story, of the
  space between the level of the highest finished floor and the top of the
  highest roof beams, or, if the first story, of  the  space  between  the
  level  of the finished floor and the finished ceiling immediately above.
  For the purpose of measuring height by stories of dwellings  erected  on
  or  after  July  first, nineteen hundred fifty-two, one additional story
  shall be added for each twelve feet or fraction thereof that  the  first
  story  exceeds  fifteen  feet  in  height,  and  for each twelve feet or
  fraction thereof that any story above the  first  story  exceeds  twelve
  feet in height.


   49.  "Street  wall."  A wall of a building, at any level, nearest to a
  street line abutting the property.
    50.  "Suite."  That  portion  of  a dwelling consisting of one or more
  living rooms and occupied by the members of a  family,  which  group  of
  rooms is separated from all other groups within a dwelling.
    51.  "Window  dimensions." The measurements between the stop-beads or,
  if there are no stop-beads, between the sides and the head and  sill  of
  the sash opening.
    52.  "Yard." An open space on the same lot with a dwelling between the
  extreme rear line of the lot and the extreme rear wall of the dwelling.




   §  8.  General  application  to  all  dwellings.  Except  as otherwise
  specifically provided in this chapter, every multiple dwelling shall  be
  constructed   and   maintained   in   accordance   with  all  applicable
  requirements of this chapter and other applicable laws.




   §  9.  Buildings  converted  or  altered.  1.  On or after July first,
  nineteen hundred fifty-two, no multiple dwelling shall  be  enlarged  or
  its  lot  diminished so that the yard or other unoccupied areas shall be
  diminished in size or  area  below  the  minimum  requirements  of  this
  chapter.
    2.  A  building  not  a dwelling, if converted on or after July first,
  nineteen hundred fifty-two, to  a  multiple  dwelling,  shall  thereupon
  become  subject  to all the provisions of this chapter applicable to new
  multiple dwellings of like class and kind. "Class" shall mean the use of
  a multiple dwelling for either permanent or transient occupancy or both.
  "Kind" shall mean  the  type  of  construction  of  a  building,  either
  fireproof or non-fireproof.
    3.  No dwelling shall be altered or converted so as to be in violation
  of any provision of this chapter relating to dwellings of like class and
  kind, and, except as provided in subdivision four, a  dwelling,  altered
  or converted to be occupied primarily for permanent-residence use, shall
  comply  with  article  three;  and a dwelling converted or altered to be
  occupied primarily for transient use shall comply with article four.
    4. If any multiple dwelling three or more stories in height is altered
  after July first, nineteen hundred fifty-three so  as  to  increase  its
  height  or  bulk  for living purposes or so as to increase the number of
  living rooms by more than twenty per centum, such dwelling shall be made
  to conform to the requirements of  this  chapter  with  respect  to  new
  dwellings of like class and kind erected after such date.
    5.  It  shall  be  unlawful  to convert a frame dwelling to a multiple
  residence, except that a frame dwelling not more than  two  stories  and
  attic  in  height  and  erected  before  July  first,  nineteen  hundred
  fifty-two, as a one-family or two-family residence may be converted to a
  multiple dwelling for permanent  occupancy  by  complying  with  article
  three; and if such residence is converted to be occupied, as a rule, for
  transient use, it shall comply with article four.




   § 10. Dwellings damaged. If an old or other existing multiple dwelling
  be damaged by fire or other cause to the extent of two-thirds or more of
  its  value  at  the  time  of  such damage exclusive of the value of the
  foundation, such dwelling shall not be repaired  or  rebuilt  except  in
  conformity  with the provisions of this chapter relative to new multiple
  dwellings.




   §  11.  Old dwellings. Except as required in section nine and articles
  three and four, nothing in this chapter shall be  construed  to  require
  any  change  in  the construction, use, or occupancy of any old or other
  existing multiple dwelling occupied as  such  on  July  first,  nineteen
  hundred  fifty-two,  which  on  such  date  is  in  compliance  with the
  provisions  of  all  statutes,  local  laws,   ordinances,   rules   and
  regulations applicable thereto.




   §  12.  Uncompleted  dwellings.  1.  The  provisions  of  this chapter
  relating to new multiple dwellings  shall  not  apply  to  any  multiple
  dwelling for which plans were on file with the department or a permit to
  commence  building  was  issued  by  the  department  before July first,
  nineteen hundred fifty-two, or to any dwelling the plans for  conversion
  of  which  to  multiple  dwelling  occupancy,  were  on  file  with  the
  department or a permit authorizing the commencement of the work of  such
  conversion  was  issued  by  the  department before such date, provided,
  however, a certificate of occupancy as required  by  the  provisions  of
  section  three  hundred  two  shall  be  obtained therefor prior to July
  first, nineteen hundred fifty-seven.
    2. No provisions of any part  of  this  section  shall  be  deemed  to
  prohibit  the  amendment  of  any  plans  filed and approved before July
  first, nineteen hundred fifty-two, if such  amendment  would  have  been
  lawful  before  such  date,  or  if  such  amendment  complies  with the
  requirements of this chapter for alterations to buildings of  like  kind
  existing before such date.




   §  13.  Prohibited  uses:  The  storage  or keeping of any combustible
  gaseous material within any multiple dwelling shall be unlawful unless a
  written permit therefor is issued by the  department  and  any  and  all
  local  laws  or  regulations  applicable  thereto are complied with. The
  provisions of this  section  shall  not  prevent  the  keeping  of  such
  gasoline,  oil or other fuel as may be contained in a tank or receptacle
  of a motor vehicle stored in a  space  provided  for  automobiles  in  a
  multiple dwelling, nor shall this section apply to gaseous material used
  for  the  cleaning  or washing of a motor vehicle so stored. Such permit
  shall not be required for the keeping or storage of oil or  kerosene  in
  quantities  not  exceeding  five  gallons  at  any one time for domestic
  heating or cooking purposes, provided such  oil  or  kerosene  is  in  a
  container  directly  connected  to  the heating or cooking appliances in
  which it is to be  used  and  is  kept  or  stored  in  accordance  with
  standards of safety prescribed by the department.




   §  15.  Smoke  detecting  devices.  1. This section shall apply to all
  multiple dwellings, whenever constructed, provided however, that for the
  purposes of this section the term "multiple dwelling" shall also include
  any dwelling accommodation used as a temporary  or  permanent  residence
  located in any building owned as a condominium or cooperative.
    2. (a) The owner of every multiple dwelling to which the provisions of
  this  section  apply shall equip each apartment or other separate living
  unit in such multiple  dwelling  with  approved  and  operational  smoke
  detecting  devices  in  conformity  with  the  state fire prevention and
  building code; provided, however, that any multiple dwelling not subject
  to the provisions of such code may, in the alternative, be equipped with
  battery-operated smoke detecting devices  of  a  type  accepted  by  the
  division of housing and community renewal.
    (b)  In  hotels,  tourist  houses,  lodging  houses,  rooming  houses,
  boarding houses, boarding and nursery schools,  furnished  room  houses,
  club   houses,  sorority  and  fraternity  houses,  college  and  school
  dormitories, convalescent, old age and nursing homes, any dwelling which
  is two or more stories in height, with five or more boarders, roomers or
  lodgers residing with any one family, and any multiple dwelling used for
  single room occupancy, at least one  smoke  detecting  device  shall  be
  located  within  each  room  used  for  sleeping  purposes. In any other
  multiple dwelling or portion thereof, there shall be at least one  smoke
  detecting  device located within each apartment or separate living unit,
  in an area so that it is clearly audible in each bedroom or  other  room
  used  for  sleeping  purposes,  with intervening doors closed; provided,
  however, that no smoke detecting device be located more  than  ten  feet
  from  the  entrance  to  any  bedroom  or  other  room used for sleeping
  purposes.
    (c) Each smoke detecting device shall include a test device to  permit
  the occupant to readily determine if it is operational.
    (d)  In addition to complying with the provisions of this section, the
  type, location, number, and manner of installation  of  smoke  detecting
  devices  shall  be  in accordance with standards prescribed by the state
  fire prevention and building code council.
    3. (a) With respect to  multiple  dwellings  which  are  occupied  for
  permanent  residential purposes only, other than any portion of any such
  dwelling  used  for  single  room  occupancy,  and  notwithstanding  the
  provisions  of  sections forty and one hundred seventy-four or any other
  provision of this chapter, or of any other law or requirement, state  or
  local,  the  duties  of  the  owner  and  tenant  with  respect to smoke
  detecting devices  installed  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be  as
  provided in subdivisions four and five of this section.
    (b)  With respect to multiple dwelling units as specified in paragraph
  (b) of subdivision two of this section, or any portion of  any  multiple
  dwelling  used  for single room occupancy, the provisions of subdivision
  five of this section  shall  not  apply,  and  smoke  detecting  devices
  installed as required by this section shall be subject to the provisions
  of section forty or one hundred seventy-four of this chapter.
    (c)  The  owner  of every multiple dwelling shall keep such records as
  the state fire prevention and  building  code  council  shall  prescribe
  relating  to the installation and maintenance of smoke detecting devices
  in the building and make  such  records  available  to  any  local  code
  enforcement official on request.
    4.  In  addition  to  initially  providing  and  installing  the smoke
  detecting devices, the owner shall:
    (a) replace within thirty days after the receipt of written notice any
  such device which becomes inoperable within one year of the installation


 of such device due to a defect in the manufacture  of  such  device  and
  through no fault of the occupant of the apartment or other unit;
    (b)  upon  the  occurrence of a vacancy, replace or properly equip any
  such device which has been removed or  rendered  inoperable,  so  as  to
  provide operational smoke detecting devices for any new tenant; and
    (c)  notify  tenants  in writing, individually or through posting of a
  notice in a common area of the building, of  the  respective  duties  of
  owners and tenants under this section.
    5.  Except  as  provided in paragraph (b) of subdivision three of this
  section, the tenant shall keep and maintain any smoke  detecting  device
  installed  pursuant  to this section in good repair and replace any such
  device which becomes inoperable during his occupancy.
    6. An owner need not furnish or install a smoke detecting device where
  one has already been installed, provided  that  (a)  the  type  of  such
  device  and the manner of its installation comply with the provisions of
  this section and the standards prescribed by the state  fire  prevention
  and  building  code council, (b) the existing device is tested and found
  to be operational, and (c) the existence of such device in  lieu  of  an
  owner-furnished  device  is  noted  on  the  records  kept  by the owner
  pursuant to paragraph (c) of subdivision three of this section.




   * § 16. Multiple residence emergency information. 1. In the case of an
  emergency  affecting  a  multiple  residence, the owner or agent of such
  multiple residence shall provide emergency service personnel,  upon  the
  request  of  such emergency service personnel, including but not limited
  to local police  and  fire  departments,  with  the  names  and  contact
  information  of  all  affected  residents  or occupants as listed in the
  lease of such multiple residence as is required to ascertain the  safety
  of  such  residents  or  occupants. For the purposes of this section, an
  emergency shall include but not be limited to fires, gas leaks, building
  collapses, natural disasters, acts of terrorism and other  events  where
  the  physical  safety of residents must be accounted for by ascertaining
  their whereabouts.
    2. The owner or agent of such multiple residence shall update the list
  of names and contact information of all affected residents or  occupants
  of  such  multiple  residence  upon  the execution of a new lease, lease
  renewal or lease amendment. Specific and informed written consent  shall
  be  obtained  by  the owner or agent of the multiple residence from each
  occupant or resident each time the list is updated and no occupant's  or
  resident's  name  or  contact information shall be included in such list
  without their specific and  informed  written  consent.  Written  notice
  shall be provided to the occupant or resident about the contact list and
  shall  include but not be limited to that such list is maintained by the
  owner and the potential impact of opting-out.
    3. Such list of names and contact information shall only be maintained
  for  the  purpose  of  an  emergency  evacuation  and   shall   not   be
  disseminated,  used  or  accessed  by  emergency  services  personnel or
  disseminated, used or accessed by the owner or agent  of  such  multiple
  residence for any other purposes.
    * NB Effective February 15, 2024




   §  25.  Application  of  article three. The provisions of this article
  shall apply to all multiple dwellings existing on July  first,  nineteen
  hundred  fifty-two,  and  shall  also  apply  to  dwellings converted to
  multiple dwelling occupancy on or after  July  first,  nineteen  hundred
  fifty-two,  provided,  however,  that  this  article  shall not apply to
  hotels and similar dwellings in any city, town or village  with  respect
  to  which  the provisions of article four are applicable. The provisions
  of this article shall apply in addition to and not in  substitution  for
  the  provisions  of  article  two.   Provisions of this article shall be
  complied with on or before July first, nineteen hundred fifty-four.




   §  26. Egress from dwellings.  In every such dwelling three stories or
  more in height there shall be from each story at least  two  independent
  means  of  egress accessible to each apartment or suite. The first means
  shall open into a public hall connected  with  a  stair  affording  safe
  access  to  a  street,  or  to  a  yard,  court  or passageway affording
  continuous, safe and unobstructed access to a street. The  second  means
  shall  be  directly  to  a  fire-escape  or to an enclosed stair without
  passing through the first means,  except  that  where  the  first  means
  includes  an  interior  stair which is closed off at each floor level by
  fire-retarded construction with a fireproof self-closing  door  therein,
  the  second  means  may  be another such interior stair or a fire-escape
  directly accessible on the same story from a public hall therein whether
  or not such public hall is also a part of the first means provided  such
  fire-escape  is  not  a  wire,  chain,  cable,  vertical  ladder or rope
  fire-escape. In lieu of a second means of egress a sprinkler system  may
  be installed in the public halls and stairs.
    Except  as required by the provisions of article four of this chapter,
  the second means of egress shall not be required in a multiple  dwelling
  of fireproof construction, six stories or less in height, erected before
  July  first,  nineteen  hundred  fifty-two,  if  the egress arrangements
  thereof complied with requirements of law applicable  at  the  time  the
  dwelling was erected.




   §  27. Fire-escapes.  Wire, chain, cable, combustible, vertical ladder
  or rope fire-escapes shall not be accepted as a required or  alternative
  means  of  egress  and, unless such fire-escapes are supplemental to the
  means of egress required by section twenty-six, they  shall  be  removed
  and  replaced  by  a  system of fire-escapes constructed and arranged as
  provided in section one hundred thirty-three. All  fire-escapes  erected
  on  or  after  July  first,  nineteen hundred fifty-three, to serve as a
  second means of egress shall be in conformity  with  the  provisions  of
  section  one  hundred  thirty-three.  It shall be unlawful to remove any
  fire-escape without permission from the department. Such system shall be
  installed, arranged and maintained  in  a  manner  satisfactory  to  the
  department and in accordance with rules adopted by the commission.




   §  28. Stairs and entrance halls. In every such dwelling three stories
  or more in height the wood wainscoting and other  combustible  materials
  on  the  wall  and  ceiling  surfaces  in all halls shall be removed and
  replaced with incombustible or other fire-resistive materials.  In  lieu
  of  such  removal,  a sprinkler system may be installed in such halls or
  such wainscoting and the combustible surfaces may be treated or  covered
  in a manner satisfactory to the department with a surface fire-retardant
  approved  by  the  department. In such a dwelling, however, any entrance
  door and every door opening into any entrance hall, stair hall, or other
  public hall connected therewith, shall be self-closing.  Every  interior
  sash,  or  opening other than a door, in the walls or partitions of such
  halls and every window therein not opening to the  outer  air  shall  be
  sealed with fire-resistive materials.






   §  29. Dumbwaiter shafts. In every such dwelling three stories or more
  in height the doors of all dumbwaiter shafts shall be made  self-closing
  and be covered on the shaft side with fire-resistive material.




   § 30. Cellar ceilings. In every such dwelling three stories or more in
  height  the ceiling of the cellar, or of the lowest story if there be no
  cellar, shall be fire-retarded, or be equipped with a sprinkler  system,
  unless  such  ceiling  has already been plastered to the satisfaction of
  the department.




   §  31.  Inside cellar stairs. Every stair leading from a cellar to the
  floor above in  all  old  multiple  dwellings  shall  be  enclosed  with
  fire-retarded  partitions  and  shall  be  equipped with a fire-retarded
  self-closing door located as the department may approve.
   §  32.  Artificial lighting. The owner shall provide a light or lights
  in every public hall, stair and fire-stair on every floor so that  every
  such space shall be lighted adequately.




   §  40.  Repairs  and  cleanliness. All old multiple dwellings shall be
  maintained in conformity with the  provisions  of  section  one  hundred
  seventy-four.




   §  41.  Water  supply.  Every  such dwelling shall be provided with an
  adequate supply of water obtained from the public water system or from a
  source approved by the public health officer having jurisdiction.


   §  42.  Water  closet  and  bath accommodations. Every water closet or
  bathroom installed in such dwellings on or after  July  first,  nineteen
  hundred  fifty-two,  and  in  dwellings converted on or after such date,
  shall be in conformity  with  the  provisions  of  section  one  hundred
  seventy-one.




   §  43.  Plumbing  and  drainage. Every such dwelling shall be provided
  with facilities for  the  disposal  of  sewage,  waterborne  waste,  and
  excreta,  and such facilities shall be connected with the public sewers,
  if available and practicable; otherwise,  such  waste  matter  shall  be
  disposed  of  in  a  manner approved by the public health officer having
  jurisdiction.




   §  50.  Application  of  article four. 1. As used in this article, the
  term "transient  dwellings"  shall  mean  and  include  hotels,  lodging
  houses,  boarding  and  nursery  schools,  sorority  houses,  fraternity
  houses, college  and  school  dormitories,  convalescent,  old  age  and
  nursing  homes,  and  dwellings used for single room occupancy. The term
  "transient occupancy" shall mean the occupancy of a  room  for  sleeping
  purposes  by  the  same person or persons for a period of ninety days or
  less.
    2. Except as provided in  sections  sixty-three  and  sixty-four  with
  respect  to  one  and  two  story transient dwellings only, this article
  shall apply to all transient dwellings three or more stories  in  height
  and  in  existence  on July first, nineteen hundred fifty-two, provided,
  however, that the provisions of article two  and  sections  fifty-three,
  fifty-six  and  sixty-one  of  this article shall apply to new transient
  dwellings.
    3. As to such existing transient dwellings, the provisions of sections
  fifty-six, sixty-one and sixty-two of this  article  shall  be  complied
  with on or before July first, nineteen hundred fifty-four, and all other
  sections of this article shall be complied with on or before July first,
  nineteen hundred fifty-five.




   § 52. Public halls and stairs. The walls and ceiling of every entrance
  hall,  stair hall or other public hall, every hall or passage not within
  an apartment or suite of rooms, every dumbwaiter, elevator,  and,  every
  other  shaft,  including  stairs,  connecting  more  than two successive
  stories, shall be sealed off from every other portion  of  the  dwelling
  with fire-retarded materials, or, in lieu thereof, except in the case of
  elevator  shafts,  shall be equipped with an automatic sprinkler system.
  Except as provided in subdivision five of  section  fifty-five,  nothing
  contained in this article shall be deemed to exempt an interior required
  means  of  egress  from  the  enclosure  requirements  or  the equipment
  provided for in this section.  A  fire-detecting  system  shall  not  be
  acceptable for any of the requirements of this section.




   §  53.  Storage  compartments.  There  shall be one or more completely
  enclosed compartments for the storage of mattresses, furniture,  paints,
  floor   wax,   linens,  brooms,  mops  and  other  such  inflammable  or
  combustible paraphernalia incidental to the occupancy and maintenance of
  the dwelling, and such paraphernalia shall be stored in no other portion
  of such dwelling. Such compartments shall be completely protected by  an
  automatic  sprinkler system or a fire-detecting system. Closets which do
  not exceed one hundred square feet in floor area may  be  used  for  the
  temporary  storage  of such paraphernalia, except mattresses, furniture,
  paints  and  insecticides  containing  inflammable  materials  and   are
  excluded  from  the  requirements  of  this  section. Where such storage
  compartments  are  located  at  least  thirty  feet  distant  from  such
  dwelling, no sprinklers or fire-detecting system shall be required.




   §  54.  Kitchens  and  pantries.  All  kitchens  and  pantries serving
  restaurants or dining rooms in a non-fireproof transient dwelling  shall
  be  equipped  with  an  automatic  sprinkler  system or a fire-detecting
  system. Where such kitchens and pantries are  located  at  least  thirty
  feet  distant  from such dwelling, no sprinkler or fire-detecting system
  shall be required.




   §  55. Egress. 1. In every transient dwelling to which this article is
  applicable there shall be from each story at least two independent means
  of egress accessible  to  each  room,  apartment  or  suite,  except  as
  otherwise  provided  in  section  sixty-three  with respect to two story
  transient dwellings.
    2. The first means of egress shall  be  an  enclosed  stair  extending
  directly  to  a  street,  or  to  a  yard, court or passageway affording
  continuous, safe and unobstructed access to a street, or by an  enclosed
  stair  leading  to  the  entrance  story,  which story shall have direct
  access to a street. That area of  the  dwelling  immediately  above  the
  street  level  and commonly known as the main floor, where the occupants
  are registered and the usual business  of  the  dwelling  is  conducted,
  shall  be  considered a part of the entrance story; and a required stair
  terminating at such main floor or  its  mezzanine  shall  be  deemed  to
  terminate  at the entrance story. An elevator or an unenclosed escalator
  shall not be acceptable as a required means of egress.
    3. The second means of egress  shall  be  by  an  additional  enclosed
  stair,  conforming to the provisions of subdivision two of this section,
  a fire-stair or an outside fire-escape. In a non-fireproof dwelling when
  it is necessary to pass through a stair enclosure which may or  may  not
  be  a required means of egress to reach a required means of egress, such
  stair enclosure and that part of the public  hall  or  corridor  leading
  thereto  from  a  room,  apartment  or  suite, shall be fire-retarded as
  provided in section fifty-two or protected by a sprinkler system;  in  a
  fireproof  dwelling  only  that  part of the hall or corridor leading to
  such stair enclosure need be so protected.
    4. Where it is impractical in such  existing  transient  dwellings  to
  provide  a  second means of egress, the department may order, in lieu of
  the second means of egress, additional alteration to the first means  of
  egress  and  to  shafts,  stairs  and  other  vertical  openings  as the
  department  may  deem  necessary  to  safeguard  the  occupants  of  the
  dwelling,  may  require  the  public halls providing access to the first
  means of egress to be equipped on each story with an automatic sprinkler
  system, and, in non-fireproof  dwellings,  may  also  require  automatic
  sprinkler heads in the stair which serves as the only means of egress.
    5. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require the enclosure of
  a  stair  which  is ornamental provided such stair does not connect more
  than two stories.
    6. A stair, fire-stair or  fire-escape  supplementary  to  the  egress
  requirements  of  subdivisions  two, three and four of this section need
  not lead to the entrance story or to a street, or to a yard or  a  court
  which  leads  to  a  street,  provided  the means of egress therefrom is
  approved by the department.
    7. A fire-detecting system shall not be  acceptable  for  any  of  the
  requirements of this section.
    8.  In lieu of enclosing stairways as required by subdivisions two and
  three of this section, an automatic sprinkler system may be provided  on
  such stairs.
    9.  All  fire-escapes erected on or after July first, nineteen hundred
  fifty-three,  in  compliance  with  this  section,  shall  be  arranged,
  constructed  and maintained in accordance with the provisions of section
  one hundred thirty-three. Such system shall be installed,  arranged  and
  maintained  in a manner satisfactory to the department and in accordance
  with rules adopted by the commission. It shall be unlawful to remove any
  fire-escape without permission from the department.






	   §  56.  Exit  and  directional  signs.  Every means of egress shall be
  indicated by a sign reading "EXIT" in red letters at least eight  inches
  high  on  a  white  background,  or vice versa, illuminated at all times
  during the day and night by a red light of at least twenty-five watts or
  equivalent illumination.  Such light shall be maintained  in  a  keyless
  socket.  On  all  stories  where  doors,  openings or passageways giving
  access to any means of egress are not visible from all portions of  such
  stories, directional signs shall be maintained in conspicuous locations,
  indicating in red on a white background, or vice versa, the direction of
  travel  to  the  nearest  means  of  egress.  At least one sign shall be
  visible from the doorway of each room or suite of rooms. Existing  signs
  and  illumination  may be accepted if, in the opinion of the department,
  such existing signs and illumination serve the  intent  and  purpose  of
  this  section.   Supplementary stairs, fire-stairs or fire-escapes which
  do not lead to the entrance story or to a street or to a yard or  court,
  leading  to  a  street,  shall  be clearly marked "NOT AN EXIT" in black
  letters at least four inches high on a yellow  background,  and  at  the
  termination  of  each such stair, fire-stair or fire-escape, there shall
  be a directional sign indicating the nearest means of egress leading  to
  a  street.  All signs shall be constructed, located and illuminated in a
  manner satisfactory to the department.




   § 56-a. Posting of means of egress in hotels and motels. On each floor
  of  every  hotel  or motel having two or more stories where the rooms or
  suites are connected by an interior hallway there  shall  be  posted  by
  each  stairway,  elevator or other means of egress a printed scale floor
  plan of the particular story, which shall  show  all  means  of  egress,
  clearly  labeling  those to be used in case of fire. Such signs shall be
  posted in other conspicuous areas throughout the  building.  Said  floor
  plan  shall  be  no smaller than eight inches by ten inches and shall be
  posted in such a manner that it cannot be readily removed.




   §  57.  Vertical  and  horizontal  openings.  In  order to prevent the
  vertical and horizontal spread of fire, smoke and gases,  it  shall,  in
  addition to other applicable provisions of this article, be necessary to
  comply with the requirements of this section.
    1.  All  doors opening from shafts, stair halls or stairs and the door
  assemblies shall  be  fire-retarded  with  the  doors  self-closing  and
  without  transoms  or  any other opening. Except in the case of elevator
  shafts, such shafts, stair halls  or  stairs  may  be  protected  by  an
  automatic sprinkler system in lieu of fire retarding.
    2.  All  other doors opening upon entrance halls or other public halls
  or corridors in every part of the dwelling shall be self-closing, except
  where such  dwelling  is  equipped  throughout  with  an  approved  type
  automatic  sprinkler  or  fire-detecting system. It shall be unlawful to
  attach to or maintain on or about any door required to  be  self-closing
  any device which prevents the self-closing of such door.
    3.  Every existing interior glazed sash, window or opening, other than
  a door, or a fireproof sash, window or opening glazed with  wire  glass,
  in  any  partition  forming  required enclosures around stairs or shafts
  shall be removed and the openings closed up and fire-retarded.




   § 58. Cellar ceiling. The ceiling of the cellar shall be fire-retarded
  or  be  equipped  with a sprinkler system, or the entire cellar shall be
  equipped with a fire-detecting system. Any room within the  dwelling  in
  which  a  boiler  or furnace is used for generating heat or hot water to
  service the dwelling shall be enclosed with fire-retarded partitions and
  every door opening therefrom and its assembly shall  be  fireproof  with
  the   door  self-closing.  The  ceiling  of  such  room  shall  also  be
  fire-retarded or be equipped with a sprinkler system, or the room  shall
  be equipped with a fire-detecting system.


   §  59.  Ventilation for shafts. 1. There shall be provided in the roof
  directly over each stair, fire-stair, dumbwaiter,  elevator  or  similar
  shaft  which  extends  to  or  within one story of a roof, a ventilating
  metal skylight of the cross-sectional area of such shaft. Such  skylight
  need  not, however, exceed twenty square feet in area. Where an existing
  skylight is smaller than the  dimensions  or  area  prescribed  in  this
  subdivision,  no  structural change shall be required, but a ventilating
  metal skylight fitting  the  existing  opening  in  the  roof  shall  be
  sufficient.  Every skylight shall be glazed with plain glass in the roof
  of such skylight and shall be equipped with metal screens over and under
  the skylight. In lieu of a skylight a window of the same area at the top
  story shall be accepted.
    2.  Whenever  there  is a flooring of solid construction at the top of
  any enclosed stair, fire-stair,  elevator  or  similar  shaft,  openings
  shall  be left near the top of such shaft for ventilation. Such openings
  shall provide  at  least  two  hundred  eighty-eight  square  inches  of
  unobstructed  ventilation  and shall communicate directly with the outer
  air, or be otherwise ventilated in accordance with the provisions of the
  local building code.
    3. It  shall  be  unlawful  to  discharge  into  any  such  shaft  any
  inflammable  or  volatile  gases, liquids or other thing or matter which
  would endanger life.




   §  60.  Bulkheads  and  scuttles.  1.  There shall be a fire-resistive
  bulkhead in the roof over, or connecting directly by means of  a  public
  hall  with  the  highest portion of every stair extending to the highest
  story below the main roof.  Stairs leading to such  bulkheads  shall  be
  fire-retarded  as required for other public stairs and shall have at the
  top fireproof doors and assemblies  with  the  doors  self-closing.  All
  stairs to required bulkheads shall be provided with a guide or handrail.
  A  scuttle so constructed as to be readily opened may be substituted for
  a bulkhead in dwellings not exceeding three stories and  a  basement  in
  height.  Such  scuttle  shall be at least twenty-one inches in width and
  twenty-eight inches in length, covered on the  outside  with  metal  and
  provided with a stationary iron or steel ladder leading thereto.
    2. When a dwelling has a pitched or sloping roof with a pitch or slope
  of more than fifteen degrees, no bulkhead or scuttle, or stair or ladder
  leading thereto shall be required.
    3.  A  bulkhead  door or scuttle shall never be locked with a key, but
  may be fastened on the inside with movable  rustproof  bolts  or  hooks.
  All key locks shall be removed.
    4.  Bulkheads  and  stairs  leading  thereto  existing  on July first,
  nineteen hundred fifty-two, shall be permitted provided the stairs  have
  such angle of ascent and treads of such dimensions as may be approved by
  the department.




   §   61.  Fire  alarm  system;  watchman.  1.  Except  as  provided  in
  subdivision three, in every transient dwelling containing thirty or more
  sleeping rooms for transient occupancy, there shall be an interior  fire
  alarm system.
    2.  Except  as  provided  in  subdivision  three,  in  every fireproof
  transient dwelling containing fifty or more sleeping rooms for transient
  occupants, and in  every  non-fireproof  transient  dwelling  containing
  thirty  or  more such rooms, when thirty-five per centum or more of such
  rooms are occupied, there shall be, in addition  to  the  interior  fire
  alarm  system,  one  or  more watchmen or clerks, employed by the owner,
  whose duty it shall be  to  visit  every  portion  of  the  dwelling  at
  frequent  regular  intervals  between the hours of eleven p.m. and seven
  a.m. for the purpose of detecting fire or other sources  of  danger  and
  giving  immediate and timely warning thereof to all the occupants. There
  shall be provided a watchman's clock system or other  device  to  record
  the movement of such watchman.
    3.  Where  throughout  such  dwelling  a  fire-detecting system, or an
  approved type automatic sprinkler system is provided  which  actuates  a
  fire  alarm  by  the  flow  of  water  through such system so as to give
  warning to all the occupants of the dwelling,  and  is  installed  in  a
  manner  satisfactory  to  the  department  in  conformity with rules and
  regulations adopted by the commission, the  provisions  of  subdivisions
  one and two shall not be applicable.






   § 62. Miscellaneous provisions. 1. An existing sprinkler installation,
  fire  alarm,  watchman's  clock  or fire-detecting system which has been
  approved or accepted by the department having jurisdiction and installed
  before July first, nineteen hundred fifty-two, in conformity with  rules
  and  regulations  adopted  by the commission, shall, after inspection by
  the said department, be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements
  of this chapter.
    2. Where a sprinkler system is required by this article,  such  system
  shall  be  constructed  to  fuse  at  a  temperature not higher than one
  hundred sixty-five degrees Fahrenheit, spaced so as to protect the  area
  which is required to be sprinklered.
    3.  In  furnace, boiler, laundry rooms and other parts of the dwelling
  where high temperature usually prevails, sprinkler heads may fuse  at  a
  higher  temperature.  Where  such rooms are located at least thirty feet
  distant from such dwelling, no sprinklers shall be required.
    4. Except as otherwise provided in sections fifty-two and  fifty-five,
  an  approved  fire-detecting  system  shall  be  accepted as meeting any
  requirement for a sprinkler system under this article.




   §  63.  Two story transient dwellings. 1. All nursing and convalescent
  homes, homes for the aged, and boarding and nursery schools, two stories
  in height, shall conform with all of the provisions of article four.
    2. Except as provided in subdivision one of  this  section,  the  only
  provisions  of  article  four  which  shall apply to two story transient
  dwellings in existence on July first, nineteen hundred fifty-two,  shall
  be sections sixty, sixty-one, sixty-five, title two and the following:
    a.  Every  such  transient  dwelling  shall have at least two means of
  egress. The first means of egress shall be by an interior  stair  closed
  off  at  the  top  or  bottom. The second means of egress shall be by an
  additional interior stair closed off at the top  or  bottom  or  a  fire
  stair  or fire escape. A second means of egress shall not be required in
  a dwelling containing less than thirty sleeping rooms if the sill of the
  second story window does not exceed fourteen  feet  in  vertical  height
  above  the  ground  or  other  safe landing place immediately below such
  window sill.
    b. Where it is impractical in such transient dwellings  to  provide  a
  second  required  means  of  egress,  the  department may order, in lieu
  thereof, additional alterations to the first  means  of  egress  and  to
  shafts, stairs and other vertical openings to safeguard the occupants of
  the dwelling, may require the public halls providing access to the first
  means  of  egress  to  be  equipped  on  both  stories with an automatic
  sprinkler system, and may also require automatic sprinkler heads in  the
  stair which serves as the only means of egress.
    c.  Where  two means of egress are required by this section and one is
  an ornamental stair, the provision for closing off the stair at  top  or
  bottom shall not be applicable to the ornamental stair.


   §  64.  One  story transient dwellings. The only provisions of article
  four which shall apply to one story transient dwellings in existence  on
  July  first,  nineteen  hundred  fifty-two,  shall  be  sections  sixty,
  sixty-one, sixty-five and title two.




   §  65. Artificial lighting.  The owner shall provide a light or lights
  in every public hall, stair and fire-stair on every floor so that  every
  such space shall be lighted adequately.




   §  70.  Repairs  and  cleanliness.  Every  transient dwelling shall be
  maintained in conformity with the  provisions  of  section  one  hundred
  seventy-four.




   §  71.  Water  closet  and  bath accommodations. Every water closet or
  bathroom installed in  transient  dwellings  on  or  after  July  first,
  nineteen  hundred  fifty-two, and in transient dwellings converted on or
  after such date shall be constructed in conformity with  the  provisions
  of section one hundred seventy-one.




   §  72. Water supply; plumbing and drainage.  Every such dwelling shall
  comply with the provisions of sections forty-one and forty-three.




   § 100. Application of article five. All the provisions of this article
  shall  apply  to  every  multiple  dwelling  of  permanent  or transient
  occupancy erected on or after July first,  nineteen  hundred  fifty-two,
  and  shall  apply  in  addition  to  and  not  in  substitution  for the
  provisions of article two, articles six or seven, and  in  the  case  of
  transient  dwellings,  sections fifty-three, fifty-six, and sixty-one of
  article four.




   §  101.  Height  and  bulk.  The  height  and bulk of any new multiple
  dwelling shall be in accordance with the provisions  of  any  applicable
  local law, ordinance, resolution, code provision or regulation.




   §  102. Yards and courts. Yards and courts in connection with any such
  multiple dwelling shall be in accordance  with  the  provisions  of  any
  applicable   local   law,   ordinance,  resolution,  code  provision  or
  regulation.




   § 103. Lighting and ventilation of rooms. 1. Except as in this section
  and  in  sections one hundred five, one hundred seventy-one and articles
  three and four otherwise expressly provided,  every  living  room  shall
  have  at  least one window opening directly upon a street, yard or court
  upon the same lot as that occupied by the dwelling in which such room is
  situated.
    2. Nothing in this section  shall  be  construed  as  prohibiting  the
  windows  of  any  room  from  opening  on  a  partially-enclosed terrace
  provided such terrace opens directly to a street, yard or court and  the
  area  of  the  front of the terrace which is open to the outer air is at
  least equal to seventy-five per centum of the floor surface area of  the
  terrace.
    3.  No  required window shall open upon any offset or recess less than
  six feet in  width  except  a  window  of  a  water-closet  compartment,
  bathroom, or stair or of a kitchenette.
    4.  The  total  window  area  in  every  living room shall be at least
  one-tenth of the floor surface area of such room.




   §  104.  Size of rooms.   1. Every living room, except kitchens, shall
  contain at least eighty square feet of floor space and shall be not less
  than eight feet in its least horizontal  dimension.  However,  in  every
  permanently  occupied  dwelling,  one  living  room in each apartment or
  suite shall have at least one hundred thirty-two square  feet  of  floor
  space.
    2. Every living room shall be at least seven and a half feet high, the
  measurements  in  all  cases  to be taken from the finished floor to the
  finished underside of the ceiling. Beams crossing  the  ceiling  may  be
  disregarded  if  none  of  them  extends below the ceiling more than six
  inches.




   §  105. Cooking spaces.  1. Every space which is intended, arranged or
  designed for cooking or warming of food shall be  either  a  kitchen  or
  kitchenette.
    2.   A   kitchen  or  kitchenette  shall  be  unlawful  unless  it  is
  constructed, arranged and maintained in compliance  with  the  following
  applicable provisions:
    a.  The  ceiling  and  walls,  exclusive of doors, of all kitchenettes
  shall be fire-retarded or in lieu thereof such space shall  be  equipped
  with  one  or  more  sprinkler heads to fuse at a temperature not higher
  than  two  hundred  twelve  degrees  Fahrenheit.  Such  heads  shall  be
  connected to the water supply through a pipe of adequate size.
    b.   In  every  kitchen  and  kitchenette,  all  combustible  material
  immediately underneath or within one foot  of  any  apparatus  used  for
  cooking  or  warming  of  food  shall  be  fire-retarded or covered with
  fire-resistive material.
    c. Every kitchenette shall be provided with a window  opening  upon  a
  street or upon a yard, court or shaft. Such window shall be at least one
  foot  wide,  have  a  total area of at least three square feet and be at
  least ten per centum of the superficial floor area of such  kitchenette.
  In  lieu  of  such  window,  in  such  kitchenette it shall be lawful to
  install a system of mechanical or  gravity  ventilation  to  provide  at
  least six changes per hour of the air volume of such kitchenette.
    d.  Every  kitchenette  may be equipped with a door or doors, provided
  the lower portion of each such door has a  metal  grille  containing  at
  least  forty-eight square inches of clear openings or, in lieu of such a
  grille, there are two clear open spaces, each of  at  least  twenty-four
  square  inches,  one between the floor and each such door, and the other
  between the top of each such door and the head jamb.




   §  106.  Rooms  in  cellars. It shall be unlawful to occupy all or any
  part of a cellar for sleeping purposes, but all or part of  such  cellar
  may  be  used for storage or other general utility purposes accessory to
  the occupancy, use or management of the dwelling.




   §  107.  Entrance doors.  Every door giving access to an entrance hall
  from outside the dwelling shall contain at least  five  square  feet  of
  glazed surface. Every such door shall open outwardly. The width of every
  such  door  shall  be  at  least forty-four inches. However, when double
  doors are provided each of the doors separately shall be  at  least  two
  feet six inches.




   §  108. Windows and skylights for public halls and stairs. 1.  Where a
  window or windows are required to light a public hall or  part  thereof,
  at  least one of such windows shall be not less than two feet six inches
  wide and five feet high. Every required window in such a hall shall open
  upon a street, yard or court. On the top story  of  such  a  dwelling  a
  ventilating skylight of the same dimensions shall be accepted in lieu of
  a window for that story.
    2.  There  shall be in the roof, directly over each required stair and
  fire-stair a ventilating skylight provided with louvres  or  ventilators
  having  a  minimum  open  area of forty square inches. The roof of every
  such skylight shall  be  glazed  with  plain  glass  and  equipped  with
  suitable  metal  screens  above and below. The glazed area of every such
  skylight shall be at least twenty square feet, except  that  in  such  a
  dwelling  or  section  thereof  two stories or less in height the glazed
  area of such a skylight need be only nine square  feet.  In  lieu  of  a
  skylight, a window of the same area as prescribed in subdivision one may
  be  provided.  If  such  a  window  is used in lieu of a skylight, fixed
  louvres having a minimum opening of forty square inches  shall  also  be
  installed in or directly adjacent to such window.
    3.  When  any  stair,  fire-stair  or  fire-tower  in  such a dwelling
  terminates at the level of a setback of an outer wall and  such  setback
  consists  of a terrace at least four feet in width, measured between the
  inside of the parapet wall and the wall of the dwelling and at least ten
  feet in length, measured parallel to the wall of the dwelling, there may
  be provided in lieu of such skylight a fireproof door and assembly  with
  the  door  self-closing  giving  access from such stair or fire-stair to
  such terrace. Such door shall have a panel at least five square feet  in
  area  glazed with wire glass and shall be equipped with louvres having a
  minimum open area of forty square inches.




   §  109. Artificial lighting. The owner shall provide a light or lights
  in every public hall, stair and fire-stair on every floor so that  every
  such space shall be lighted adequately.






	   §  130.  Entrance  halls.  Every entrance hall shall be at least three
  feet eight inches in clear width from the entrance to the  first  stair.
  If  such an entrance hall is the only entrance to more than one required
  stairs, the width of such hall shall be increased  in  every  part,  for
  each  such  additional  flight of stairs, by one-half the width required
  for one flight of stairs.




   §  131.  Shafts,  elevators  and  dumbwaiters.  Every  shaft  shall be
  enclosed on all sides with fireproof  walls  and  shall  have  fireproof
  doors  and  assemblies at all openings, with the doors self-closing. Not
  more than three elevators or dumbwaiters shall ever  be  placed  in  the
  same  shaft.  All dumbwaiter doors shall be fastened by an interior lock
  in the shaft operated and controlled from a central point. The doors  of
  every  elevator  shaft  shall  be  provided  with an automatic device to
  prevent the normal operation of the elevator unless the hoistway door at
  which the car is standing is closed and locked, or unless  all  hoistway
  doors   are  locked  in  a  closed  position.  Such  doors,  except  for
  power-operated sliding doors, shall have a vision panel  of  wire  glass
  not  exceeding one square foot in area. Every elevator shall be equipped
  with a gate or door with an  automatic  device  to  prevent  the  normal
  operation of such elevator unless such gate or door is closed.




   §  132. Stairs. Every interior and exterior stair and fire-stair shall
  be provided with proper balustrades and handrails. Every such stair  and
  fire-stair  three  feet  eight inches or more in width shall be provided
  with a handrail on each side. Each tread, exclusive of nosing, shall  be
  not less than nine and one-half inches wide; each riser shall not exceed
  seven  and three-quarter inches in height; and the product of the number
  of inches in the width of the tread and the  number  of  inches  in  the
  height  of  the  riser  shall  be  at  least  seventy  and  at  the most
  seventy-five. Winding stairs shall be unlawful in any public part of the
  dwelling.




   §  133. Fire-escapes. 1. Every fire-escape shall be located, arranged,
  constructed and maintained in accordance with the following provisions:
    a. Each fire-escape shall be accessible to one or more exterior  doors
  or windows opening from the room, apartment or suite, and such window or
  door shall be two feet or more in clear width and two feet six inches or
  more  in clear height. The sill of any such window shall be within three
  feet of the floor.
    b. Access to any fire-escape shall not be through any  public  toilet,
  or  be  obstructed by any bathroom fixture, kitchen fixture, sink, or in
  any other way. Bars, grilles, gates or other obstructing devices on  any
  window  or  door  giving access to any fire-escape shall be unlawful.  A
  required fire-escape shall never include a window of  a  stair  hall  or
  public stairs.
    c.  Every  fire-escape  shall  be  constructed  of  open balconies and
  stairways of incombustible material and designed to support a  uniformly
  distributed live load of at least eighty pounds per square foot. The use
  of cast iron in the construction of fire-escapes shall be unlawful.
    d.  No  fire-escape shall be removed from or erected upon any multiple
  dwelling without a permit from the department. No fire-escape  shall  be
  removed  or  replaced unless a secondary means of egress is available or
  provided in lieu thereof.
    2. a. Every balcony for a fire-escape shall be three feet or  more  in
  clear width.
    b.  Every  lowest  balcony  more  than  five feet above a safe landing
  beneath shall have  a  drop  ladder  fifteen  inches  in  width  and  of
  sufficient  length to reach such landing. Such ladder shall be held in a
  proper position at all  times,  and,  unless  properly  counterbalanced,
  shall  be  placed in guides so that it can be lowered easily. The lowest
  balcony shall not be more than fourteen feet above the  ground  or  safe
  landing place beneath.
    c. Every stairway shall be placed at an angle of sixty degrees or less
  with  steps at least six inches in width and twenty inches in length and
  with a maximum rise of nine inches. The opening in any balcony for  such
  a stairway shall be at least twenty-one by twenty-eight inches.
    d. A stairway shall be provided from every balcony on the top story to
  the  roof  of a multiple dwelling three or more stories in height except
  where the roof is sloped or pitched in excess of fifteen degrees.




   §  134.  Cellar  entrance.  There  shall  be  a direct entrance to the
  cellar, or to the lowest story if there be no cellar, from  the  outside
  of every multiple dwelling, except that any stair leading to such cellar
  or  lowest  story  may  be  located  inside  the dwelling provided it is
  enclosed in fireproof walls and fireproof doors and assemblies, with the
  doors self-closing, at both the level of such cellar or lowest story and
  that of the story above.




   § 135. Frame buildings. It shall be unlawful to erect a frame multiple
  dwelling exceeding two stories in height.






	   §  136.  Motor vehicle storage. A space or a structure may be provided
  and maintained in any multiple dwelling or upon the premises thereof for
  the storage of passenger motor vehicles but only with a  written  permit
  therefor  from  the  department  and in accordance with every applicable
  local law, ordinance, resolution, code provision or regulation  and  the
  rules and regulations of the commission.




   §  137.  Business  uses. When business is conducted in a non-fireproof
  multiple dwelling, the ceiling of the business space  shall  be  covered
  with fire-resistive materials or be equipped with a sprinkler system.




   §  138.  Parapets  and  guard railings. Except as hereinafter provided
  every open area of a roof, terrace, areaway,  outside  stair,  retaining
  wall  or porch shall be protected by a parapet wall, a guard railing, or
  both, extending three feet six inches or more in height above the  level
  of  such area or, in the case of a stair landing, stair window or window
  in a public hall, above the level of  the  floor  adjacent  thereto.  In
  dwellings  two  stories  in  height, it shall be sufficient if the guard
  railing is erected at least five feet  distant  from  and  encloses  any
  required bulkhead or scuttle opening to the roof. This section shall not
  apply to dwellings one story in height.




   §  139.  Boiler  rooms.   In every dwelling the boiler or furnace of a
  central heating plant shall be enclosed in a fireproof room or space and
  all openings therefrom to  other  portions  of  the  dwelling  shall  be
  equipped   with   fireproof   doors   and   assemblies  with  the  doors
  self-closing, except that in any  dwelling  three  stories  or  less  in
  height, such room or space may in the alternative be enclosed with walls
  or  partitions  constructed  of fire-resistive materials and the ceiling
  fire retarded.




   §  170.  Water  supply.   The owner shall provide proper appliances to
  receive and distribute in such dwelling  an  adequate  supply  of  water
  obtained  from  the public water supply system or from a source approved
  by the public health officer having jurisdiction at all times  when  the
  building  is  occupied  and  during  all hours and hot water between six
  o'clock in the morning and midnight.




   §  171.  Water-closet  and  bath  accommodations.    1. Every dwelling
  arranged for permanent occupancy shall contain a water-closet  in  every
  apartment.
    2.  The  floor  of  every compartment, bathroom or general toilet room
  shall be made waterproof and such waterproofing shall extend six  inches
  or  more  above the floor so that the floor can be washed or flushed out
  without leaking. No plumbing  or  plumbing  fixture  shall  be  enclosed
  wholly or in part with woodwork.
    3.  Water-closets  may  be  placed  together  in a general toilet room
  provided  such  water-closets  are  supplementary  to  the  water-closet
  accommodations  required  for  the  exclusive  use  of  tenants  of  the
  dwelling, or are  solely  for  the  use  of  business  portions  of  the
  dwelling.
    4.  Every  apartment  arranged for permanent occupancy shall contain a
  bath or shower accessible from every bedroom without passing through any
  other bedroom. In dwellings arranged for transient occupancy there shall
  be at least one shower or bath for every eight resident occupants.
    5. Except as specifically provided otherwise in  this  chapter,  every
  water-closet  compartment  and  bath  or shower room shall have a window
  opening upon a street or upon a lawful court or yard.
    6. In lieu of a required window or skylight, it  shall  be  lawful  to
  install  a  system of mechanical or gravity ventilation for water-closet
  compartments or bathrooms in any portion of a dwelling. Such  system  of
  ventilation  shall  be constructed, arranged and maintained continuously
  to provide at least four changes per hour of the air volume of each such
  water-closet compartment or bathroom.




   §  172.  Plumbing  and  drainage. All liquid or water-borne waste from
  plumbing fixtures shall be conveyed by a house drain and house sewer  to
  a  street  sewer  or  to  a  combined street storm water main and sewer,
  unless no such sewers are available.   Where neither kind  of  sewer  is
  available, provision shall be made for disposing of such waste as may be
  permitted  pursuant  to  article  five  of  the public health law and as
  required by local law or ordinance.




   §  173. Heating. Every new dwelling shall be provided with heat in all
  living rooms sufficient to maintain the minimum temperatures required by
  local law, ordinances, rules or  regulation,  or  by  the  local  public
  health  officer, provided, however, that such minimum temperature shall,
  notwithstanding the provisions  of  subdivision  one  of  section  three
  hundred  twenty-nine  of this chapter, be sixty-eight degrees Fahrenheit
  during the hours between six o'clock in the morning and ten  o'clock  in
  the   evening   during   the   months  between  October  first  and  May
  thirty-first, whenever the outdoor temperature  falls  below  fifty-five
  degrees Fahrenheit.




   §  174.  Repairs  and  cleanliness. The owner shall keep all and every
  part of a dwelling and the lot on which it is situated in  good  repair,
  clean and free from vermin, rodents, dirt, filth, garbage or other thing
  or  matter  dangerous  to  life  or health; but the tenant shall also be
  liable if a violation is caused by his own  wilful  act,  assistance  or
  negligence  or  that  of  any  member  of his family or household or his
  guests.




   §  200.  Application  of  article  six. The provisions of this article
  shall apply only to fireproof new multiple  dwellings  of  permanent  or
  transient  occupancy,  and  shall  apply  in  addition  to  and  not  in
  substitution for the provisions of articles two and  five,  and  in  the
  case  of  transient  dwellings,  sections  fifty-three,  fifty-six,  and
  sixty-one of article four.




   §  201. Requirements for fireproof construction. 1. Every new multiple
  dwelling exceeding six stories or seventy-five feet in height  shall  be
  fireproof.
    2. The foregoing requirements shall not be construed as prohibiting:
    a.  Elsewhere  than  within,  or in the openings to, the public halls,
  stairs and shafts, the  use  of  wood  for  sleepers,  grounds,  nailing
  blocks,  underflooring,  finish  flooring,  interior  doors  with  their
  assemblies and saddles, floor base not more than  one  foot  in  height,
  picture  and  wall  moulding,  shelving,  closet  and  kitchen fixtures,
  cupboards, cabinets and wardrobes.
    b. The use of wood for window and for interior trim and finish  backed
  solidly  against,  or  filled with, incombustible material and elsewhere
  than within, or in the openings to, the public halls, stairs and shafts.




   § 202. Egress from dwellings. 1. Nursing and convalescent homes, homes
  for  the  aged  and  boarding and nursery schools, two stories in height
  erected after July first, nineteen  hundred  fifty-seven,  child  caring
  institutions,  two  stories in height erected after July first, nineteen
  hundred sixty-two, and all dwellings three or  more  stories  in  height
  shall  have  at  least two fire-stairs. Except as otherwise specifically
  provided in subdivision four, such fire-stairs  shall  extend  from  the
  entrance  story  to the roof and be equipped with fireproof self-closing
  doors glazed with wire glass and without transoms. No windows  shall  be
  required  in such stairs, but any openings in exterior walls, except any
  window openings  facing  a  street  or  yard,  shall  be  equipped  with
  fireproof frame and sash and glazed with wire glass.
    2.  Every such fire-stair shall have an entrance on the entrance story
  from a street or an entrance at the side or rear of the dwelling from  a
  yard,  court  or  passageway  having  continuous,  safe and unobstructed
  access to a street. Every required stair and stair-landing shall  be  at
  least three feet eight inches in clear width.
    3.  There  shall be horizontal access from every apartment to at least
  two fire-stairs, at least one of which shall be within one hundred  feet
  horizontally  in the line of travel from a required means of egress from
  such apartment.
    4. A dwelling as a rule transiently or temporarily occupied, in  which
  at  least  eighty  per centum of the living rooms above the second story
  open directly upon a  public  hall  without  any  intervening  foyer  or
  private  hall,  shall  have  at least two fire-stairs accessible at each
  story from each room through a public hall. Such fire-stairs shall be so
  located that at least one fire-stair shall be not more than one  hundred
  twenty-five  feet along the line of travel from the means of egress from
  any living room. Every such fire-stair shall have a clear  width  of  at
  least  three  feet  eight  inches.  Two such fire-stairs shall be deemed
  adequate for seventy living rooms on any story.
    5. Nursing and convalescent homes, homes for the  aged,  and  boarding
  and  nursery  schools,  one  story  in height, erected after July first,
  nineteen hundred fifty-seven, and child caring institutions,  one  story
  in  height,  erected after July first, nineteen hundred sixty-two, shall
  have at least two means of egress from the dwelling accessible to  every
  apartment  providing  free  and unobstructed egress by a door opening to
  the outer air.




   § 203. Egress from apartments. 1. There shall be at least one means of
  egress  from  each  apartment  or  suite on each and every story of such
  apartment or suite, and a second means of egress if the first  means  is
  not within forty feet of every living room in such apartment or suite on
  such story.
    2.  No means of egress from any apartment or suite shall open into any
  stair or fire-stair required under the provisions of this section except
  through a vestibule or public hall.




   §  204. Bulkheads. Every stair and fire-stair required by this chapter
  to extend to the level of  the  roof  shall  extend  to  and  through  a
  fireproof  bulkhead  or  other  fireproof  enclosure  in such roof. Such
  bulkhead or enclosure shall give unobstructed access  at  all  times  to
  such  roof  by means of a fireproof door and door assembly with the door
  self-closing. Stairs to a bulkhead or enclosure shall have  a  handrail.
  Where  the  roof  of  a  dwelling is pitched or sloped more than fifteen
  degrees, no bulkhead or stairs leading thereto shall be required.




   §  205.  Separation  and  ventilation  of  stairs.  1.  All stairs and
  fire-stairs shall be completely separated  from  one  another  and  from
  every  elevator  or  other  shaft  by  fireproof  walls.   They shall be
  constructed of fireproof material throughout and shall contain  no  wood
  or  other  inflammable  material  of  any kind, except that handrails of
  hardwood may be provided.
    2. Access to stairs and fire-stairs from any public vestibule or other
  public hall shall be through fireproof doors and  assemblies,  with  the
  doors  self-closing  and  at  least three feet wide, or through pairs of
  such doors at least four feet wide, containing in either  case  a  fixed
  sash glazed with wire glass at least one-quarter inch thick and at least
  three hundred sixty square inches in area.
    3.  At  the highest level of every stair and fire-stair there shall be
  provided a window or a skylight. At such termination, there  shall  also
  be  an  opening  of  at least one hundred forty-four square inches which
  shall communicate directly to the outer air, which opening may be a part
  of such window or skylight. Except as  herein  provided,  such  skylight
  shall  ccomply  with  the  provisions  of subdivision two of section one
  hundred eight.




   §  206.  Cellar  and  basement  stairs.  All inside cellar or basement
  stairs shall be entirely enclosed with fireproof walls and  be  provided
  with fireproof doors and assemblies, with the doors self-closing, at all
  openings.




   §  207.  Public  halls. 1. Every public vestibule or other public hall
  shall comply either  with  the  applicable  provisions  of  section  two
  hundred  fifty-eight  for  non-fireproof  dwellings,  or with all of the
  following provisions:
    a. Every such public vestibule or hall shall be  everywhere  at  least
  three  feet  eight inches in clear width and shall be separated from all
  other parts of the dwelling by fireproof floors and walls.
    b. All openings from such  a  public  vestibule  or  hall  to  stairs,
  fire-stairs,   shafts,  apartments  or  suites  shall  be  protected  by
  fire-proof doors and assemblies, with  the  doors  self-closing,  except
  that  such doors and assemblies shall not be required in any transiently
  or temporarily occupied fireproof dwelling for any apartment  consisting
  of one room opening directly upon a public hall.
    c.  Such  a  public  vestibule or hall shall not be required to have a
  window, but if it does not have a window opening to  the  outer  air  it
  shall be equipped for artificial lighting and ventilation.
    d.  Any  part of a public hall that is shut off from any other part of
  such hall by a door or doors shall be deemed a separate hall.




   §  215.  Interior  water-closets and bathrooms. 1. Except as otherwise
  provided in this section, water-closets, bath and shower  rooms  may  be
  ventilated  by  windows  or  mechanically  ventilated  as  prescribed in
  section one hundred seventy-one.
    2. In transiently occupied dwellings there shall be on each  story  at
  least two water-closet compartments for the first twenty living rooms or
  fraction  thereof  and  at least one additional water-closet compartment
  for each additional fifteen living rooms or fraction thereof.
    a. The water-closet compartments on each  story  shall  be  accessible
  from every such living room on the story. Such water-closet compartments
  may be placed in one or more general toilet rooms.
    b.  Every  water-closet  compartment  of  a  general toilet containing
  water-closet compartments permitted under this subdivision shall have  a
  window  opening  to  the  outer air of the dimensions, kind and location
  required in a living room of the same area by section one hundred three,
  or be provided with a system of mechanical ventilation as prescribed  in
  subdivision six of section one hundred seventy-one.




   §  250.  Application  of article seven. The provisions of this article
  shall  apply  only  to  non-fireproof  new  dwellings  of  permanent  or
  transient  occupancy,  and  shall  apply  in  addition  to  and  not  in
  substitution for the provisions of articles two and  five,  and  in  the
  case  of  transient  dwellings,  sections  fifty-three,  fifty-six,  and
  sixty-one of article four.


   §  251. Height limitation.  A dwelling not exceeding seventy-five feet
  or six stories in height may be non-fireproof construction.




   §  252.  Sub-curb  uses.  In  all portions of such dwellings below the
  level of the highest curb all structural members,  partitions,  furrings
  and ceilings shall be constructed of incombustible materials.


   §  253. Construction of first floor.  The first floor above the lowest
  cellar, or, if there be no cellar, above  the  lowest  story,  shall  be
  fireproof  or,  if  the  dwelling  be  three  stories or less in height,
  fire-retarded.




   § 254. Egress from dwellings. 1. Nursing and convalescent homes, homes
  for  the  aged  and  boarding and nursery schools, two stories in height
  erected after July first, nineteen  hundred  fifty-seven,  child  caring
  institutions,  two stories in height, erected after July first, nineteen
  hundred sixty-two and all dwellings three  or  more  stories  in  height
  shall  have  at  least  two  means  of  egress  and, except as otherwise
  provided in the case of a pitched or sloped roof, shall  extend  to  the
  roof  from  an  entrance  story, street, court or yard. The entrances to
  such means of egress at every story  shall  be  at  least  fifteen  feet
  distant  from  each  other unless they are on opposite sides of a public
  hall. One means of egress shall be a stair constructed  as  provided  in
  section  two  hundred  fifty-seven.  The  other means of egress shall be
  either another such stair or a fire-stair or a  fire-escape  constructed
  as provided in section one hundred thirty-three.
    2.  If  the  number of living rooms on any story, or in any section of
  any story, above the entrance story exceeds twenty, there  shall  be  an
  additional  stair  or  a fire-stair extending from the entrance story to
  the roof for each twenty rooms or fraction  thereof  on  such  story  or
  section  thereof  in  excess  of twenty, except that no additional stair
  shall be required for such excess on any story or section thereof if the
  number of living rooms thereon does not exceed thirty and if in addition
  one stair serving such story or section and every entrance hall or other
  public hall connected therewith is everywhere four feet  six  inches  or
  more in clear width.
    3.  There shall be accessible from every apartment two means of egress
  from the dwelling, one of which shall be  an  enclosed  stair  complying
  with the provisions of section two hundred fifty-seven within fifty feet
  from a means of egress from such apartment.
    4.  Nursing  and  convalescent homes, homes for the aged, and boarding
  and nursery schools, one story in  height,  erected  after  July  first,
  nineteen  hundred  fifty-seven, and child caring institutions, one story
  in height, erected after July first, nineteen hundred  sixty-two,  shall
  have  at least two means of egress from the dwelling accessible to every
  apartment providing free and unobstructed egress by a  door  opening  to
  the outer air.




   § 255. Egress from apartments.  1. A dwelling three or more stories in
  height  shall  have at least two means of egress from every apartment or
  suite. Such means shall be remote from each other. Except where it opens
  into a stair as permitted in subdivision three, one means shall be to  a
  public  hall  connecting  with  an enclosed stair or fire-stair not more
  than fifty feet distant from such means. The  other  required  means  of
  egress  shall  open  either  directly  upon  a  fire-escape  or a public
  vestibule or other public hall connecting with a stair or fire-stair.
    2. Except as hereinafter provided for dwellings two stories or less in
  height, such vestibule, hall or stair shall be separated from the public
  hall or stair, on which the first means of egress opens, by a  fireproof
  wall,  unpierced  except  by a fireproof door and assembly with the door
  self-closing.  In  a  dwelling  two  stories  or  less  in  height,  the
  separating wall may be fire-retarded.
    3.  In a dwelling three stories or less in height and occupied by four
  families or less on each story, and in  any  section  of  a  permanently
  occupied dwelling which is two stories or less in height and occupied by
  four families or less on each story, a means of egress from an apartment
  may  open  directly  into  a  stair without the intervention of a public
  hall. Such means shall have a fireproof door and assembly with the  door
  self-closing and without a transom.






   § 256. Bulkheads and scuttles.  1. Every required stair and fire-stair
  in  a  dwelling  three  stories  or more in height shall have a bulkhead
  constructed as provided for fireproof dwellings in section  two  hundred
  four.
    2. A dwelling which is two stories or less in height shall be provided
  at each required stair or fire-stair either with such bulkhead or with a
  scuttle  at least two feet by three feet in size, located in the ceiling
  of the public hall on  the  top  story.  Every  such  scuttle  shall  be
  arranged  to  be  readily  opened,  shall be covered on the outside with
  metal and shall be provided with stairs or  a  stationary  metal  ladder
  leading  thereto  and  easily  accessible  to  all  the occupants of the
  dwelling.
    3. When the roof of a dwelling is pitched or sloped more than  fifteen
  degrees,  no  bulkhead  or  scuttle, or stair or ladder leading thereto,
  shall be required.




   § 256. Bulkheads and scuttles.  1. Every required stair and fire-stair
  in  a  dwelling  three  stories  or more in height shall have a bulkhead
  constructed as provided for fireproof dwellings in section  two  hundred
  four.
    2. A dwelling which is two stories or less in height shall be provided
  at each required stair or fire-stair either with such bulkhead or with a
  scuttle  at least two feet by three feet in size, located in the ceiling
  of the public hall on  the  top  story.  Every  such  scuttle  shall  be
  arranged  to  be  readily  opened,  shall be covered on the outside with
  metal and shall be provided with stairs or  a  stationary  metal  ladder
  leading  thereto  and  easily  accessible  to  all  the occupants of the
  dwelling.
    3. When the roof of a dwelling is pitched or sloped more than  fifteen
  degrees,  no  bulkhead  or  scuttle, or stair or ladder leading thereto,
  shall be required.




   §  257.  Public stairs. 1. Every stair and fire-stair shall, except as
  otherwise provided in subdivisions three and four of this section and in
  section  two  hundred  fifty-nine,  be  constructed  as   provided   for
  fire-stairs  in  sections  two  hundred  two  and  two  hundred five for
  fireproof dwellings.
    2. Every stair and fire-stair shall be at least three  feet  in  clear
  width  throughout,  and at all floor levels shall have landings at least
  three feet eight inches in clear width.
    3. Every stair and fire-stair shall be completely separated from every
  other stair and fire-stair and from  every  public  hall  and  shaft  by
  fireproof  walls,  with  fireproof  doors and assemblies, with the doors
  self-closing and without transoms,  at  all  openings,  except  that  in
  dwellings two stories or less in height such walls may be fire-retarded.
  The  doors  giving  access  to such stairs shall not be held open by any
  device whatever.
    4. Except in the case of an interior enclosed stair separated from and
  directly accessible to the public hall by a self-closing fireproof  door
  and  except  as provided in subdivision five, there shall be provided to
  light and ventilate every stair at  every  story  a  window  or  windows
  opening on a street, court or yard.
    5. In a dwelling occupied by two families or less on every story:
    a.  If  such dwelling is three stories or less in height, there may be
  provided for any stair, in lieu of windows, a stairwell  sixteen  inches
  or more in clear width extending from the entrance story to the roof.
    b.  If  such  dwelling  is  a permanently occupied dwelling and is two
  stories or less in height, there may be provided for any stair, in  lieu
  of  windows,  a  stairwell  six  inches  or more in clear width. For the
  purposes of this paragraph, a section of a permanently occupied dwelling
  may be deemed a separate multiple dwelling.
    c. If such dwelling is two stories in height and has no public hall on
  the first story, no stairwell or stair windows need be provided.




   § 258. Public halls. 1. Every public hall shall be everywhere at least
  three feet in clear width.
    2.  Except  as  herein provided, every public hall shall be completely
  enclosed with fireproof floor, ceiling and  walls,  and  separated  from
  every  stair  by  fireproof partitions or walls, and all doors and their
  assemblies  opening  therefrom  shall  be  fireproof,  with  the   doors
  self-closing  and  without transoms. In a dwelling three stories or less
  in height occupied by not more than four families on each story, or in a
  permanently occupied dwelling or any section thereof two stories or less
  in height, any such hall which furnishes access to only one  stair  need
  not  be separated from such stair by any partition or door and the walls
  of a public hall may be fire-retarded and the  floors  may  be  provided
  with three inches or more of incombustible materials between the beams.
    3. Except in dwellings three stories or less in height and occupied by
  two  families  or  less  on every story, every public hall shall have at
  least one window opening directly upon a street or upon a lawful yard or
  court. There shall be such a window at the end of such hall and at right
  angles to its length, with an additional window in each  forty  feet  of
  hall  or  fraction  thereof  beyond  the  first sixty feet from such end
  window; or the hall shall  have  one  window  opening  directly  upon  a
  street, yard or court, in every forty feet of the length of such hall or
  fraction thereof measured from one end of the hall. Any part of a public
  hall  that  is  shut  off  from any other part of such hall by a door or
  doors shall be deemed a separate hall.
    4. The foregoing provisions of this section with  regard  to  lighting
  and  ventilation  shall  not  apply  to a vestibule or other public hall
  which serves as a means of access from one or  more  apartments  opening
  thereon  to a fire-stair meeting the requirements of section two hundred
  two if such vestibule or  public  hall  is  lighted  and  ventilated  as
  required by sections one hundred nine and two hundred seven.




   §  259. Cellar and basement stairs. A cellar or basement stair located
  inside the dwelling shall be entirely enclosed with fireproof walls  and
  be  provided, at all openings, with fireproof doors and assemblies, with
  the doors self-closing, except that in any  dwelling  three  stories  or
  less  in  height,  such  stair  may be enclosed with walls or partitions
  constructed of fire-resistive materials.




   §  260.  One  and two-story frame dwellings; area limitation.  A frame
  dwelling not exceeding two stories in height erected pursuant  to  plans
  filed  after April first, nineteen hundred fifty-nine, and containing an
  area greater than three thousand square feet must, in  addition  to  any
  other  applicable  provisions of this article, comply with the following
  provisions:
    1. Fire-stopped partitions shall be constructed between apartments  in
  such  dwelling so as to prevent the passage of fire, smoke or gases from
  one apartment to another.
    2. No section of such dwelling shall contain more than three  thousand
  square  feet.  Each  such  section  shall  be  separated  from all other
  sections of the dwelling by fire walls of  masonry  or  other  materials
  having  a  fire  resistive  rating  of at least two hours. Such wall (1)
  shall be unpierced except for  openings  for  heat,  utility  and  other
  service  lines  and  ducts  with such openings sealed with incombustible
  materials (2) shall extend continuously from the  floor  of  the  lowest
  level  of  the  dwelling,  to  at  least two feet above the level of the
  finished roof and (3) be fire-stopped at floors and roof in such  manner
  as  to  prevent  the  passage  of fire, smoke or gases between sections.
  Where there is a peaked or sloped roof, such wall may terminate  at  the
  top of the roof boards.




   §  280. Water-closets and bathrooms. The requirements for water-closet
  compartments, bath and shower rooms shall be the  same  as  provided  in
  section  two  hundred  fifteen for fireproof dwellings, except that each
  required water-closet compartment, bath or shower room in  an  apartment
  shall  be ventilated by a window opening to the outer air as provided in
  section one hundred seventy-one.   Water-closet compartments,  bath  and
  shower  rooms  which  are  supplementary  to  those  required  under the
  provisions of sections one hundred seventy-one and two  hundred  fifteen
  may  be  mechanically  or  gravity ventilated as provided in section one
  hundred seventy-one.




   §  300.  Registry  of owner. On or before July first, nineteen hundred
  fifty-four, every owner of a  multiple  dwelling  shall  file  with  the
  department  a  statement,  in duplicate, on a form to be prepared by the
  department substantially as follows:
  Owner of record: .......................................................
  Street No. or other identifying description: ...........................
  Type of construction: ..................................................
                                    (frame, brick, stucco, etc.)
  Height of building: ................No. of stories: ....................
  Number of rooms or apartments for which designed: ......................
  Number of persons in occupancy: ........................................




   §  301.  Permits. 1. It shall be unlawful to commence the construction
  or alteration of a multiple dwelling or any part or section thereof,  or
  of  any  building  or structure on the same lot with such a dwelling, or
  the alteration or conversion  of  a  building  for  use  as  a  multiple
  dwelling,  or the moving of a dwelling from one lot to another, until an
  application or plans have been filed in  and  a  permit  issued  by  the
  department.  The department shall have the power to charge and collect a
  reasonable fee for each application filed and for each permit issued.
    2. No person shall be recognized as the agent of the owner  unless  he
  shall  file  with  the  department  a  written instrument, signed by the
  owner,  designating  him  as  such  agent.  Upon  the  filing  of   such
  instrument,  the person designated therein as such agent shall be deemed
  to be and shall be known as the certified agent of the owner.
    3. The department shall have power to issue, refuse, revoke or  cancel
  any  permit or approval in case of any failure to comply with any of the
  provisions  of  this  chapter,  or  in  case  any  false  allegation  or
  representation is made in any plans or statements submitted or filed for
  such  permit  or  approval.  If  such  permit  is  refused,  revoked  or
  cancelled,  the  reason  for  such  action  shall  be  recorded  by  the
  department.
    4.  All plans, statements and permits filed in any department shall be
  public  records  and  shall  not  be  destroyed  or  removed  from   the
  department.




   §  302.  Certificate  of  occupancy.  1. No multiple dwelling shall be
  occupied in whole or in part until the issuance of a certificate by  the
  department   that   said  dwelling  conforms  in  all  respects  to  the
  requirements of this chapter, except that no such certificate  shall  be
  required  for  any  multiple  dwelling  existing on July first, nineteen
  hundred fifty-two, for which a certificate of occupancy was not required
  before such date and in which no changes or alterations commenced on  or
  after  such  date have been made except in compliance with this chapter,
  and except that a certificate shall be required  prior  to  July  first,
  nineteen  hundred  fifty-seven  for  any  dwelling,  the  plans  for the
  alteration or conversion of which to multiple dwelling occupancy were on
  file with the department or a permit  authorizing  such  conversion  was
  issued  before  such  date and for which a certificate of occupancy upon
  completion of such conversion or alteration was not required before such
  date. This exception shall not be deemed to relieve any owner  from  the
  obligation  to  make such dwelling comply with the applicable provisions
  of this chapter.
    2. Except as above provided, no dwelling constructed as or altered  or
  converted  into  a  multiple  dwelling  on or after July first, nineteen
  hundred fifty-two, shall be occupied in  whole  or  in  part  until  the
  issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
    3.  The  department shall, on request of the owner or of his certified
  agent, issue a certificate of occupancy for any  old  multiple  dwelling
  not  requiring  such  certificate, provided that, after an inspection by
  the department, no violations are found against such dwelling.
    4. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued within  ten  days  after
  written application therefor, if the dwelling shall be entitled thereto.
  When the department does not issue such certificate within ten days, the
  head  of  the  department  shall,  on  the  request  of the owner or his
  certified agent, issue  a  temporary  certificate  of  occupancy  for  a
  multiple  dwelling or a section or a part thereof for a period of ninety
  days or less, provided that such certificate shall bear the  endorsement
  that the dwelling has been inspected by the department and complies with
  all  the requirements of this chapter, and that such temporary occupancy
  will not jeopardize life, health or property. Such temporary certificate
  may be renewed at the discretion of  the  head  of  the  department  for
  similar  periods  but  shall  not  extend,  together with such renewals,
  beyond one year from the date of its original issuance.
    5. A certificate, a record in the department, or a statement signed by
  the head of the department that a certificate has been  issued,  may  be
  relied  upon  by  every  person  who  in good faith purchases a multiple
  dwelling or who in good  faith  lends  money  upon  the  security  of  a
  mortgage  covering  such  a  dwelling. Whenever any person has so relied
  upon such a certificate, no claim that such dwelling had not,  prior  to
  the  issuance  of  such  certificate,  conformed  in all respects to the
  provisions of this chapter shall be made  against  such  person  or  his
  successor  in  title or ownership with respect to such multiple dwelling
  or mortgage, or against the interest of any  such  person  with  respect
  thereto.
    6.  Notwithstanding  any  general  or  local  law  to  the contrary, a
  certificate issued for any multiple dwelling organized pursuant  to  the
  provisions  of  article nine-B of the real property law, shall be deemed
  issued for each dwelling unit contained within such multiple dwelling in
  full compliance with the requirements of this section.




   §  302-a.  Unlawful  occupation.  1.  If  any dwelling or structure be
  occupied in whole or in  part  for  human  habitation  in  violation  of
  section three hundred two of this article, no rent shall be recovered by
  the owner of such premises for said period, and no action for possession
  of  said  premises  for  nonpayment  of  such  rent  shall be maintained
  therefor.
    2. The department charged with the enforcement  of  this  chapter  may
  cause  to  be  vacated any dwelling or any part thereof which contains a
  nuisance as defined in section three hundred five of this article, or is
  occupied by more families or persons than permitted in this chapter,  or
  is erected, altered or occupied contrary to law. Any such dwelling shall
  not again be occupied until it or its occupancy, as the case may be, has
  been made to conform to law.




   §  303.  Enforcement.  1.  The  provisions  of  this  chapter shall be
  enforced within each municipality by a person or department charged with
  such duty as provided in this section, provided, however,  that  in  the
  case  of  a  town  such  person  or  department  shall  have  power  and
  jurisdiction concerning such enforcement only with respect to such  part
  of the town as is outside the limits of any village or city. Whenever in
  any  city  or  village  there  is  a  person or department enforcing any
  building code, or in any town there is a person or department  enforcing
  any  building  code  with  respect  to  the whole or the portion thereof
  outside the limits of any  village  or  city,  the  provisions  of  this
  chapter  shall  be enforced by such person or department in such city or
  village, or in such town or portion thereof, respectively. If  there  be
  no  such person or department in and for a city or village, or in a town
  for the whole or the portion thereof outside the limits of any  city  or
  village,  the  chief  executive  officer or, if there be none, the chief
  administrative  body  or  board  of  the   city,   village,   or   town,
  respectively, shall have the power to and shall organize a department or
  shall  designate or employ a person or department for the enforcement of
  this chapter in such city  or  village,  or  in  such  town  or  portion
  thereof,  respectively,  and  the  provisions  of  this chapter shall be
  enforced therein by  the  department  so  organized  or  the  person  or
  department  so  designated  or  employed.  The  person  so designated or
  employed to enforce this chapter in a city or village or in  a  town  or
  portion  thereof,  or  in  two  or  more  of  them  acting  jointly,  as
  hereinafter provided, need not be an elector of  the  city,  village  or
  town,  or  of  any of them, as the case may be, in or for which he is so
  designated or employed. A person assigned as a fire department inspector
  pursuant to subdivision four of this section shall not by virtue of such
  assignment be  disqualified  from  holding  the  office  of  enforcement
  officer.
    2.  One such person or department may be designated or employed by two
  or more cities, villages or towns, acting jointly, for  the  enforcement
  of this chapter in such cities or villages, or in such towns or portions
  thereof,  respectively, and such cities, villages and towns may make and
  perform  agreements  in  connection  therewith.  Where   two   or   more
  municipalities  are  so  jointly acting, provision shall be made by each
  municipality for the appropriation, custody, audit, approval and payment
  of funds sufficient to defray the expense of operation of such person or
  department, including salaries, in such municipality  or  municipalities
  or  portion or portions thereof. Any joint agreement made as provided in
  this section shall include provisions for the proportionate cost of  the
  expense  of  operation of such person or department, including salaries,
  to be borne by each municipality or portion thereof and  the  manner  of
  employment  of  personnel  and  may provide that a fiscal officer of one
  such municipality shall be the custodian of the  moneys  made  available
  for  expenditure  for  the  purposes  of  such  enforcement  by all such
  municipalities or portions thereof and that such fiscal officer may make
  payments therefrom upon  audit  of  the  appropriate  auditing  body  or
  officer  of  his  municipality. In providing for the enforcement of this
  chapter in any municipality or portion thereof, a municipality may  also
  contract  with  another municipality to enforce this chapter within such
  municipality or portion thereof as required by this chapter, under  such
  terms  and  conditions as may be stated in such contract, and any amount
  agreed to be paid under  such  contract  shall  be  a  charge  upon  the
  municipality  or  portion thereof for which such enforcement is provided
  and  shall  be  paid  in  the  same  manner  as  other  charges  of  the
  municipality.


   3.  The  person  or  department charged with the duty of enforcing the
  provisions of this chapter in a municipality or  portion  thereof  shall
  have  power  to enter, examine, and inspect, or cause to be examined and
  inspected, any building or property for the purpose of carrying out  the
  duties  of  such person or department under this chapter. Such person or
  department is authorized and empowered to issue departmental notices and
  orders and is authorized to institute  appropriate  judicial  action  or
  proceeding to enforce any building code.
    4. The fire department of any city, village or fire district, the fire
  department of any town which as such has a fire department, and any fire
  company  located  in  the  area  of  a  town  outside  villages and fire
  districts, may, with the approval of the chief executive officer or,  if
  there  be  none,  the  chief  administrative  body or board of the city,
  village or town, respectively, assign to one or more members of the fire
  department  or  company,  as  the  case  may  be,  the  duty  of  making
  inspections  of  buildings  and  properties  which  are  subject  to the
  provisions of this chapter and are located in the area regularly  served
  and  protected  by  such  fire  department  or  company  including areas
  protected pursuant to a contract. The purpose  of  any  such  inspection
  shall  be  to  determine  whether the provisions of this chapter and the
  rules and  regulations  adopted  and  promulgated  pursuant  thereto  in
  relation  to  fire  protection  and  safety  are  being  complied  with.
  Firefighters assigned to such duty shall have full power  and  authority
  to  enter,  examine  and  inspect  any such building or property at such
  times and hours as are reasonably convenient. It shall be  the  duty  of
  any  firefighter so assigned to report any violations of such provisions
  of this chapter or of such  rules  and  regulations  to  the  person  or
  department  charged  with  the  duty of enforcing the provisions of this
  chapter in the city, town or village in which the building  or  property
  is  located  and also to the chief of his or her fire department or fire
  company, as the case may be.  In  the  event  that  an  area  is  served
  pursuant  to a fire protection contract by more than one fire department
  or fire company, the firefighter or  firefighters  assigned  to  perform
  such duty in such area shall report violations to the chief of each fire
  department  and  fire company serving such area. The failure of any such
  firefighter to discover and properly report any such violations  or  his
  neglect  or  omission  to  perform such duties, shall not subject him or
  her, his or her fire department, fire company,  or  the  city,  village,
  fire district or town in which or of which he or she is a firefighter to
  any  civil  or other liability. Any such firefighter shall not be liable
  civilly for any act or acts done by him or her as a firefighter  in  the
  performance of such duties, except for wilful negligence or malfeasance,
  but  the provisions of this subdivision shall not relieve any such city,
  village, fire district, town, or fire company from  liability,  if  any,
  for  the  negligent  or  wrongful  acts of the firefighter in the actual
  performance of such duty. Firefighters assigned to any such duty may  be
  known  as  fire  inspectors  but shall not, by reason of this law, be an
  officer of any city, village, fire district  or  town  or  of  any  fire
  department or fire company. Unless otherwise provided by some other law,
  general,  special  or  local,  any  such  assignment  of  duty  and  the
  termination of any such assignment shall be made by  the  chief  of  the
  fire department or the fire company, as the case may be. Before any such
  inspection  is  made, the firefighter assigned to perform such duty must
  be approved by the chief executive officer or, if  there  be  none,  the
  chief  administrative  body  or  board  of  the  city,  village or town,
  respectively, in which the inspection will be made.
    5. Pending the organization of a department or designation of a person
  or department for the  enforcement  of  this  chapter  in  any  city  or


 village,  or  in a town outside any city or village, the chief executive
  officer, or if there be none, the chief administrative body or board  of
  the  city,  village or town, shall be charged with the duty of enforcing
  the  provisions of this chapter in such city or village, or in such town
  outside a city or village, until such time as a department is  organized
  or  a  person  or  department  is  designated or employed to enforce the
  provisions of this chapter.
    6. Notwithstanding the foregoing  provisions  of  this  section,  this
  chapter  shall  be enforced within the county of Hamilton, in the manner
  provided in this subdivision. On or  before  September  first,  nineteen
  hundred  fifty-four,  the  board  of  supervisors of such county may, by
  local law, create an office or department, or designate a county  office
  or  department,  for  the  purpose  of  enforcing the provisions of this
  chapter within such county. The  office  or  department  so  created  or
  designated shall succeed to and become vested with the duty of enforcing
  the  provisions of this chapter within each municipality in such county.
  All provisions of this chapter, not inconsistent with this  subdivision,
  shall apply to the enforcement of this chapter within such county by the
  office  or  department so created or designated. The cost and expense of
  such enforcement shall be a county charge. In the event  such  board  of
  supervisors  shall  fail  to provide for the enforcement of this chapter
  pursuant to the foregoing provisions of this subdivision by  such  date,
  then and in such event, the provisions of this chapter shall be enforced
  within  each  municipality  in  such  county  in the manner hereinbefore
  provided in this section.




   § 304. Penalties for violations. 1. Any person, who having been served
  with a notice or order to remove any violation of this chapter or of any
  nuisance,  fails  to  comply therewith within thirty days or within such
  further reasonable time therefore fixed  by  the  department,  shall  be
  guilty  of  a  misdemeanor  punishable for each offense by a fine of not
  exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a  period  of  one
  year,  or  by both such fine and imprisonment. However, every person who
  shall violate or assist in a violation  of  any  provision  of  sections
  forty,  seventy  and  one  hundred  seventy-four  shall  be guilty of an
  offense punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars nor  exceeding
  five  hundred  dollars or by imprisonment for a period not exceeding six
  months, or by  both  such  fine  and  imprisonment.  Courts  of  special
  sessions  shall  have  exclusive  jurisdiction  in the municipalities to
  which this chapter is  applicable  to  hear  and  determine  charges  of
  violations constituting misdemeanors or offenses under this chapter.
    2.  The term "person" as used in this section shall include the owner,
  mortgagee  or  vendee  in  possession,  assignee  of  rents,   receiver,
  executor,   trustee,   lessee,  agent  or  any  other  person,  firm  or
  corporation directly or indirectly in control  of  a  dwelling  or  part
  thereof.




   §  305.  Nuisances.  1.  The  term  nuisance  shall be held to embrace
  whatever is dangerous to human life or detrimental to health  and  shall
  include  but not be limited to: (a) a public nuisance as known at common
  law, statutory law and in equity jurisprudence, and (b) a dwelling that,
  in violation of this chapter  or  of  any  other  state  or  local  law,
  ordinance  or  regulation,  does  not  have  adequate egress, safeguards
  against fire, adequate  electrical  service,  installation  and  wiring,
  structural   support,   ventilation,   plumbing,  sewerage  or  drainage
  facilities, is overcrowded or inadequately cleaned or  lighted  and  the
  condition  constituting  such  violation  is  dangerous to human life or
  detrimental to health. All such nuisances  are  hereby  declared  to  be
  unlawful.
    2.  Whenever  the  department  shall  declare  that  a  dwelling  is a
  nuisance, it shall serve a notice or order in the manner  prescribed  by
  section   three   hundred  six  of  this  chapter,  reciting  the  facts
  constituting such nuisance, specifying in what respect the  dwelling  is
  dangerous to human life or detrimental to health and requiring the owner
  to  remove such nuisance within thirty days after service of such notice
  or order or such lesser period of time where an emergency exists as  may
  be determined by the department head. Such notice or order shall provide
  that,  if the owner fails to remove such nuisance within such period for
  compliance so prescribed, the department may remove or cause the removal
  of such nuisance by cleansing, repairing, vacating,  demolishing  or  by
  taking  such  other  corrective action deemed necessary and shall notify
  the owner of his right to a hearing as hereinafter provided.
    Wherever such notice is given, the owner may request a hearing  before
  the head of the department charged with enforcement, and a hearing shall
  be given such owner prior to the expiration of the period for compliance
  so prescribed.
    3.  a.  If  such  nuisance is not removed by the owner within the time
  heretofore prescribed  after  service  of  such  notice  or  order,  the
  department  may proceed with the removal of such nuisance as provided in
  the notice or order.
    b. If the owner refuses to permit the department to  remove  or  cause
  the   removal  of  such  nuisance  by  cleansing,  repairing,  vacating,
  demolishing or  by  taking  such  other  corrective  action  as  may  be
  necessary,  or interferes in any way with the department or causes delay
  to the taking of  corrective  action,  the  department  may  cause  such
  dwelling,  in  whole  or in part, to be vacated and sealed up or vacated
  and demolished, but, in such  case,  the  department  shall  commence  a
  special  proceeding  in  the  supreme  court for such relief. During the
  pendency of such proceeding, the department may obtain a temporary order
  for the immediate vacating of such dwelling, upon  proof  of  a  present
  danger  to  human life or detriment to health. In addition to the owner,
  all tenants, mortgagees and lienors of record shall be necessary parties
  to such special proceeding.
    4. a. If the department proceeds to execute a notice or  order  issued
  by  it or by the court for the removal of a nuisance, the department may
  let contracts therefor, in accordance with the provisions of  any  local
  laws,  ordinances,  rules and regulations of the municipality applicable
  to the letting of contracts for municipal improvements.    The  cost  of
  executing  such  notice  or  order  or orders whether or not carried out
  pursuant to court  order  shall  be  met  from  any  appropriation  made
  therefor, or if such appropriation has not been made or is insufficient,
  from  the  proceeds  of  the  sale  of obligations pursuant to the local
  finance law. The department shall keep a  record  of  such  notices  and
  orders  together  with  the  acts done and the items of cost incurred in
  their execution.


   b. The municipality shall  have  a  lien  upon  the  premises  of  the
  dwelling  for  the  cost of executing such notice or order or orders for
  the removal of a nuisance and shall file a notice of such  lien  in  the
  office of the clerk where notices of mechanics' liens are filed; and all
  proceedings  with  respect  to  such lien, its enforcement and discharge
  shall be carried on in the same manner as proceedings  with  respect  to
  mechanics' liens under the lien law.
    c.  Notwithstanding  the foregoing and in addition to any other remedy
  available, the department may maintain an action against  the  owner  to
  recover the cost of executing such notice or order or orders.




   §  305-a. Abatement of rent in the case of serious violations. 1.  The
  provisions of this section shall apply to all cities of less  than  five
  hundred thousand population and to all towns and villages.
    2.  a. A "rent impairing" violation within the meaning of this section
  shall designate a condition in a multiple dwelling which, in the opinion
  of the state building code council,  constitutes,  or  if  not  promptly
  corrected,  will  constitute,  a  fire hazard or a serious threat to the
  life, health or safety of occupants thereof.
    b. The determination as to which violations are "rent impairing" shall
  be made in the following manner. Within six months after  the  enactment
  of this section, the state building code council shall promulgate a list
  of  conditions constituting violations of the provisions of this chapter
  and of  any  regulations  promulgated  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of
  subdivision  three  of  section  three of this chapter.  Such list shall
  contain a brief description of the condition constituting the violation,
  the section of this chapter or regulation violated, and the order number
  assigned thereto. Such council may from time to time change  the  number
  or  description  of  violations on such list, as may seem appropriate to
  such council. Such list shall be available at all times to the public.
    c. At the time of the promulgation of  the  list  of  violations,  the
  state  building  code  council shall also designate, by reference to the
  order number, those violations which it proposes  to  classify  as  rent
  impairing  as above defined. Within thirty days thereafter, such council
  shall hold a public hearing at which all persons interested may be heard
  as to the propriety of the classification of  such  violations  as  rent
  impairing.  Within  a  reasonable  time  after the hearing, such council
  shall make and publish a list of those violations which  are  classified
  as  rent  impairing.  Any  person  interested  may,  within  four months
  thereafter, seek a review by the supreme court of the propriety  of  the
  classification  of  any  of  such  violations  as  "Rent Impairing" by a
  special proceeding  pursuant  to  article  seventy-eight  of  the  civil
  practice law and rules. No other body or officer shall have the power to
  review said classification.
    d.  The  state building code council may at any time change the number
  or description of rent impairing violations but no such change shall  be
  made  except  in  the  manner  above  set  forth after notice and public
  hearing.
    3. a. If (i) the official records of the department shall note that  a
  rent  impairing  violation  exists in respect to a multiple dwelling and
  that notice of such violation has been given by the department, by mail,
  to the owner last registered with the department and (ii) such  note  of
  the  violation  is  not cancelled or removed of record within six months
  after the date of such notice of such violation,  then  for  the  period
  that such violation remains uncorrected after the expiration of said six
  months, no rent shall be recovered by any owner for any premises in such
  multiple  dwelling  used  by  a resident thereof for human habitation in
  which the condition constituting such rent impairing  violation  exists,
  provided,  however,  that if the violation is one that requires approval
  of plans by the department for the corrective work and if plans for such
  corrective work shall have been duly filed within three months from  the
  date  of  notice  of  such violation by the department to the owner last
  registered with the department,  the  six-months  period  aforementioned
  shall not begin to run until the date that plans for the corrective work
  are  approved  by  the  department;  if  plans are not filed within said
  three-months period or if so filed, they are disapproved and  amendments
  are  not duly filed within thirty days after the date of notification of
  the disapproval by the department to the person having filed the  plans,
  the six-months period shall be computed as if no plans whatever had been


 filed  under  this proviso. If a condition constituting a rent impairing
  violation exists in the part of a multiple dwelling used  in  common  by
  the residents or in the part under the control of the owner thereof, the
  violation  shall  be  deemed to exist in the respective premises of each
  resident of the multiple dwelling.
    b. The provisions of  subparagraph  a  shall  not  apply  if  (i)  the
  condition  referred  to  in  the  department's  notice to the owner last
  registered with the department did not in  fact  exist,  notwithstanding
  the  notation  thereof  in  the  records  of  the  department;  (ii) the
  condition which is the  subject  of  the  violation  has  in  fact  been
  corrected,  though  the  note  thereof  in  the  department has not been
  removed or cancelled;  (iii)  the  violation  has  been  caused  by  the
  resident  from  whom rent is sought to be collected or by members of his
  family or by his guests or by another resident of the multiple  dwelling
  or the members of the family of such other resident or by his guests, or
  (iv)  the  resident  proceeded against for rent has refused entry to the
  owner for the purpose of correcting the condition  giving  rise  to  the
  violation.
    c.  To  raise  a defense under subparagraph a in any action to recover
  rent or in any special proceeding for the recovery of possession because
  of non-payment of rent, the resident must affirmatively plead and  prove
  the  material facts under subparagraph a, and must also deposit with the
  clerk of the court in which the action or proceeding is pending  at  the
  time  of filing of the resident's answer the amount of rent sought to be
  recovered in  the  action  or  upon  which  the  proceeding  to  recover
  possession  is  based,  to be held by the clerk of the court until final
  disposition of the action or proceeding at which time the rent deposited
  shall be paid to the owner, if the owner prevails, or be returned to the
  resident if the resident prevails.  Such deposit of rent  shall  vitiate
  any  right  on  the  part  of the owner to terminate the lease or rental
  agreement of the resident because of nonpayment of rent.
    d. If a resident voluntarily pays rent or an installment of rent  when
  he  would  be  privileged  to withhold the same under subparagraph a, he
  shall not thereafter have any claim or cause of action to  recover  back
  the  rent or installment of rent so paid. A voluntary payment within the
  meaning hereof shall mean payment other than  one  made  pursuant  to  a
  judgment in an action or special proceeding.
    e.  If  upon  the  trial  of any action to recover rent or any special
  proceeding for the recovery of possession because of non-payment of rent
  it shall appear that the  resident  has  raised  a  defense  under  this
  section  in  bad faith, or has caused the violation or has refused entry
  to the owner for the purpose of correcting the condition giving rise  to
  the  violation,  the  court,  in  its  discretion,  may  impose upon the
  resident the reasonable costs of the owner, including counsel  fees,  in
  maintaining the action or proceeding not to exceed one hundred dollars.




   §  305-a. Abatement of rent in the case of serious violations. 1.  The
  provisions of this section shall apply to all cities of less  than  five
  hundred thousand population and to all towns and villages.
    2.  a. A "rent impairing" violation within the meaning of this section
  shall designate a condition in a multiple dwelling which, in the opinion
  of the state building code council,  constitutes,  or  if  not  promptly
  corrected,  will  constitute,  a  fire hazard or a serious threat to the
  life, health or safety of occupants thereof.
    b. The determination as to which violations are "rent impairing" shall
  be made in the following manner. Within six months after  the  enactment
  of this section, the state building code council shall promulgate a list
  of  conditions constituting violations of the provisions of this chapter
  and of  any  regulations  promulgated  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of
  subdivision  three  of  section  three of this chapter.  Such list shall
  contain a brief description of the condition constituting the violation,
  the section of this chapter or regulation violated, and the order number
  assigned thereto. Such council may from time to time change  the  number
  or  description  of  violations on such list, as may seem appropriate to
  such council. Such list shall be available at all times to the public.
    c. At the time of the promulgation of  the  list  of  violations,  the
  state  building  code  council shall also designate, by reference to the
  order number, those violations which it proposes  to  classify  as  rent
  impairing  as above defined. Within thirty days thereafter, such council
  shall hold a public hearing at which all persons interested may be heard
  as to the propriety of the classification of  such  violations  as  rent
  impairing.  Within  a  reasonable  time  after the hearing, such council
  shall make and publish a list of those violations which  are  classified
  as  rent  impairing.  Any  person  interested  may,  within  four months
  thereafter, seek a review by the supreme court of the propriety  of  the
  classification  of  any  of  such  violations  as  "Rent Impairing" by a
  special proceeding  pursuant  to  article  seventy-eight  of  the  civil
  practice law and rules. No other body or officer shall have the power to
  review said classification.
    d.  The  state building code council may at any time change the number
  or description of rent impairing violations but no such change shall  be
  made  except  in  the  manner  above  set  forth after notice and public
  hearing.
    3. a. If (i) the official records of the department shall note that  a
  rent  impairing  violation  exists in respect to a multiple dwelling and
  that notice of such violation has been given by the department, by mail,
  to the owner last registered with the department and (ii) such  note  of
  the  violation  is  not cancelled or removed of record within six months
  after the date of such notice of such violation,  then  for  the  period
  that such violation remains uncorrected after the expiration of said six
  months, no rent shall be recovered by any owner for any premises in such
  multiple  dwelling  used  by  a resident thereof for human habitation in
  which the condition constituting such rent impairing  violation  exists,
  provided,  however,  that if the violation is one that requires approval
  of plans by the department for the corrective work and if plans for such
  corrective work shall have been duly filed within three months from  the
  date  of  notice  of  such violation by the department to the owner last
  registered with the department,  the  six-months  period  aforementioned
  shall not begin to run until the date that plans for the corrective work
  are  approved  by  the  department;  if  plans are not filed within said
  three-months period or if so filed, they are disapproved and  amendments
  are  not duly filed within thirty days after the date of notification of
  the disapproval by the department to the person having filed the  plans,
  the six-months period shall be computed as if no plans whatever had been


 filed  under  this proviso. If a condition constituting a rent impairing
  violation exists in the part of a multiple dwelling used  in  common  by
  the residents or in the part under the control of the owner thereof, the
  violation  shall  be  deemed to exist in the respective premises of each
  resident of the multiple dwelling.
    b. The provisions of  subparagraph  a  shall  not  apply  if  (i)  the
  condition  referred  to  in  the  department's  notice to the owner last
  registered with the department did not in  fact  exist,  notwithstanding
  the  notation  thereof  in  the  records  of  the  department;  (ii) the
  condition which is the  subject  of  the  violation  has  in  fact  been
  corrected,  though  the  note  thereof  in  the  department has not been
  removed or cancelled;  (iii)  the  violation  has  been  caused  by  the
  resident  from  whom rent is sought to be collected or by members of his
  family or by his guests or by another resident of the multiple  dwelling
  or the members of the family of such other resident or by his guests, or
  (iv)  the  resident  proceeded against for rent has refused entry to the
  owner for the purpose of correcting the condition  giving  rise  to  the
  violation.
    c.  To  raise  a defense under subparagraph a in any action to recover
  rent or in any special proceeding for the recovery of possession because
  of non-payment of rent, the resident must affirmatively plead and  prove
  the  material facts under subparagraph a, and must also deposit with the
  clerk of the court in which the action or proceeding is pending  at  the
  time  of filing of the resident's answer the amount of rent sought to be
  recovered in  the  action  or  upon  which  the  proceeding  to  recover
  possession  is  based,  to be held by the clerk of the court until final
  disposition of the action or proceeding at which time the rent deposited
  shall be paid to the owner, if the owner prevails, or be returned to the
  resident if the resident prevails.  Such deposit of rent  shall  vitiate
  any  right  on  the  part  of the owner to terminate the lease or rental
  agreement of the resident because of nonpayment of rent.
    d. If a resident voluntarily pays rent or an installment of rent  when
  he  would  be  privileged  to withhold the same under subparagraph a, he
  shall not thereafter have any claim or cause of action to  recover  back
  the  rent or installment of rent so paid. A voluntary payment within the
  meaning hereof shall mean payment other than  one  made  pursuant  to  a
  judgment in an action or special proceeding.
    e.  If  upon  the  trial  of any action to recover rent or any special
  proceeding for the recovery of possession because of non-payment of rent
  it shall appear that the  resident  has  raised  a  defense  under  this
  section  in  bad faith, or has caused the violation or has refused entry
  to the owner for the purpose of correcting the condition giving rise  to
  the  violation,  the  court,  in  its  discretion,  may  impose upon the
  resident the reasonable costs of the owner, including counsel  fees,  in
  maintaining the action or proceeding not to exceed one hundred dollars.




   §  305-c. Right of tenant to offset payments for heat failure; certain
  cases. 1. Any tenant acting alone or together with other  tenants  of  a
  multiple  dwelling  employing  an oil fired heating device for which the
  owner is responsible and wherein there exists a lack of heat due to  the
  owner's  failure  to have oil supplied to the premises, may contract and
  pay for the delivery of such oil in accordance with  the  provisions  of
  this  section.  Any  payment  so  made  shall  be  deductible  from rent
  providing the following provisions have been substantially complied with
  by the tenant or someone acting on his behalf:
    a. Reasonable efforts were made to contact the owner or his  agent  to
  inform the owner of such failure to supply oil.
    b.  Reasonable  efforts  were made to have the normal fuel supplier to
  the premises deliver the requested fuel.
    c. Delivery of fuel oil to  the  premises  was  secured  from  a  fuel
  supplier  regularly engaged in such business at a price within the range
  of prices listed  by  the  department  in  the  index  provided  for  in
  subdivision three of this section.
    d.  The  fuel  supplier  from  whom  oil is secured provided a written
  statement containing the following:
    (1) The name of the person or persons who requested the delivery; and
    (2) The date, time of and premises to which delivery was made; and
    (3) The amount, grade and price of the oil delivered; and
    (4) A certification that the usable fuel supply  before  the  delivery
  was exhausted; and
    (5) The charge, if any, for refiring the burner; and
    (6) The amounts and from whom any payments were received.
    e.  A  tenant  shall  not be required to comply with the provisions of
  paragraph a or b hereof unless the owner has continuously kept posted in
  a conspicuous place at  the  premises  a  notice  containing  his  name,
  address  and telephone number or that of his agent and the name, address
  and telephone number of the fuel supplier to the premises.
    f. For  purposes  of  this  section,  a  multiple  dwelling  shall  be
  considered  to lack heat if, during the months between October first and
  May thirty-first, while  its  usable  fuel  supply  was  exhausted,  the
  outdoor temperature fell below fifty-five degrees Fahrenheit at any time
  during  the  hours between six o'clock in the morning and ten o'clock in
  the evening.
    2. The deduction from rent allowed by this section shall also  include
  a  reasonable  charge, if any, made by the supplier for refiring the oil
  burner at the premises.
    3. The department charged with the enforcement of laws, ordinances and
  regulations in relation to multiple dwellings shall:   a. Maintain  and,
  to the extent practicable, update at least bi-weekly an index reflecting
  the range of prices of fuel oil according to grade and quantity paid per
  gallon  on  deliveries  within the jurisdiction of the department during
  the last two week period for which statistics are available; and
    b. Maintain and keep current and available a list of  suppliers  which
  have  agreed to make deliveries of fuel oil in the circumstances, and to
  render such assistance as is otherwise required hereby to enable tenants
  to obtain the benefits, contemplated by this section.
    4. The payment for fuel oil at a price  within  the  range  of  prices
  permitted  by  paragraph  c  of subdivision one of this section shall be
  conclusively presumed to have been a reasonable price.
    5. The introduction into evidence in any action or proceeding  of  any
  statement  rendered  in compliance with the provisions of paragraph d of
  subdivision one of this section shall be presumptive of the facts stated
  therein. Sufficient foundation for the allowance into evidence  of  such
  statement  shall  consist in the oral testimony of any person named as a


 payer of all or part of the amount indicated thereon relating the  facts
  and circumstances in which the statement was rendered.
    6.  Any  tenant  who  has  in good faith secured and paid for fuel oil
  otherwise in conformance with the provisions of this section and against
  whom an action or proceeding to recover possession of the  premises  for
  nonpayment  of  rent  or  any other action or proceeding attributable at
  least in part to the tenant seeking or taking a deduction from  rent  as
  allowed  by  this  section  shall,  in addition to any other amounts, be
  entitled to recover reasonable costs  and  attorney's  fees  against  an
  owner bringing such action or proceeding.
    7.  No  owner  or  agent  shall  be entitled to recover any amounts in
  damages from any fuel oil supplier who attempts in good faith  and  acts
  reasonably  to  carry  out the intendment of this section except damages
  arising out of gross negligence.
    8. The remedy provided in this section shall not be  exclusive  and  a
  court  may  provide  such  other relief as may be just and proper in the
  circumstances. Nothing in this section shall be construed  to  limit  or
  deny  any  existing  constitutional, statutory, administrative or common
  law right of a tenant to contract and pay for the delivery of  fuel  oil
  for  the multiple dwelling in which he resides or to pay for the cost of
  any other goods and services for such multiple  dwelling.  This  section
  shall not be construed to preclude any defense, counterclaim or cause of
  action  that  may  otherwise exist with respect to an owner's failure to
  provide heat or any other service.
    9. Any agreement by a tenant of a dwelling waiving  or  modifying  his
  rights  as set forth in this section shall be void as contrary to public
  policy.
    10. The provisions of this section shall be liberally construed so  as
  to give effect to the purposes set forth herein.
    *  11.  Nothing contained in this section and no payment made pursuant
  to this section shall be deemed to discharge the liability of  a  renter
  with an interest in real property pursuant to subdivision two of section
  three  hundred  four  of  the real property tax law from taxes levied on
  such interest.
  * NB (Effective pending ruling by Commissioner of  Internal  Revenue  of
  the United States)




   § 306. Service of notices and orders.  Every notice or order issued by
  the  department  relative  to a premises shall be served at least thirty
  days before the time for compliance therewith. It  shall  be  sufficient
  service  of  a  departmental  notice  or  order,  if  it  is posted in a
  conspicuous place upon the premises affected and a copy thereof  mailed,
  on  the  same  day it is posted, to the person to whom it is directed at
  the address filed by him in the department, and, if his address  is  not
  so filed in the department, then in such case, such notice shall be sent
  by registered mail to his last known address or place of residence.




   §  307.  Records  and searches. All records of the department shall be
  public.  Upon request the department shall be required to make a  search
  and issue a certificate of any of its records, including violations, and
  shall  have the power to charge and collect reasonable fees for searches
  or certificates.




   §  325.  Review boards. 1. There may be in each county a review board,
  to consist of three members, who shall be  appointed  by  the  board  of
  supervisors of the county. One member shall be a registered architect or
  a  professional  engineer.  The  term of office of each member of such a
  review board shall be for three years, provided, however,  that  of  the
  members  first  appointed  in  the  case  of any such board one shall be
  appointed for a term of one year, one for a term of two years,  and  one
  for  a  term  of three years. Such members shall receive no compensation
  unless the board of  supervisors  shall  otherwise  determine  but  each
  member  shall  be  entitled  to  his  expenses  actually and necessarily
  incurred by him in the performance of his duties. The board shall  elect
  its  chairman from among its own members. Two members of the board shall
  constitute a quorum. The concurring vote of at least two members of  the
  board shall be necessary for action. Any member chosen to fill a vacancy
  occurring  otherwise  than  by expiration of term shall be appointed for
  the unexpired term of the member whom he is to  succeed.  The  board  of
  supervisors  shall  have  power to remove any member of the review board
  for cause and after public hearing.
    2. The board may appoint such employees as may be  authorized  by  the
  board of supervisors, and prescribe their duties.
    3.  Each  county  board  shall have power within its county, except as
  stated to the contrary in subdivision eight of this  section,  and  each
  local board of review, as provided in said subdivision eight, shall have
  power within its own applicable area:
    a.  With  respect  to dwellings existing on the effective date of this
  chapter only, to vary or modify, in whole or in part, the application of
  any provision of this chapter or  of  any  rule  or  regulation  of  the
  department or commission, relating and limited to
    (1) secondary means of egress from dwellings,
    (2) fire retarding of public halls, stairs, and cellar ceilings,
    (3) requisite open spaces, and
    (4)  requirements  with  respect  to bulkheads and scuttles; provided,
  however, that in the instance of each such variance or modification, the
  basic spirit and intent of the law are  maintained  and  public  health,
  safety   and  welfare  are  preserved,  and  further  provided  that  in
  connection  with  any  such  variance  or  modification  the  board  may
  prescribe alternative or substitute requirements where such requirements
  are  appropriate  or  necessary to effectuate the basic purposes of this
  chapter.  Any such variance or modification shall be granted only  after
  satisfactory  proof,  at  a public hearing, of practical difficulties or
  unnecessary hardships to be encountered or caused by compliance with the
  strict letter of such law, rule or regulation.
    b. To fix a  reasonable  time  for  the  hearing  of  an  application,
  requiring that due notice be given of the time and place of such hearing
  to the applicant and to the department or to other persons affected.  In
  every case the board shall state the reason or reasons for its decision.
  A  record  of all orders, requirements and decisions of each such board,
  indexed according to the section or sections of  this  chapter  affected
  thereby  shall be kept in the office of the board, and such record shall
  be open to public inspection at all times during normal business hours.
    c. To enter, or delegate to any employee or officer of  such  a  board
  power  to  enter, any building or property for the purpose of conducting
  investigations, surveys, or  inspections  necessary  to  carry  out  the
  provisions of this article.
    d.  To  adopt  a  seal  and  to alter the same at its pleasure, and to
  require that it be used for the authentication of orders and proceedings
  and for such other purposes as it may prescribe.


   e. To conduct examinations and investigations, administer oaths,  hear
  testimony  and take proof, under oath, if the board should so determine,
  of any matter relevant or necessary to carry out the provisions of  this
  article.
    f.  To  do  all other things convenient and necessary to carry out its
  powers.
    4. No member of such a board, nor any of  its  employees,  shall  pass
  upon  any  question  relating  to  any  premises  in  which  he  or  any
  corporation in which he is a stockholder  or  security  holder  has  any
  interest directly or indirectly.
    5. An application for such variance or modification may be made within
  thirty  days  after service of a notice or order to remove any violation
  of this chapter or any nuisance, by any person aggrieved, or by the head
  of an agency or department within the  area  in  which  such  board  has
  jurisdiction.  An  aggrieved  person  shall  be  construed as one who is
  directly and adversely affected by a provision of this chapter or a rule
  or regulation of the department or commission. Any action or decision of
  such a board may be reviewed on the law  or  the  facts  in  the  manner
  provided  by  the  provisions  of  article  seventy-eight  of  the civil
  practice law and rules.
    6. An appeal shall stay all proceedings, both civil and  criminal,  in
  furtherance  of  the  action appealed from, unless the officer from whom
  the appeal is taken shall file with the board to which  the  appeal  has
  been taken a certificate that, by reason of facts stated therein, a stay
  would,  in  his  opinion,  cause  imminent peril to life or property, in
  which case,  proceedings  shall  not  be  stayed  otherwise  than  by  a
  restraining  order  which, upon good cause shown, may be granted by such
  board or by the supreme court,  on  application,  at  least  three  days
  notice  of  which  shall be given to the officer from whom the appeal is
  being taken.
    7. Each review board shall have power to charge and collect reasonable
  fees and to make rules governing such charges.
    8. A municipality may continue an  existing  local  board  of  review,
  which  is  in  existence  on July first, nineteen hundred fifty-four, to
  have  jurisdiction  solely  within  the  territorial  limits   of   such
  municipality.  In  any  such case, the jurisdiction of a county board of
  review shall not extend to any such municipality or municipalities.   In
  the  event  that no such local board exists in a municipality and in the
  event that, and so long as, there shall not be in such county  a  review
  board  appointed  pursuant  to subdivision one of this section, a review
  board to consist of three members, one of whom  shall  be  a  registered
  architect  or  a  professional  engineer,  may  be  established  by such
  municipality before September thirty, nineteen hundred sixty-six located
  within such county to have jurisdiction solely  within  the  territorial
  limits  of  such municipality. The powers and duties of a local board of
  review, insofar as the operation of the provisions of  this  chapter  is
  concerned,  shall  be  the  same,  within  the territorial limits of the
  municipality, as those of  a  county  board  created  pursuant  to  this
  section.
    9. In the event that, and so long as, there shall not be in any county
  or  municipality  a  review  board  authorized to be established in this
  section, appeals authorized to be taken  to  such  county  or  municipal
  review  board,  as  herein provided, within the area in which such board
  would, if established, have jurisdiction, may be taken to the commission
  instead, and in such event and  with  respect  to  any  such  county  or
  municipality, the commission shall have the same powers and jurisdiction
  as  is herein provided for a county or municipality review board in such
  county.




   §  326.  Rules and regulations. 1. The commission shall have the power
  to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations carrying into effect  such
  provisions  of the sections of this chapter wherein reference is made to
  the rules and regulations of or to be adopted  by  the  commission,  and
  also  in  other  cases  where  the  approval  of  the  department or the
  existence of conditions satisfactory to it is  a  requisite  under  this
  chapter  for  compliance  with  any  provision  of  this  chapter or the
  exercise of discretionary powers  by  the  department  with  respect  to
  alternative requirements, is authorized.
    2. Such rules and regulations shall be designed within the limitations
  of the specifically applicable provisions of this chapter:
    a. To effectuate the general purposes of this chapter.
    b.  To provide reasonably uniform standards, ratings and requirements,
  consonant with accepted standards of engineering,  fire  prevention  and
  safety practices.
    c.  To  formulate  such  standards  and requirements, so far as may be
  practicable, in terms of performance objectives, so as to make  adequate
  performance for the use intended the test of acceptability.
    d.  To  permit to the fullest extent possible, use of modern technical
  methods,  devices  and  improvements  which  tend  to  reduce  costs  of
  construction,   installation   and   maintenance  without  substantially
  affecting reasonable requirements for the health, safety and security of
  the occupants or users of dwellings.
    3. Every rule or regulation or modification, amendment or repeal of  a
  rule  or  regulation  shall, immediately after adoption, be certified by
  the commission and transmitted to the secretary of state for  filing  in
  the  office  of  the  department of state. Upon such filing, the rule or
  regulation or modification, amendment or repeal of a rule or regulation,
  shall have the force and effect  of  law.  The  commission  shall  cause
  copies  thereof  to be sent to the appropriate department or departments
  of  all  municipalities  having  jurisdiction  over  multiple  dwellings
  therein which are affected thereby.
    4.  The  commission  shall  invite  the cooperation and advice of fire
  departments and organizations in connection  with  the  promulgation  of
  rules and regulations relating to fire protection and fire prevention.




   §  327. Saving clauses. The provisions of this chapter shall supersede
  any local law, ordinance, resolution or regulation of municipalities  to
  which this chapter is applicable, but shall not affect or impair any act
  done,  offense  committed  or  right  accruing,  accrued or acquired, or
  liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred or  imposed  prior
  to  the  time  this  chapter  takes effect, but the same may be enjoyed,
  asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted as fully  and  to  the  same
  extent and same manner as if such provisions had not been enacted.




   §  328.  Effect  of  invalidity in part. If any term, part, provision,
  article, section, subdivision or paragraph of this chapter shall be held
  unconstitutional, or ineffective in whole or in part, then to the extent
  that it is not unconstitutional or ineffective  this  chapter  and  such
  term,  part,  provision,  article,  section,  subdivision  or  paragraph
  thereof shall be in full force and effect; and such determination  shall
  not  be  deemed  to  invalidate  the remaining terms, parts, provisions,
  articles, sections, subdivisions or paragraphs thereof.




   §  329.  Laws  superseded.  1.  The  provisions  of this chapter shall
  supersede all other state  laws  and  all  local  laws,  ordinances  and
  regulations  of  municipalities to the extent that such laws, ordinances
  or regulations are inconsistent with the  provisions  of  this  chapter;
  provided,  however, that the provisions of any other state law or of any
  local  law,  ordinance  or  regulation  of  any  municipality,  or   the
  supplementary  rules  or  regulations of any state department having the
  force and effect of law, now in effect or hereafter enacted or  adopted,
  which  are  more  restrictive than those provided in this chapter, shall
  govern during the period in which they are in effect.
    2. Upon the  adoption  by  any  municipality  of  any  state  building
  construction  code  as to multiple residences pursuant to the provisions
  of article eighteen of the executive law which code contains  provisions
  relating  to  the  construction  of  multiple  dwellings  to  which  the
  provisions of articles four, five, six and seven  of  this  chapter  are
  applicable  in  whole or in part, then and in such event, the provisions
  of such articles four, five, six and seven and the definitions  used  in
  conjunction  therewith  shall  become  inoperative  with  respect to the
  construction of such dwellings in any such municipality so long  as  the
  state building construction code is applicable and operative.




   §  330.  Time  of  taking  effect. This chapter shall take effect July
  first, nineteen hundred fifty-two.