§ 1. Short  title.    This  chapter  shall  be  known  as  the "Public
  Buildings Law."




   § 2.  Public buildings.  Except where otherwise prescribed by law, the
  commissioner  of  general services shall have supervision and control of
  public buildings of the state of New York,  including  the  capitol  and
  executive  mansion, with the buildings, grounds and premises adjacent or
  appurtenant  thereto  or  connected  thereto  or   connected   therewith
  belonging  to  the  state,  so  far  as such grounds and premises now or
  hereafter shall be  laid  out  and  completed,  and  the  entire  public
  sidewalks  bordering  upon the capitol grounds and parks for the purpose
  of keeping such sidewalks at all times clear of snow, ice, dirt and  all
  other obstructions.




   § 2-a. Park north of capitol and east of the state education building.
  The park grounds and premises belonging to the state, lying to the north
  of the capitol between Washington avenue and Elk street, and to the east
  of  the state education building, in the city of Albany, shall hereafter
  be known and designated as  "Lafayette  Park."  Such  park  grounds  and
  premises  shall be under the supervision and control of the commissioner
  of general services.




   §  2-b. State office building to be designated and known as the "Perry
  B.   Duryea, Jr. State Office  Building".  The  New  York  state  office
  building  on  Veterans  Memorial Highway in the town of Islip, county of
  Suffolk, shall be designated and known as  the  "Perry  B.  Duryea,  Jr.
  State Office Building".




   * §  2-c.  Research  tower  at  the  Institute  for  Basic Research in
  Developmental Disabilities  to  be  named  the  "Dr.  Henryk  Wisniewski
  Research   Tower".   The   five   story  tower  which  is  part  of  the
  administrations building at the  New  York  State  Institute  for  Basic
  Research  in Developmental Disabilities located in the Borough of Staten
  Island, County of Richmond, shall be designated and known  as  the  "Dr.
  Henryk Wisniewski Research Tower".
    * NB There are 2 § 2-c's




   * §  2-c.  State  office  building  to  be designated and known as the
  "Shirley Chisholm State Office Building". The state office  building  at
  55  Hanson  Place in Brooklyn, New York shall be designated and known as
  the "Shirley Chisholm State Office Building".
    * NB There are 2 § 2-c's




   § 3. General   powers  and  duties  of  the  commissioner  of  general
  services.  The commissioner of general services is authorized to:
    1. accept and receive for erection or location in any  of  the  public
  buildings  or  grounds  such  statues,  monuments,  memorials or tablets
  having reference to historical events in the  history  or  acts  of  the
  citizens  or  soldiers  of  the  state  of  New  York  as shall meet his
  approval, provided that such gifts are unconditional and are erected  or
  located without expenditure from the state treasury.
    2. cause the flags of the United States and the state flag bearing the
  arms  of the state, to be displayed upon the capitol building during the
  daily sessions of the legislature and on public occasions, and cause the
  necessary flagstaffs to be erected  therefor.  Cause  the  flag  of  the
  United  States  to be appropriately displayed at all times in the senate
  chamber and in the assembly chamber. Cause the flag of the United States
  to be appropriately displayed upon  the  walls  of  any  hall  or  other
  meeting  place  in  a  public building under his supervision and control
  during any meeting or gathering  of  persons  to  which  the  public  is
  invited.  The  necessary  expenses incurred thereby shall be paid out of
  the treasury on the warrant of the comptroller.
    3. without process and of his own authority, arrest and convey to  any
  magistrate in the county of Albany any person found disorderly or in the
  commission  of  a  breach  of  the  peace  within any building or on any
  grounds under his supervision and control and designate employees in the
  unit having charge of the operation and maintenance of public  buildings
  and grounds, who, on taking and filing an oath of office with the county
  clerk  of  Albany  county,  shall  have  the  same  power  of arrest and
  presentment of complaint as the commissioner of general services.
    4. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter or of any general or
  special law, and whenever funds therefor  are  available  or  have  been
  otherwise  provided,  the  commissioner  of  general  services is hereby
  authorized and empowered, subject to the approval of the division of the
  budget,  to  retain  and  employ  private  engineers,   architects   and
  consultants,  or  firms practicing such professions, for the purposes of
  (1) preparing designs, plans and estimates of structures of any type and
  character, (2) rendering assistance and  advice  in  connection  of  any
  project,  whether  defined or proposed, and under the supervision of the
  office of general services, and (3) performing such other and  necessary
  services  as  the commissioner of general services may deem necessary in
  the administration of the office of general services.
    5. The commissioner of general services shall have power and it  shall
  be his duty to prepare the plans, specifications, designs and estimates,
  and, by the procedure and methods provided by the laws relating thereto,
  to  construct  and  reconstruct  the public buildings and grounds of the
  state that are now or shall hereafter be under the jurisdiction  of  the
  office of general services for such purposes.
    6.  Any  other  provision  of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
  commissioner of general services may make any agreements with respect to
  any lands or properties acquired for  state  purposes  in  the  city  of
  Albany pursuant to the recommendations of the temporary state commission
  on  the  capital city, whereby such lands and properties may continue to
  be occupied and used by the former owners, their tenants or assigns,  or
  any  other  person or persons, for a period from the date of acquisition
  of such lands and properties until  such  time  as  the  state  requires
  actual  physical  possession,  provided  that  during the period of such
  occupancy, such lands shall remain on the assessment rolls of  the  city
  of  Albany  and shall be subject to real estate taxes and assessments in
  the same manner as privately owned lands. The right of the former  owner
  or  such  other  person or persons to occupy and use such lands shall be


 conditioned on the prompt payment of the full amount of such  taxes  and
  assessments, with interest and penalties, if any. The state shall not in
  any  event be liable for real estate taxes or assessments on such lands.
  The  agreement  may  also  provide  for  such other terms, including any
  additional payments as net rentals, as the parties  may  stipulate.  The
  relationship  of the state and such occupants shall be deemed to be that
  of landlord and tenant. A copy of any such agreement shall be filed with
  the county clerk of the county of Albany. Any other provision of law  to
  the  contrary  notwithstanding, the commissioner of general services may
  also enter into contracts or agreements with any other state  agency  or
  any  person,  firm or corporation for the management or operation of any
  such lands or properties until such time as the  state  requires  actual
  physical possession.
    7. The provisions of this article and sections one hundred forty-three
  and  one  hundred forty-four of the state finance law shall not apply to
  academic  buildings,  dormitories,  and  other  facilities  constructed,
  acquired,  reconstructed,  rehabilitated  or improved for the use of the
  state university of  New  York  or  any  state-operated  institution  or
  statutory  or contract college under the jurisdiction thereof or for the
  use of the students, faculty and staff of the state  university  or  any
  such  state-operated  institution or statutory or contract college under
  the jurisdiction thereof, and their families, or  to  contracts  entered
  into  by  the state university construction fund or the state university
  trustees pursuant to article eight-a of the education  law  or  to  real
  property  held  in  the  name  of  the  state  for purposes of the state
  university of New York or any state-operated institution or statutory or
  contract college under the jurisdiction thereof. However, the office  of
  general  services, by or through the commissioner of general services or
  his  duly  authorized  officer  or  employee,  may  construct,  acquire,
  reconstruct,  rehabilitate or improve such facilities in accordance with
  the provisions of article eight-a  of  the  education  law  pursuant  to
  agreement  with the state university construction fund, as agent for the
  state university of New York.
    8. The provisions of this article and sections one hundred forty-three
  and one hundred forty-four of the state finance law shall not  apply  to
  mental   hygiene   facilities   constructed,   acquired,  reconstructed,
  rehabilitated or improved pursuant to  the  health  and  mental  hygiene
  facilities  improvement act or to contracts entered into by the trustees
  of the mental hygiene  facilities  improvement  fund  or  by  the  state
  housing  finance agency in relation thereto, or to real property held in
  the name of the state for the corporate purposes of  such  fund,  except
  that the provisions of this article and sections one hundred forty-three
  and  one hundred forty-four of the state finance law shall apply, so far
  as practicable, to such mental hygiene facilities  as  are  constructed,
  acquired,  reconstructed,  rehabilitated or improved by the commissioner
  of general services under an agreement made with  the  trustees  of  the
  mental  hygiene facilities improvement fund. The commissioner of general
  services is hereby authorized and  empowered  to  enter  into  any  such
  agreement  with the said trustees, upon such terms and conditions as may
  be mutually acceptable  and  in  accordance  with  any  requirements  of
  subdivision  two  of  section  nine  of  the  health  and mental hygiene
  facilities improvement act relating to the approval of the  commissioner
  of mental hygiene as to architectural concept and the detailed plans and
  specifications,  the  approval  of  the said trustees as to the proposed
  terms of construction contracts to be let by the commissioner of general
  services under such  agreement,  the  supervision  of  the  work  to  be
  performed, and the certification of bills for payment by the trustees of
  the mental hygiene facilities improvement fund.


   9.  (a)  The commissioner of general services shall have the power and
  it shall be his or her duty to equip that  room  in  the  state  capitol
  customarily utilized by the governor to brief the members of the working
  press  and  news media with an assistive listening system for use by the
  deaf and hard of hearing.
    (b)  For  purposes  of  this  section,  the  term "assistive listening
  system" shall mean situational-personal acoustic communication equipment
  designed to improve the transmission and auditory  reception  of  sound.
  Such  system  shall  include  but  not be limited to the use of standard
  amplitude modulation (AM), frequency modulation  (FM),  audio  induction
  loop, infrared light sound, or hard wire systems.
    10. Notwithstanding any provision of this article or of any general or
  special  law,  upon  written  certification  by the department or agency
  having jurisdiction that efficiency or economy  will  result  therefrom,
  the  commissioner  of  general  services  may adopt and use standardized
  specifications for a  particular  type,  class  or  item  of  equipment,
  material  or  system  to  be  included  in  the plans and specifications
  prepared pursuant to this article. Such plans and  specifications  shall
  conform with sections seven thousand two hundred nine and seven thousand
  three hundred seven of the education law.
    11.  Allot  to  the  legislature  and to the departments, commissions,
  boards and officers of the state government such space and room  in  the
  public  buildings  or  leased  space  that are now or shall be hereafter
  under the  supervision  and  control  of  the  commissioner  of  general
  services.  Space  in  the state capitol occupied by the legislature, and
  committees and offices thereof, shall not be  reduced  nor  other  space
  substituted  therefor without the approval of the temporary president of
  the senate and speaker of the assembly. Where  a  statute  provides,  in
  terms  or effect, that a department, commission, board or officer of the
  state government shall have space or rooms in the state capitol, or in a
  building in the city of Albany which is now or which shall hereafter  be
  under  the  supervision  and  control  of  the  commissioner  of general
  services, the commissioner may, if space in the capitol or in  any  such
  building  be  not  adequate or available therefor, assign space or rooms
  therefor in buildings, rooms or premises in such city that  are  now  or
  that shall be hereafter available by lease or leases as aforementioned.
    * 12.  Lease  from  time  to  time buildings, rooms or premises in the
  county of Albany, and elsewhere as required,  for  providing  space  for
  departments,  commissions,  boards and officers of the state government,
  upon such terms and conditions as he or she deems most  advantageous  to
  the  state.  Any  such lease shall, however, be for a term not exceeding
  ten years, except that, the commissioner of general services  may  enter
  into leases for a term not exceeding fifteen years when, in the judgment
  of  such  commissioner, such longer term is in the best interests of the
  state. Any such lease may provide for optional renewals on the  part  of
  the state, for terms of ten years or less. Each such lease shall contain
  a  clause  stating  that  the  contract of the state thereunder shall be
  deemed executory only to the extent of  moneys  available  therefor  and
  that  no  liability  shall  be  incurred  by  the state beyond the money
  available for such purpose. Notwithstanding the provisions of any  other
  law,   except   section   sixteen  hundred  seventy-six  of  the  public
  authorities law relating to use of dormitory authority facilities by the
  aged, the commissioner of general services shall have sole and exclusive
  authority to lease space for state departments,  agencies,  commissions,
  boards and officers within the county of Albany. Any buildings, rooms or
  premises,  now or hereafter held by the commissioner of general services
  under lease, may be sublet, in part or in whole, provided  that  in  the
  judgment of such commissioner, and the occupying department, commission,


 board,  and  officers  of the state government, such buildings, rooms or
  premises are not for a time needed. Notwithstanding any other  provision
  of law to the contrary, if bonds or notes are issued pursuant to section
  sixteen  hundred  eighty-n of the public authorities law for the purpose
  of acquiring a building or other facility previously financed by a lease
  or lease-purchase obligation as  authorized  herein,  the  state  agency
  which  is  the  tenant  in  occupancy  shall  be authorized to remit tax
  payments or payments in  lieu  of  thereof  to  the  appropriate  taxing
  authority  in  a manner consistent with the process and term established
  under the original lease or lease-purchase for the subject property  for
  a  period  coincident  with  the term of the lease as established at the
  commencement of the term thereof. The state may undertake  a  certiorari
  review of assessments that may be imposed from time to time.
    * NB Effective until June 30, 2030
    * 12.  Lease  from  time  to  time buildings, rooms or premises in the
  county of Albany, and elsewhere as required,  for  providing  space  for
  departments,  commissions,  boards and officers of the state government,
  upon such terms and conditions as he or she deems most  advantageous  to
  the  state.  Any  such lease shall, however, be for a term not exceeding
  ten years, but may provide for optional renewals  on  the  part  of  the
  state,  for  terms of ten years or less. Each such lease shall contain a
  clause stating that the contract of the state thereunder shall be deemed
  executory only to the extent of moneys available therefor  and  that  no
  liability  shall be incurred by the state beyond the money available for
  such purpose. Notwithstanding the provisions of any  other  law,  except
  section  sixteen  hundred  seventy-six  of  the  public  authorities law
  relating to use of dormitory  authority  facilities  by  the  aged,  the
  commissioner of general services shall have sole and exclusive authority
  to  lease space for state departments, agencies, commissions, boards and
  officers within the county of Albany. Any buildings, rooms or  premises,
  now  or  hereafter  held  by  the commissioner of general services under
  lease, may be sublet, in part or in whole, provided that in the judgment
  of the commissioner, and the occupying  department,  commission,  board,
  and  officers of the state government, such buildings, rooms or premises
  are not for a time needed.
    * NB Effective June 30, 2030
    13. (a) In his or her discretion, lease space in any  public  building
  or  other premises under his or her supervision and control, pursuant to
  this article, to any person, firm or corporation, for the  operation  of
  restaurants,  retail  stores, vending stands for the sale of newspapers,
  periodicals, confections and such other articles that  are  not  tobacco
  products, as may be approved by the commissioner for each stand, and for
  bootblack  service.  Any  such  lease shall be subject to such terms and
  conditions as he or she may deem proper, but for a  term  not  exceeding
  five  years, except that the commissioner may, in his or her discretion,
  lease space for a term of  not  more  than  ten  years  where  extensive
  renovation or repair to or improvement of the space is required of or by
  the lessee and the commissioner determines that it is reasonable for the
  costs  thereof  to  be  amortized  over  a term greater than five years.
  Nothing herein shall restrict the commissioner  from  providing  in  any
  such  lease  for its renewal or extension, at the commissioner's option,
  for terms of five years or less. However,  in  order  to  provide  blind
  persons   with   remunerative   employment,   enlarge   their   economic
  opportunities  and  facilitate  their  efforts  to  be  self-supporting,
  whenever  feasible,  permits  shall  be given to the state department of
  social services for the operation of vending stands and machines.
    (b) Issue to the office of children and family services a  permit  for
  any  of  the  purposes mentioned in this subdivision to be operated by a


 blind person or persons as defined in subdivision four  of  section  two
  hundred eight of the social services law or for the operation of vending
  machines  and similar devices dispensing food, confections, coffee, tea,
  milk,  soft  drinks  and  such  other  articles,  that  are  not tobacco
  products, as may be approved by him or  her  in  consultation  with  the
  office  of  children and family services, for the benefit of the general
  purposes of the business enterprise program for the blind of the  office
  of  children and family services commission for the blind, and upon such
  terms and conditions as the commissioner may  deem  proper  but  without
  provision  for  payment of rent or other consideration for such permits,
  and for a term not exceeding five years, which permit  may  be  extended
  and  renewed.  Such  permit  shall  include  a provision authorizing the
  office of children and family services to assign or transfer such permit
  to a blind person or persons, as herein referred to,  for  the  purposes
  aforesaid,  and  it  shall  also provide that the office of children and
  family  services  shall  send  to  the  commissioner  a  notice  of  any
  assignment  or  transfer  as  aforesaid, which notice shall contain such
  information as the  commissioner  shall  require.  The  permit  and  any
  assignment  or  transfer  thereof  shall  reserve  (i)  to the office of
  children and family services the power of supervision over  the  conduct
  and   operation  of  the  premises  covered  thereby  and  (ii)  to  the
  commissioner of general services the right to revoke such permit or  the
  assignment  or  transfer  thereof  upon  the  mailing  to the last known
  address of the assignee or assignees a notice of such revocation  to  be
  effected within such period of time as the commissioner shall deem to be
  reasonable.
    (c)  If  he  or  she shall deem it necessary to cause the removal of a
  lessee, licensee or assignee from the demised premises, other  than  the
  New   York  state  commission  for  the  blind,  or  its  licensee,  the
  commissioner of general services shall cause  the  lessee,  licensee  or
  assignee  and  his or her representative to be removed therefrom and the
  possession to be delivered to the commissioner of  general  services  in
  the same manner and by the same proceedings and before the same officers
  as  provided  for  in  article  seven  of  the real property actions and
  proceedings law. The proceedings shall be brought in  the  name  of  the
  commissioner of general services as an agent of the state. If any person
  proceeded  against  shall  contest the petition by an answer raising any
  material issue the attorney general shall be notified,  and  he  or  she
  thereafter shall represent the petitioner in the proceedings.
    14.  Where  the  use of any state-owned real property is not presently
  required for any other state purpose, the department, board, commission,
  division, or other state agency having jurisdiction thereof,  may,  with
  the  approval of the commissioner of general services, temporarily lease
  or operate such property in such manner as will produce net revenue  for
  the  support  of  the  state  (a)  by  the  forces and equipment of such
  department, board, commission, division or other state agency, or (b) by
  contracting for the management and operation thereof  with  any  person,
  firm  or  corporation,  or  (c) by a combination of such methods, but no
  such contract nor any lease or permit for the use of such property shall
  be made for a period exceeding five years from  the  date  thereof.  All
  expenses  incident to the leasing, use or operation of any such property
  shall be paid out of the gross revenue therefrom  and  shall  not  be  a
  charge  against the state. Insofar as the provisions of this subdivision
  may conflict with the provisions of section one  hundred  twenty-one  of
  the  state finance law or provisions of any other law, the provisions of
  this subdivision shall control and the same shall not be  deemed  to  be
  repealed,  altered  or  superseded  by  implication  by the enactment or
  amendment of any other law. The use and occupancy of any  such  property


 pursuant  to  any  license,  lease,  permit  or  contract made under the
  provisions of this subdivision and the right of the state  or  its  duly
  authorized  agent  to recover possession thereof shall not be subject to
  the  emergency  housing rent control law. Where it is necessary to cause
  the removal of an occupant  of  any  such  property,  the  head  of  the
  department,  board,  commission,  division  or other state agency having
  jurisdiction thereof may cause such occupant to be removed therefrom and
  the possession thereof to be delivered to him or her  as  agent  of  the
  state  in  the same manner and by the same proceedings in the same court
  or before the same judge or justice  as  is  now  or  hereafter  may  be
  provided  by  law  for  the  removal  of a tenant holding over after the
  expiration of his or her term without the permission  of  the  landlord.
  The  proceeding  shall  be  brought  in  the  name  of such head of such
  department, board, commission, division or  other  state  agency  having
  jurisdiction of such property, as agent of the state.
    15.  The  provisions of subdivision fourteen of this section shall not
  apply to the following state-owned lands:
    (a) Lands under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  commissioner  of  general
  services.
    (b)  Lands  under the jurisdiction of a state or interstate authority,
  commission or agency, the leasing of which is authorized  by  any  other
  law.
    (c)  Lands acquired by the commissioner of transportation for purposes
  connected  with  the  construction,   reconstruction,   improvement   or
  maintenance of a state highway or other duly authorized project.
    (d) Lands acquired by the commissioner of general services pursuant to
  chapter  two  hundred  thirty-seven  of  the  laws  of  nineteen hundred
  forty-six.
    (e) Lands subject to the provisions of the salt springs law.




   § 4.   Rooms for the Grand Army of the Republic and United Spanish War
  Veterans.   The rooms in  the  capitol  now  under  the  charge  of  the
  commander  of  the  Grand Army of the Republic for the department of New
  York, shall continue to be set  apart  and  suitably  furnished  by  the
  commissioner  of  general  services,  and  such rooms so furnished shall
  hereafter be and remain under the joint charge of the commander  of  the
  Grand  Army  of the Republic and the commander of the United Spanish War
  Veterans, department of New York, or of such officers who are members of
  such organizations,  respectively,  as  they  or  their  successors  may
  appoint.    Such rooms shall continue to be used by them for the purpose
  of storing the supplies and property of such Grand Army of the  Republic
  and  United Spanish War Veterans and their relics and mementoes, and for
  arranging  and  preserving  the  history  of  individuals  belonging  to
  organizations  of  the  state  who  served  in the army, navy, or marine
  corps, during the war of the rebellion or the Spanish American  war,  or
  of citizens of this state who served in the regular army, navy or marine
  corps  of  the  United  States, which such organizations may collect and
  desire to preserve as a part of the history of the state.  Such  records
  shall be accessible at all times under suitable rules and regulations to
  members of the Grand Army of the Republic, members of the United Spanish
  War   Veterans  and  other  persons  engaged  in  collecting  historical
  information.  The commander of each organization shall  annually  report
  to  the  legislature,  on  or  before  April first, such portions of the
  transactions of his  respective  organization  as  he  deems  to  be  of
  interest to that organization and to the people of the state.




   § 5. Quarters for Veterans of Foreign Wars.  There shall be set aside,
  when  available, suitably furnished space by the commissioner of general
  services, in the capitol, for the use as quarters  of  the  Veterans  of
  Foreign  Wars  of  the  United  States,  department  of New York, in the
  transaction of its business and  preservation  of  its  records.    Such
  quarters  shall  be  under  the  charge  of the commander of veterans of
  foreign wars of the United States, department  of  New  York,  and  such
  officers  who  are members of such department as he or his successor may
  appoint.




   § 5-a. Quarters  for  Disabled American Veterans.   There shall be set
  aside, when available, suitably furnished space by the  commissioner  of
  general  services,  in  the  capitol,  for  the  use  as quarters of the
  Disabled American Veterans, department of New York, in  the  transaction
  of its business and preservation of its records.  Such quarters shall be
  under  the  charge  of the department commander of the Disabled American
  Veterans, department of New York, and such officers who are  members  of
  such department as he or his successor may appoint.




   §  5-b.  Quarters  for Vietnam Veterans of America. There shall be set
  aside, when available, suitably furnished space by the  commissioner  of
  general services, in the capitol, for the use as quarters of the Vietnam
  Veterans  of  America, New York State Council, in the transaction of its
  business and preservation of its records. Such quarters shall  be  under
  the charge of the president of the Vietnam Veterans of America, New York
  State Council, and such officers who are members of such organization as
  his or her successor may appoint.




   * §  5-c.  Samuel  J.  Abbott  commemorative  plaque.  There  shall be
  installed and maintained in the Capitol, a commemorative plaque honoring
  the service and sacrifice of Samuel J.  Abbott  to  the  people  of  the
  state.  Such plaque shall bear the likeness of Samuel J. Abbott, include
  a  description  of his service and sacrifice to the people of the state,
  and be designed and placed in a manner  as  determined  jointly  by  the
  commissioner of general services and the commission on the restructuring
  of the Capitol.
    * NB There are 2 § 5-c's




   * §  5-c.  POW/MIA chair and plaque in the capitol. There shall be set
  aside space in the capitol by the commissioner of general services for a
  POW/MIA chair and plaque, and such commissioner shall  provide  for  the
  placement  and  maintenance  of  such chair and plaque in the capitol to
  honor United States prisoners of war and those still missing in action.
    * NB There are 2 § 5-c's




   § 6. Construction    plans;    custody;    approval;   and   procedure
  notwithstanding local requirements. The office of general services shall
  have the custody of all plans, specifications, books and records of such
  office which  pertain  to  architecture.  The  commissioner  of  general
  services shall prepare the drawings and specifications for and supervise
  the  construction  of  all  new  buildings erected at the expense of the
  state, except as otherwise provided  by  law;  shall  also  prepare  the
  drawings  and specifications for reconstruction and for all additions to
  existing buildings, and for the alteration or improvement  thereof,  and
  shall  see  that  the  materials  furnished  and  the  work performed in
  constructing, reconstructing, altering or improving  any  such  building
  are  in  accordance  with such drawings and specifications, and that the
  interests of the state are fully protected.
    Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of law,  the  commissioner
  of  general  services  may by rules delegate to the agency or department
  having custody of  any  public  building  full  responsibility  for  the
  preparation  of  plans  and specifications and the supervision of minor,
  routine  or  uncomplicated  construction,  reconstruction,   alteration,
  improvement  or repair of any such building, providing the value of such
  work shall not exceed one hundred fifty thousand dollars.
    All the provisions of this chapter  that  relate  to  state  buildings
  shall,  insofar  as may be practicable, also apply to the improvement of
  grounds owned by the state.
    No municipality of the state shall have  power  to  modify  or  change
  plans  or specifications for the erection, reconstruction, alteration or
  improvement of state buildings, or the construction, plumbing,  heating,
  lighting  or  other  mechanical branch of work necessary to complete the
  work in question, nor to require that any person,  firm  or  corporation
  employed  on  any  such  work  shall  perform  said work in any other or
  different manner than that provided by said contract and specifications,
  nor to obtain any other or additional  authority  or  permit  from  such
  municipality,  department  or  person as a condition of doing such work,
  nor shall any condition whatever be imposed by any such municipality  in
  relation  to  the  work  under  the  supervision  of the commissioner of
  general services, but such work shall be under the sole control of  such
  commissioner  in accordance with the drawings, plans, specifications and
  contracts in relation thereto; and the doing of any such  work  for  the
  state by any person, firm or corporation in accordance with the terms of
  such  contract,  plans  or specifications shall not subject said person,
  firm or corporation to any liability  or  penalty,  civil  or  criminal,
  other  than  as  may  be  stated  in such contract and specifications or
  incidental to  the  proper  enforcement  thereof.  The  commissioner  of
  general services shall prepare necessary contracts, to be approved as to
  form  and  execution by the attorney-general, which shall be used in all
  work let by contract and no payment shall be made on any  such  contract
  except upon official certificate of such commissioner after audit by the
  comptroller.




   § 8. Contracts.  1.  Whenever the commissioner of general services, in
  accordance with the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  has  caused  to  be
  prepared  the  drawings and specifications for the work of construction,
  reconstruction, alteration, repair or improvement of any state buildings
  such drawings and  specifications  shall  be  a  part  of  the  contract
  therefor.  Such drawings and specifications when prepared shall be filed
  in the office of the office of general services, and in  the  office  of
  the  board,  department,  commission or officer having jurisdiction over
  such state buildings whether constructed or to be reconstructed, and the
  office of the state comptroller at his request; and shall at  all  times
  be open to public inspection. The department or other agency having such
  jurisdiction  shall  adopt,  modify  or  reject  any  such  drawings and
  specifications, and no such work shall be begun until the  drawings  and
  specifications  therefor  have  been  adopted,  but  before the adoption
  thereof, the department or other agency having such  jurisdiction  shall
  submit the same to the board of visitors, if any, of the said department
  or  other agency, in case such board of visitors is authorized by law to
  review such  drawings  and  specifications  for  the  purposes  of  this
  section,  and  shall  allow  such board of visitors a period of not more
  than thirty days in which to submit a statement of  their  opinions  and
  suggestions in regard thereto.
    2.  The  said  department  or  other agency having jurisdiction shall,
  except as otherwise provided in this chapter,  advertise  for  proposals
  for  such  work  of  construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or
  improvement, or, upon the request of said department  or  other  agency,
  the  commissioner of general services is authorized to advertise for and
  to receive and open  such  proposals  for  such  work  of  construction,
  reconstruction,  alteration, repair or improvement, and upon the opening
  of such proposals he shall,  in  appropriate  cases,  transmit  to  said
  department  or  other  agency  a tabulation of such proposals. Except as
  provided in section twenty  of  this  chapter,  such  advertisement  for
  proposals  shall  be  printed  in  a  newspaper published in the city of
  Albany, and in such other newspaper or newspapers as will be most likely
  to give adequate notice to contractors of the work contemplated  and  of
  the invitation to submit proposals therefor. Such advertisement shall be
  published for such time and in such manner as shall be determined by the
  commissioner  of  general services. Such advertisement shall be a public
  notice  which  shall  contain  a  brief  description  of  the  work   of
  construction,  reconstruction,  alteration,  repair  or  improvement,  a
  reference to the drawings and specifications therefor and where they may
  be seen and obtained, the time when and the place  where  the  proposals
  invited  by  such  advertisement  will be received, the requirement of a
  deposit with the proposal, the requirement of a bond  to  accompany  the
  contract  and  in  such  amount  as  may  be prescribed for the faithful
  performance of the contract, and such other matters as the  commissioner
  of general services may deem advisable.
    3.  Every  proposal received by the said department or other agency or
  the commissioner of general services, as the case may be, must be sealed
  and enclosed therewith the bidder shall deposit with the said department
  or other agency, or with the commissioner of general  services,  as  the
  case may be, such security as the commissioner of general services shall
  determine as a guarantee that the bidder will enter into the contract if
  it  be  awarded  to  him.  Such  security  shall  be returned as soon as
  practicable after the bid opening to all  bidders  other  than  the  two
  lowest bidders. The security of the two lowest bidders shall be returned
  to  each  of  them  upon the execution of the contract and the bonds, if
  any, required by law for  the  performance  of  the  work  of  a  public
  improvement for the state of New York or upon the rejection of all bids.


   4.  The said department or other agency or the commissioner of general
  services, as the case may be, may (a) reject any or all  proposals,  (b)
  again  advertise  for  proposals,  and  (c)  waive  any  informality  in
  proposals, if the said department or other  agency  or  official  having
  jurisdiction,  deems  the  best  interests of the state will be promoted
  thereby. No proposal shall be withdrawn or  cancelled  before  the  time
  designated  for  opening  such  proposals  publicly,  except  upon  such
  conditions as the said department or other  agency  or  official  having
  jurisdiction, may deem to be necessary.
    6.  All  contracts  for amounts in excess of five thousand dollars for
  the  work  of  construction,  reconstruction,  alteration,   repair   or
  improvement  of  any  state  building,  whether  constructed  or  to  be
  constructed must be offered for public bidding and may be awarded to the
  lowest responsible and reliable bidder, as will best promote the  public
  interest,  by  the  said department or other agency with the approval of
  the comptroller for the whole or any part of the work to  be  performed,
  and,  in  the  discretion  of  the said department or other agency, such
  contracts may be sublet; provided, however, that no such contract  shall
  be  awarded  to  a bidder other than the lowest responsible and reliable
  bidder, except for certain contracts awarded to minority or  women-owned
  business enterprises as provided herein, without the written approval of
  the  comptroller.  When  a  proposal  consists  of  unit prices of items
  specified to be performed,  except  for  certain  contracts  awarded  to
  minority  or  women-owned  business  enterprises as provided herein, the
  lowest bid shall be deemed to be  that  which  specifically  states  the
  lowest  gross sum for which the entire work will be performed, including
  all the items specified in the proposal thereof. The lowest bid shall be
  determined by the commissioner of general services on the basis  of  the
  gross  sum  for which the entire work will be performed, arrived at by a
  correct computation of all the items specified in the proposal  therefor
  at the unit prices contained in the bid. Provided, however, that where a
  responsible  and  reliable bidder certified as a minority-owned business
  enterprise  or  women-owned  business  enterprise  pursuant  to  article
  fifteen-A of the executive law submits a bid of one million four hundred
  thousand  dollars  or less, as adjusted annually for inflation beginning
  January  first,  two  thousand  twenty,  the  bid  of  the  minority  or
  women-owned business enterprise shall be deemed the lowest bid unless it
  exceeds the bid of the lowest bidder by more than ten percent.
    7.  All  such  contracts for the work of construction, reconstruction,
  alteration, repair or improvement of  any  such  state  building,  shall
  contain a clause that the contract shall only be deemed executory to the
  extent  of  the  moneys available, and no liability shall be incurred by
  the state beyond the moneys available for the purpose.




   § 9. Construction emergencies. 1. A "construction emergency" is damage
  to  or  a  malfunction in buildings or property of the state of New York
  caused by an  unanticipated,  sudden  and  unexpected  occurrence  which
  involves  a  pressing  necessity for immediate repair, reconstruction or
  maintenance in order to permit the  safe  continuation  of  a  necessary
  public  use  or function, or to protect the property of the state of New
  York, or the life, health or safety of any person.
    * 2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this law or any general or
  special law, where there is a  construction  emergency,  as  defined  by
  subdivision  one  of  this section, the commissioner of general services
  may,  upon  written  notice  of  such  construction  emergency  from  an
  authorized  officer  of  the department or agency having jurisdiction of
  the property, let emergency contracts for public work or the purchase of
  supplies,  materials  or  equipment  without   complying   with   formal
  competitive bidding requirements, provided that all such contracts shall
  be  subject  to the approval of the attorney general and the comptroller
  and that no such contract shall exceed one million five hundred thousand
  dollars. Such emergency contracts shall be let only for  work  necessary
  to remedy or ameliorate a construction emergency.
    * NB Effective until June 30, 2025
    * 2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this law or any general or
  special  law,  where  there  is  a construction emergency, as defined by
  subdivision one of this section, the commissioner  of  general  services
  may,  upon  written  notice  of  such  construction  emergency  from  an
  authorized officer of the department or agency  having  jurisdiction  of
  the property, let contracts for public work or the purchase of supplies,
  materials or equipment without complying with formal competitive bidding
  requirements,  provided  that all such contracts shall be subject to the
  approval of the attorney general and the comptroller and  that  no  such
  contract shall exceed one million five hundred thousand dollars.
    * NB Effective June 30, 2025
    3. The office of general services shall prepare and maintain a written
  record  of  each transaction entered into, pursuant to the provisions of
  this section, setting forth (a) the nature of such  emergency,  (b)  the
  effect  thereof on public property, on the operation of government or on
  life, health or safety of any person, (c) a detailed description of  the
  work  to  be  performed  and  the cost of such work, (d) engineering and
  architectural evaluation showing the need for immediate action, and  (e)
  the  notice  of  construction  emergency  from  the department or agency
  requesting such work. At least three  oral  competitive  bids  shall  be
  solicited  and  written  confirmation  of  each  solicitation  shall  be
  furnished within a reasonable time and maintained as an official record.
    * 4. Bidders  for  such  construction  emergency  contracts  shall  be
  solicited  from  a  list  of  bidders, which shall be regional in scope,
  established by the office of general services based on an invitation  to
  contractors  including certified minority and women-owned contractors to
  be so listed, subject to approval by the  office  of  general  services,
  advertised   annually   in   the  procurement  opportunities  newsletter
  published by the department  of  economic  development,  in  the  public
  notification  service of the office of general services and by newspaper
  advertisement as provided in section eight of this article.  The  office
  of  general  services  shall  seek  to  provide  prime  contract bidding
  opportunities for minority and women-owned contractors in the letting of
  such emergency contracts. From such  list  of  bidders,  the  office  of
  general  services  shall  solicit bidders sequentially or by rotation in
  such manner  that  the  listed  potential  bidders  shall  be  solicited
  consecutively,  to  the  extent  practicable,  and  thereby  given  fair
  opportunity to bid in the  course  of  successive  needs  for  emergency


 contracts.  The  office  of  general services may remove any bidder from
  such  lists  for  nonresponsibility  or  nonreliability.  The  emergency
  contracts let under this section in each month shall be published by the
  office of general services in the public notification service.
    The  department  or  agency  having jurisdiction of the property shall
  promptly and diligently take all actions  and  prepare  and  submit  the
  required documentation relating to the contract award for the repair and
  remediation  of  the  construction emergency, as necessary to deliver to
  the office of the state comptroller as early as practicable prior to the
  thirtieth  day  following  the  commencement  of  the  work   all   such
  documentation required for the comptroller's approval of the contract.
    * NB Expires June 30, 2025




   § 10.  Disposal  of  buildings  and improvements on state lands, or on
  lands under lease to the state. 1. Except as provided in subdivision two
  of this section, whenever the head of any  agency,  board,  division  or
  commission,  with  the approval of the director of the budget, (a) shall
  certify to the commissioner of general services  that  any  property  on
  state  land  or  on  land  under  lease  to  the state and consisting of
  buildings with or without  fixtures  attached  thereto,  and  any  other
  improvements  upon  such lands, are unfit, not adapted or not needed for
  use by  such  agency,  board,  division  or  commission  and  (b)  shall
  recommend  for  reasons  to  be stated, that the said property should be
  disposed of, the commissioner of general services shall,  after  causing
  an  investigation  to  be  made,  dispose  of  said  property by sale or
  demolition as will best promote the public interest. Public notice of  a
  proposed  sale  where  the value of the property to be sold exceeds five
  thousand dollars shall be given  by  advertising  at  least  once  in  a
  newspaper  published  and  having a general circulation in the county in
  which such lands are located and in such other newspaper  or  newspapers
  as  the  commissioner of general services may deem to be necessary. Such
  advertisement shall give a  general  description  and  location  of  the
  property  and  the terms of the sale and the date on which proposals for
  the same will be received  by  the  commissioner  of  general  services.
  Should  any  or  all  of  the  offers  so  received  be  deemed  by  the
  commissioner of general services to be too low, he or she may dispose of
  such property so advertised at private sale within ninety  days  of  the
  opening  of  the  bids,  provided  that  no  such  private sale shall be
  consummated at a price lower than that submitted as a result  of  public
  advertising.  The  commissioner  of general services shall also have the
  power to demolish such property either by contract or, if such  property
  is  located  on lands which are under the jurisdiction of the department
  of corrections and community supervision, the work  of  such  demolition
  may  be  done  by  the incarcerated individuals of the institution where
  such property is located, provided  however  that  the  commissioner  of
  corrections and community supervision shall consent to the employment of
  the  incarcerated individuals for the work of demolition. The provisions
  of this subdivision shall be effective notwithstanding the provisions of
  any other general or special law relating to the disposal  of  buildings
  with  the  fixtures  attached  thereto or of any improvements upon lands
  belonging to or under lease to the state, and any such statute or  parts
  thereof   relating   to   such   disposal  of  buildings,  fixtures  and
  improvements insofar as they are inconsistent  with  the  provisions  of
  this  section  are hereby superseded. A record of any such sale shall be
  filed with the state agency head above referred to and the  proceeds  of
  such  sale  or  disposal shall be paid into the treasury of the state to
  the credit of the capital projects fund.
    2. The provisions of subdivision one of this section shall  not  apply
  to  any  buildings  or  parts  thereof or to any other improvements upon
  lands that have  been  or  that  shall  hereafter  be  acquired  by  the
  commissioner   of   transportation   for  purposes  connected  with  the
  construction, reconstruction, improvement  or  maintenance  of  a  state
  highway  or  other  duly authorized project or to any buildings or parts
  thereof or to any other improvements upon lands that have been  or  that
  shall  hereafter  be acquired by the trustees of the state university of
  New York for purposes connected with the  construction,  reconstruction,
  rehabilitation,   improvement   or  maintenance  of  the  facilities  or
  installations of the state university or other duly authorized  project.
  In  any  such project, the commissioner of transportation or in the case
  of a duly authorized project of the state university,  the  trustees  of
  the state university may (a) provide in any agreement of adjustment with


 the  claimant  who owned such buildings or improvements for the disposal
  of such buildings or  improvements  by  removal,  (b)  provide  for  the
  demolition  of such buildings or improvements, (c) permit, on such terms
  as  he  or she or such trustees, as the case may be, may deem beneficial
  to the state, the temporary use  and  occupancy  of  such  buildings  or
  improvements  pending  prosecution  of  actual  construction work on the
  project, or (d) dispose of such buildings or improvements by such  other
  arrangement as the commissioner of transportation or the trustees of the
  state  university,  as  the  case may be, may deem advisable. The use or
  occupancy of any such property pursuant to any license, lease or  permit
  under  the  provisions of this section and the right of the commissioner
  of transportation or the trustees of the state university, as  the  case
  may  be,  as  agent  for  the  state,  to recover possession of any such
  building or improvement or of the property  upon  which  it  is  located
  shall not be subject to the emergency housing rent control law. Where it
  is  necessary  to cause the removal of an occupant of any such property,
  the  commissioner  of  transportation  or  the  trustees  of  the  state
  university,  as  the case may be, as agent for the state, may cause such
  occupant to be removed therefrom and the immediate possession thereof to
  be delivered to him or her or to them, as the case may be, as  agent  of
  the  state  in  the  same manner and by the same proceedings in the same
  court or before the same judge or justice as is now or hereafter may  be
  provided  by  law  for  the  removal  of a tenant holding over after the
  expiration of his or her term without the permission  of  the  landlord.
  The  proceedings  shall  be  brought  in the name of the commissioner of
  transportation or the trustees of the state university, as the case  may
  be,  as agent of the state, and include as part of the relief a judgment
  for any amounts which may be due for said occupancy. All monies received
  by the trustees of the state university pursuant to this  section  shall
  be paid into the state university income fund as established pursuant to
  subdivision  four  of  section three hundred fifty-five of the education
  law.




   § 11. Pilot  program  of  bicycle parking facilities.   1. Legislative
  finding. In recognition of the  role  which  bicycles  can  serve  as  a
  valuable  transportation  mode  with  energy  conservation,  health  and
  environmental benefits, it is hereby declared to be the  policy  of  the
  state  that provision for adequate and safe bicycle facilities including
  the use of present facilities for safe and  secure  bicycle  parking  be
  included in the planning and development of all state facilities.
    2.  (a)  The  commissioner of general services shall undertake a pilot
  program for provision and promotion of safe and secure  bicycle  parking
  facilities  at state office buildings. The commissioner, within one year
  of the enactment of this section, shall provide, at the principal office
  buildings under his superintendence at the Nelson A. Rockefeller  Empire
  State  Plaza  in Albany, New York, secure bicycle parking facilities for
  use by employees and visitors.
    (b) The commissioner is also authorized, within  a  reasonable  period
  and  where  feasible,  to  provide suitable support facilities including
  clothing lockers, showers and  changing  facilities,  and  to  charge  a
  reasonable use fee.
    (c)  For  the  purpose  of  this  section,  the  term "bicycle parking
  facility" means a device or enclosure,  located  within  a  building  or
  installation,   or   conveniently   adjacent  thereto,  that  is  easily
  accessible, clearly visible and so located as to minimize the danger  of
  theft  of  bicycles.  Such  a  device  shall  consist of a parking rack,
  locker, or other device constructed to enable the frame and both  wheels
  of  a  bicycle  to  be secured with ease by use of a padlock in a manner
  that will minimize the risk of  theft,  or  an  enclosure  which  limits
  access to the bicycles and is under observation by an attendant.
    3.  In  undertaking such pilot program, the office shall:  (a) Consult
  with and cooperate with (i) the statewide bicycle advisory council, (ii)
  the  New  York  state  department  of  transportation  regional  bicycle
  coordinator,  (iii)  local  bicycle  planning  groups, and (iv) persons,
  organizations, and groups served by, interested in,  or  concerned  with
  the area under study.
    (b)  Request and receive from any department, division, board, bureau,
  commission or other agency of the state  or  any  political  subdivision
  thereof  or  any  public  authority,  any  assistance and data as may be
  necessary to enable the office to carry out its  responsibilities  under
  this section.
    (c)   On  or  before  the  first  day  of  January,  nineteen  hundred
  eighty-nine, a report  shall  be  submitted  to  the  governor  and  the
  legislature  which  shall  include  a  determination  of usage levels, a
  statement outlining first year progress and the elements of a  statewide
  plan for the provision of such facilities.




   § 17. Payments.  No  payments  shall  be  made  upon  any work done or
  materials furnished for the construction, reconstruction, alteration  or
  improvement of state buildings under the supervision of the commissioner
  of  general  services,  pursuant  to  this  article,  until the bills or
  estimates presented for such payment shall have been duly  certified  by
  the commissioner of general services to be correct and until, thereafter
  the   comptroller  shall  have  audited  and  approved  such  bills  and
  estimates. Such bills or estimates presented for final payment for  such
  work  or  materials  shall  be  certified by the commissioner of general
  services and have the approval of the  department  having  jurisdiction.
  The  comptroller  shall have and is hereby given full power to pass upon
  all  bills  and  estimates  presented  for  payment  for  such  work  or
  materials, and for the purpose of passing upon and auditing the same, he
  shall  have  full  power  to make investigation thereof and to determine
  whether or not he shall approve and audit the same and allow the same to
  be paid.




   § 18. Change  in  contracts. Any change, addition or deduction made in
  any contract by reduction in price, by addition in  price  or  otherwise
  must  be  done  by  an  order  on  contract  which  may be issued by the
  commissioner of general services.  This  order  shall  specifically  set
  forth  conditions  of  the  change  or  other  modification and shall be
  approved  by  the  board,  department,  commission  or  officer   having
  jurisdiction.  After  having  been  approved  by  him the order shall be
  forthwith filed in the office of the state comptroller.




   § 19. Manner  of  doing  work  or  acquiring  material.  The  work  of
  construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or improvement  of  any
  state building, whether constructed or to be constructed, may be done by
  the  employment of incarcerated individuals or outside labor or both and
  by the purchase of materials in the open market whenever in the  opinion
  of  the  department  having  jurisdiction  over  such  building, and the
  commissioner  of   general   services   or   his   or   her   authorized
  representative, such a course shall be deemed advantageous to the state,
  and  only  upon plans and specifications prepared by the commissioner of
  general  services,  but  no  compensation  shall  be  allowed  for   the
  employment of incarcerated individual labor except convict labor.




   § 20. Work done by special order. The commissioner of general services
  shall   determine  when  minor  work  of  construction,  reconstruction,
  alteration or repair of any state building may be done by special order.
  Special orders for such work shall be short-form contracts  approved  by
  the  attorney  general  and by the comptroller. No work shall be done by
  special order in an amount in excess of one hundred thousand dollars and
  a bond shall not be required for special orders. No work shall  be  done
  by   special   order  unless  the  commissioner  has  presented  to  the
  comptroller evidence that he  has  made  a  diligent  effort  to  obtain
  competition  sufficient  to  protect the interests of the state prior to
  selecting the  contractor  to  perform  the  work.  Notwithstanding  the
  provisions  of  subdivision  two  of section eight of this chapter, work
  done by special order  under  this  section  may  be  advertised  solely
  through the regular public notification service of the office of general
  services.  At least five days shall elapse between the first publication
  of such public notice and the date so specified for the  public  opening
  of bids. All payments on special orders shall be made on the certificate
  of  the commissioner of general services and audited and approved by the
  state comptroller. All special orders shall contain a  clause  that  the
  special order shall only be deemed executory to the extent of the moneys
  available  and  no  liability  shall be incurred by the state beyond the
  moneys available for the purpose.






	   § 21. Removal,  relocation  and  payment  of  costs thereof of certain
  water mains, sewer pipes and other facilities owned by municipalities or
  public service corporations.  1. Whenever the  commissioner  of  general
  services   deems   it   necessary  as  a  result  of  the  construction,
  reconstruction or maintenance of any state project, to provide  for  the
  removal,  relocation,  replacement,  reconstruction  or  repair of water
  mains, sewer pipes and other facilities maintained for  public  use  and
  owned  by  any municipality or public service corporation, he shall have
  the  power  to  contract  with  such  municipality  or  public   service
  corporation    for    such    removal,   relocation,   replacement,   or
  reconstruction.  The expense of such removal,  relocation,  replacement,
  reconstruction  or  repair  shall  be  a  proper  charge  against  funds
  available for the construction, reconstruction or  maintenance  of  such
  state  project,  and  the  work  necessary  therefor may be performed by
  contract, or by the  use  of  office  of  general  services  forces  and
  equipment  and  of  materials  purchased  therefor.    However,  if  the
  commissioner of general services deems it to be in the public  interest,
  he  may  contract  with  the municipality or public service corporation,
  upon such terms as he may deem advantageous to the state; to  have  such
  work  performed  (a)  by the employment of the forces and for the use of
  the equipment of such municipality and by the use  of  any  material  on
  hand or necessary to be purchased by such municipality or public service
  corporation  or (b) by such other method as such commissioner of general
  services shall approve or (c) by a combination of the  methods  provided
  in  this  section.   Any municipality is hereby authorized to enter into
  such contract for the purposes of this section.  Upon the completion and
  acceptance of  the  work,  such  water  mains,  sewer  pipes  and  other
  facilities  shall  be  maintained  by  the  municipality  or such public
  service corporation as the case may be.
    2.  In all cases in which the contracts to be let are for the  purpose
  of  removal,  relocation, replacement, reconstruction or repair of water
  mains, sewer pipes and any other facilities owned by any municipality or
  public  service  corporation,  such  municipality  or   public   service
  corporation  shall not be required to make the preliminary deposit or to
  give the certified check upon submitting its proposal, nor to  give  any
  bond  for  the  performance  of  the work, nor shall any advertising for
  proposals  be  necessary  where  such  municipality  or  public  service
  corporation is to perform the work.




   § 22.   When  appropriations  are available; appropriations for two or
  more objects.  No item of an appropriation made for the  performance  of
  such  work  shall  be  available,  except  for  advertising  or expenses
  incurred in the preparation of  plans  and  specifications,  engineering
  work  or superintendence, unless one or more contracts or special orders
  shall first have been made for the completion of such  work  within  the
  appropriation   therefor.      If  an  appropriation  be  made  for  the
  construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or improvement  of  any
  state  buildings  in an appropriation act specifying two or more objects
  for which the appropriation is made and any one of  such  objects  shall
  have  been  accomplished for a sum less than the amount specified in the
  act, the unexpended balance  shall  be  applicable  to  any  other  work
  specified in the act.




   § 23. Completion  of  existing  contracts.    All  contracts  for  the
  erection of new buildings for the state or any of  its  institutions  or
  for  additions, alterations or improvements to existing buildings of the
  state and for all work and materials in connection  therewith  shall  be
  continued  in  force  and carried to completion by the office of general
  services.




   § 24. Application  of  article  to  mental hygiene construction.   The
  provisions of this article shall not apply to the department  of  mental
  hygiene   or   to   mental  hygiene  facilities  constructed,  acquired,
  reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved  pursuant  to  the  health  and
  mental  hygiene facilities improvement act, or to contracts entered into
  by the trustees of the health and mental hygiene facilities  improvement
  corporation  or by the state housing finance agency in relation thereto,
  or to real property held in the name of  the  state  for  the  corporate
  purposes of such corporation, except that the provisions of this article
  shall apply, so far as practicable, to such mental hygiene facilities or
  real property as are constructed, acquired, reconstructed, rehabilitated
  or  improved  by the commissioner of general services under an agreement
  made with the trustees of  the  health  and  mental  hygiene  facilities
  improvement   corporation;   and  except  further  that  nothing  herein
  contained shall be deemed to affect  the  power  of  the  department  of
  mental  hygiene  or  the  trustees  of  the  health  and  mental hygiene
  facilities improvement corporation to enter into any short form contract
  in accordance with section twenty of this  chapter  for  minor  work  of
  construction,  reconstruction,  alteration,  or  repair  of  any  mental
  hygiene facility  being  used  by  the  said  department  or  under  the
  jurisdiction of the said trustees.


   § 40. Definitions. As used in this article
    1.  The  term  "work of art" shall apply to and include all paintings,
  mural decorations, stained glass,  sculptures,  bas-reliefs,  fountains,
  monuments,  arches,  gateways and other structures of a permanent nature
  intended for ornamentation or commemoration.
    2. The term "building" shall apply to and include  all  monumental  or
  other  buildings for housing any of the state departments or commissions
  or intended as memorials, museums or places of  public  assemblage,  and
  shall not apply to or include any buildings for institutional, hospital,
  penal or corrective purposes.




   § 41.   Jurisdiction.    1.  Hereafter no work of art shall become the
  property of the state by purchase, gift or otherwise, or  be  paid  for,
  either wholly or in part, out of state funds, unless such work of art or
  design  for the same, together with a statement of the proposed location
  of such work of art shall first have been submitted to and  approved  by
  the  office  of  general  services;  nor shall any work of art, until so
  approved, be erected or placed in or upon or allowed over  or  upon  any
  state  building,  street,  highway or other public place, park or ground
  belonging to or under control of the state.   No existing work  of  art,
  belonging  to or in possession of the state, shall be removed, relocated
  or altered in any way without the approval  of  the  office  of  general
  services.
    2.   The construction of any building, bridge or its approaches, arch,
  gate, fence or other structure, or fixture, which is  to  be  paid  for,
  either  wholly  or in part, by state funds, or to be constructed on land
  owned or controlled by the state, shall not be begun unless  the  design
  for  the same shall have been submitted to and approved by the office of
  general services.
    3.  No arch, bridge, approach or  other  structure  belonging  to  any
  private  individual  or corporation shall be permitted to extend over or
  under, into or upon any street, highway, waterway or other public place,
  belonging to or under control  of  the  state,  unless  the  design  and
  location thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the office
  of general services.
    4.    The  office  of  general  services shall advise, generally, upon
  questions of art or architecture,  when  requested  to  do  so,  by  the
  governor,  any  legislative  committee,  head  of  a state department or
  commission.
    5.  If the office of general services should fail to decide  upon  any
  matter  submitted  to  it, within forty-five days after such submission,
  the office's approval of the matter shall be presumed.




   § 42.   Duty  of  other  state officers.   It shall be the duty of the
  officer of the state, charged by law with  the  responsibility  for  the
  purchase,  acquisition, placement, erection or execution of such work of
  art, monument, building, bridge or other  structure,  in  each  case  to
  submit  the  designs,  drawings,  models and other information as may be
  deemed necessary by the office of general services or  the  commissioner
  of  transportation,  respectively, together with explanatory statements,
  to such office or commissioner for its or his action.




   § 43. State  parks.    The  requirement  of  approval of the office of
  general services or the commissioner of transportation shall  not  apply
  to  works  of  art,  buildings,  bridges, arches, gates, fences or other
  structures  under  the  control  of  the  department  of   environmental
  conservation,  the  several park authorities and the office of parks and
  recreation.




   § 44. Application  of  article.    The  requirement in this article of
  approval of the office  of  general  services  or  the  commissioner  of
  transportation  shall  not  apply  to  works of art, buildings, bridges,
  arches, gates, fences or other structures or fixtures under the  control
  of  the  department  of  mental hygiene or the health and mental hygiene
  facilities improvement corporation.  Action in such cases shall be taken
  and final approval given by the trustees of such corporation.




   § 50. Definitions.  As used in this article:
    1. "Public building" means any building or portion thereof, other than
  a  privately  owned  residential  structure,  public  housing structure,
  police, fire or correction structure, constructed  wholly  or  partially
  with state or municipal funds, whether tax funds, funds obtained through
  bond  issues  or grants or loans under any state law, which is likely to
  be used by physically handicapped persons, including, but not limited to
  theaters,  concert  halls,  auditoriums,  museums,  schools,  libraries,
  recreation facilities, transportation terminals and stations, factories,
  office buildings and business establishments.
    2.  "State"  shall  mean  the  state  of New York and any state board,
  bureau, commission, department, authority, division, officer  or  public
  benefit corporation.
    3.  "Municipality" or "Municipal" means a city, town, county, village,
  school district or special district as defined by  section  one  hundred
  two of the real property tax law.
    4.  "Facilities" shall mean and include those facilities as defined in
  the provisions of the  state  building  construction  code  relating  to
  facilities for the physically handicapped.
    5. "Physically handicapped" means
    (a) impairment requiring confinement to a wheel chair; or
    (b) impairment causing difficulty or insecurity in walking or climbing
  stairs  or  requiring  the  use  of braces, crutches or other artificial
  supports;  or  impairment  caused  by  amputation,  arthritis,   spastic
  condition  or  pulmonary, cardiac or other ills rendering the individual
  semi-ambulatory; or
    (c) total or partial impairment of hearing or sight causing insecurity
  or likelihood of exposure to danger in public places; or
    (d) impairment due to conditions of aging and incoordination.
    6. "Reconstruction, rehabilitation, alteration or  improvement"  shall
  mean  only  that  work  which  results  in  a  substantial change in the
  structure or facilities of a public building and shall not include minor
  repairs necessary for ordinary maintenance.




   § 51. Construction  of  public  buildings.  1.  (a) In addition to any
  other requirements respecting the construction of a public building  and
  facilities    thereof,    the    new    construction,    reconstruction,
  rehabilitation, alteration or improvement  of  all  such  buildings  and
  facilities  shall  conform  to  the  requirements  of the state building
  construction code relating to facilities for the physically handicapped,
  except work already completed, work  in  progress,  or  work  for  which
  schematic  designs have been approved by the effective date of this act.
  This section shall not be effective if its provisions  will  impair  the
  structural stability of the public building or its facilities.
    *   (b)   This   section   shall  not  apply  to  the  reconstruction,
  rehabilitation, alteration or improvement of rapid transit terminals  or
  stations in New York city, which shall be governed by subdivision two of
  this section.
    * 2. With respect to the reconstruction, rehabilitation, alteration or
  improvement  of  any  rapid  transit terminal or station of the New York
  city transit authority or of the Staten Island rapid  transit  operating
  authority,  the  obligations  of such authorities for complying with the
  requirements  of  the  state  building  construction  code  relating  to
  facilities  for  individuals  with  disabilities shall be limited to its
  compliance  with  the  requirements  of  subdivision  three  of  section
  fifteen-b of the transportation law.
    *  NB  The  provisions  of par (b) of sub. 1 and sub. 2 are subject to
  expiration on July 26, 2020 if the Metropolitan Transportation Authority
  does not comply with the provisions of  sub.  3  of  sec.  15-b  of  the
  transportation law.






   § 52. Compliance.  The official, governing body or board having design
  approval  authority  for  state or municipal building construction shall
  determine whether a proposed structure is a "public building" within the
  meaning of this article and shall ensure that the  design  of  any  such
  building complies with the requirements hereby imposed.




   § 53. Assistive  listening  systems.  1.  All  new  public  buildings,
  construction of which commences after January  first,  nineteen  hundred
  ninety-one,  containing  an  auditorium,  theater, meeting hall, hearing
  room, amphitheater, or room used in any similar capacity  which  are  so
  designated by the appropriate building and fire code shall have equipped
  and  installed  an assistive listening system for use by persons who are
  deaf or hard of hearing who require the use of such a system to  improve
  their reception of sound.
    2.  Standards  for  such  systems shall be developed by the state fire
  prevention and building code council upon receiving recommendations from
  the advisory board on assistive listening systems in  places  of  public
  assembly.
    3. For purposes of this section, the term "assistive listening system"
  shall   mean   situational-personal   acoustic  communication  equipment
  designed to improve the transmission and auditory reception of sound.




   § 60. Public policy.  It is hereby declared to be the public policy of
  this   state   to   provide  leadership  in  preserving,  restoring  and
  maintaining the  historic,  architectural,  archeological  and  cultural
  environment  of  this state and that therefore it is the purpose of this
  article to provide that the instrumentalities of  the  state  administer
  the  historic and cultural properties under their control in a spirit of
  stewardship and trusteeship for the future generations and conduct their
  activities,  plans  and  programs  in  a  manner  consistent  with   the
  preservation and enhancement of historic and cultural properties.




   § 61. Definitions.    When  used  in  this article, unless a different
  meaning clearly appears from the context, the terms listed  below  shall
  have the following meanings:
    1. "Commissioner" means the commissioner of general services.
    2.  "Historic  and/or  cultural place or property" means any building,
  structure, district, area or site including underground  and  underwater
  sites,  that is of significance in the history, architecture, archeology
  or culture of the state, its communities, or the nation.
    3. "National Register" means the national register of historic  places
  authorized by the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966.
    4.  "Registered  property" means any historic place or property within
  the boundaries of the state nominated by the commissioner of  parks  and
  recreation  for  listing  on  the  national  register of historic places
  and/or listed on the state register of historic places.
    5.   "State  agency"  means  any  state  department,  officer,  board,
  commission,  agency, or a public authority or public benefit corporation
  at least one of whose members is appointed by the governor.
    6.   "State register" means the  state  register  of  historic  places
  established  pursuant  to section 14.07 of article fourteen of the parks
  and recreation law.




   § 62. Survey  of historic and cultural properties under state control.
  The commissioner of general services with the advice and  assistance  of
  the  commissioner  of  parks  and recreation shall prepare, maintain and
  publish a listing of all historic  and  cultural  properties  under  its
  jurisdiction  or  control or otherwise owned or used by any state agency
  including those listed on the state or  national  register  of  historic
  places  or  determined by the commissioner of parks and recreation to be
  eligible for the state register.    The  commissioner  may  utilize  the
  statewide inventory of historic property prepared by the commissioner of
  parks and recreation for purposes of this section.




   § 63. Protection   and  management  of  state  historic  and  cultural
  properties.  The commissioner of the office of general services  or  the
  chief executive officer of any state agency shall:
    1.   Consult with the commissioner of parks and recreation as early in
  the planning process as may be practicable when planning to    demolish,
  alter  or  transfer  any property under their jurisdiction listed on the
  state  or  national  register  or  that  has  been  determined  by   the
  commissioner  of  parks  and  recreation  to  be  eligible for the state
  register, for the  purpose  of  exploring  alternatives  to  demolition,
  alteration  or transfer.  The commissioner of parks and recreation shall
  inform the state board of such proposed actions.
    2.  Initiate measures and procedures to provide for  the  maintenance,
  through  preservation, rehabilitation or restoration of properties under
  their jurisdiction that are listed on the state or national register  or
  are  determined  by  the  commissioner  of  parks  and  recreation to be
  eligible for listing on the state register.
    3.   Initiate measures to assure that  where  as  a  result  of  state
  action, a property listed in the state register of historic places is to
  be substantially altered or demolished, timely steps be taken to make or
  have  made records, including measured drawings, photographs and maps of
  the property  according  to  the  standards  of  the  Historic  American
  Building  Survey,  and  that a copy of such records then be deposited in
  the state archives and with the Library of Congress for future reference
  and use.
    4.  To  the  fullest  extent  practicable,  secure  by   preservation,
  restriction,  historic or cultural properties sold or transferred by the
  state, which properties are listed on the state or national register  or
  determined  by  the  commissioner of parks and recreation to be eligible
  for listing on the state register.
    5.    Cooperate  with  purchasers  and  transferees  of  state   owned
  properties listed on the state or national register or determined by the
  commissioner  of  parks and recreation to be eligible for listing on the
  state register in the development of viable plans to use  such  property
  in a manner compatible with preservation objectives.




   § 64.   State  use of suitable buildings of historic, architectural or
  cultural significance.  1. The commissioner shall prepare  and  maintain
  long   range   projections  for  the  public  building  needs  of  state
  government.  In consultation with the state commissioner  of  parks  and
  recreation,  the  chairman  of the state board for historic preservation
  and municipal preservation  boards  and  commissions,  the  commissioner
  shall  identify  existing  buildings  within  the  state that (a) are of
  historic, architectural  or  cultural  significance  and  (b)  would  be
  suitable,  whether or not in need of repair, alteration or addition, for
  purchase or lease to meet the public building needs of state government.
    2.  The commissioner of parks and recreation shall keep on file a list
  of all properties which are on the state register and which  the  owners
  of  such properties have indicated are available for the purchase and/or
  lease by state agencies, or properties which have been  brought  to  the
  attention of the commissioner of parks and recreation by their owners as
  being  available  for  such  purposes  and  have  been determined by the
  commissioner of parks and recreation to be eligible for listing  on  the
  state register.
    3.   As early as may be practicable in the decision making process, in
  addition to any other requirements of  law  prior  to  the  approval  of
  contracts  or  actions  necessary to construct or acquire by purchase or
  lease for a period of one year or more building space for use  by  state
  agencies,  the  commissioner  or  chief  executive  officer of any state
  agency responsible for acquisition of space shall so notify and  consult
  with  the  commissioner  of parks and recreation as to the existence and
  availability of historic properties listed  on  the  state  or  national
  register or determined by the commissioner of parks and recreation to be
  eligible  for listing on the state register and the suitability of these
  buildings, whether or not in need of repair, alteration or addition,  to
  meet the public building needs of state government.  The commissioner of
  the  office  of parks and recreation shall report such notifications and
  consultations to  the  state  board  for  historic  preservation.    The
  commissioner  of general services and the chief executive officer of any
  other state agency shall give first priority to utilization of  suitable
  buildings  of  historic,  architectural  or cultural significance unless
  such space would  not  prove  feasible,  compatible  with  the  intended
  operation   of  state  business  and  prudent  compared  with  available
  alternatives.  The commissioner shall review and evaluate all timely and
  documented recommendations for using  existing  buildings  of  historic,
  architectural   or   cultural  significance  within  the  geographically
  relevant area.   For purposes of  this  subdivision,  "a  geographically
  relevant  area" means those municipalities located in the area where the
  particular public building need can be met.
    4.  The commissioner, in consultation with the commissioner  of  parks
  and recreation, may by rule and regulation identify minor acquisition or
  lease  actions  or  classes  of  such actions which because of the small
  amount of space involved or other characteristics are not likely to have
  a significant impact upon the public policy set forth  in  this  article
  and  such  action or actions shall be exempt from the provisions of this
  subdivision.  The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to  the
  acquisition  or  lease  of building space when the commissioner makes an
  explicit finding that an immediate  acquisition  or  lease  of  building
  space is required by public necessity.
    5.    The  commissioner in consultation with the commissioner of parks
  and recreation shall adopt such procedures and rules and regulations  as
  are necessary to carry out the requirements of this section.




   § 80. Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as the
  "state green building construction act".




   § 81. Definitions. As used in this article:
    1.  "Agency"  shall  mean  a  state department, state agency, or state
  public authority.
    2. "Authority" shall mean the  New  York  state  energy  research  and
  development authority.
    3.  "Building" shall mean a building or structure that is owned by the
  state or by an agency.
    4. "Office" shall mean the office of general services.
    5. "Substantial renovation" shall mean a substantial  modification  of
  an  existing building and shall include but not be limited to additions,
  alterations, and reconstruction as determined  pursuant  to  regulations
  promulgated by the office pursuant to this article.




   § 82. Applicability.  This  article shall apply to the construction of
  new buildings and the  substantial  renovation  of  existing  buildings,
  except that this article shall not apply in the following circumstances:
  1.  an existing building that has a historic status pursuant to federal,
  state or local law and compliance  with  construction  requirements  and
  procedures established pursuant to this article would alter the historic
  character of such building;
    2.   in   the  case  of  a  substantial  renovation,  compliance  with
  construction requirements and procedures established  pursuant  to  this
  article  would  not  be  cost  effective  over  the  useful life of such
  renovation as determined pursuant to regulations promulgated pursuant to
  this article;
    3. compliance with this article or with construction requirements  and
  procedures  established  pursuant  to this article would be inconsistent
  with or violate federal or state law;
    4. such other circumstances as the  office  may  reasonably  determine
  pursuant to regulations to not be appropriate for the application of the
  construction  requirements  and  procedures  adopted  pursuant  to  this
  article; or
    5. the design  or  planning  process  for  such  new  construction  or
  substantial  renovation  has  substantially commenced, as defined by the
  office in regulations, as of  the  effective  date  of  the  regulations
  promulgated  by  the  office pursuant to this article; provided however,
  that  whenever  subdivision  one,  two,  three  or  four  applies,   the
  construction  requirements  and  procedures shall be integrated into the
  design  and  construction  of  the  project  to   the   maximum   extent
  practicable.


   §   83.  Agency  green  building  construction  requirements.  1.  The
  construction of new buildings and the substantial renovation of existing
  buildings shall comply with such  green  construction  requirements  and
  procedures  as  shall have been established by the office in regulations
  pursuant to subdivision two of this section.
    2. The office, in consultation with the authority, the  department  of
  environmental  conservation,  the  department  of  health, the dormitory
  authority of the state  of  New  York,  the  department  of  state,  the
  department  of  education,  the office of parks, recreation and historic
  preservation, and any other agency as determined by the office that  may
  be  affected  by  this  article,  shall promulgate rules and regulations
  establishing  construction  requirements  and  procedures  necessary  to
  implement  this  article,  including the exceptions described in section
  eighty-two of  this  article.  In  establishing  such  requirements  and
  procedures,  the  office may consult green construction requirements and
  procedures established or adopted by  other  agencies,  and  by  private
  organizations,  including  but  not  limited  to the United States green
  building council under its leadership in energy and environmental design
  programs, the green building initiative's green  globes  rating  system,
  and the American National Standards Institute.
    3.  For  purposes  of monitoring compliance with this article and this
  article's effectiveness, each agency shall prepare by June thirtieth  of
  each  year  an  annual  building  performance  report  in  such form and
  containing such information as the office may require, which may  relate
  to  such  matters  as  energy  consumption,  waste reduction, indoor air
  quality, water reductions and maintenance procedures and processes. Such
  report shall be available to the office upon request.




   § 90. Definitions. As used in this article:
    1. "Authority" shall mean the power authority of the state of New York
  established  under  title  one of article five of the public authorities
  law.
    2. "Decarbonization" and "decarbonize" means eliminating  all  on-site
  combustion   of  fossil-fuels  and  associated  co-pollutants  with  the
  exception of back-up emergency generators and redundant  systems  needed
  to  address  public  health,  safety and security, providing heating and
  cooling through  thermal  energy,  and  thermal  energy  networks,  from
  non-combustion  sources,  and  to the greatest extent feasible producing
  on-site electricity that is one hundred percent renewable.
    3. "Highest-emitting facilities" means state-owned facilities that are
  among the highest producers of greenhouse gas emissions and collectively
  account for at least thirty percent of the greenhouse gas  emissions  as
  recorded  by the authority's Build Smart NY program established pursuant
  to Executive Order 88 of 2012.
    4. "Thermal energy" shall have the  meaning  provided  in  subdivision
  twenty-eight of section two of the public service law.
    5.  "Thermal energy network" shall have the same meaning as defined in
  subdivision twenty-nine of section two of the public service law.
    6. "State energy research and development authority"  shall  mean  the
  New  York  state  energy  research and development authority established
  under title nine of article eight of the public authorities law.
    7. "State-owned facilities" or  "facilities"  includes  "building"  as
  defined by section eighty-one of this chapter, "dormitory" as defined by
  section  three  hundred  seventy of the education law, and "facility" as
  defined by section three hundred seventy of the education law.




   §  91.  Decarbonization  action  plans.  1.  The  authority  is hereby
  authorized and directed to establish decarbonization  action  plans  for
  fifteen  of  the  highest-emitting facilities that will serve as a basis
  for decarbonizing the facilities to the maximum extent practicable,  and
  subject  to  any needed redundant systems and back-up systems needed for
  public safety and security. Decarbonization action plans  shall  address
  the following matters at a minimum:
    (a)  A comprehensive accounting and analysis of all energy uses at the
  facilities.
    (b) Greenhouse gas  and  other  harmful  emissions  (e.g.,  NOx,  SOx,
  particulate  matter)  resulting from the on-site and source energy usage
  of the facilities.
    (c) Analysis of the feasibility of using thermal  energy  and  thermal
  energy  networks  at the facility, including any anticipated limitations
  on the use of thermal energy networks, along with a characterization  of
  any  such  limitations, including whether they are permanent, temporary,
  or resolvable on a cost-effective basis.
    (d) Identification and analysis of  energy  efficiency  measures  that
  could  be  designed  and  constructed  in  later decarbonization project
  phases.
    (e) An analysis of the availability and/or  feasibility  of  providing
  clean   energy   through  electrification  technologies  and  associated
  electrical upgrades to meet the facility energy needs,  as  demonstrated
  by  the  reduced load profiles determined to be practicable based on the
  energy efficiency measures identified, either through on-site generation
  and/or other procurement.
    (f) Investigation of the resiliency  and  redundant  capacity  of  the
  existing  critical  infrastructure,  such as heating, cooling and backup
  electrical power systems.
    (g) Identification of any parts  of  the  facilities  that  cannot  be
  decarbonized, with explanations.
    (h)  Geotechnical  investigations into the on-site potential for clean
  energy sources, including drilling test geothermal wells as needed.
    (i) Determination of the feasibility and  advisability  of  gathering,
  combining,  or  expanding  any  clean  energy sources or central thermal
  energy networks with neighboring or nearby related state facilities.
    (j) Investigation of the infrastructure, planning and  funding  needed
  to  electrify  transportation  resources  regularly  used  to  serve the
  facilities,   such   as    public    transit,    vehicle    fleets    or
  employee/resident/student electric vehicle charging stations.
    (k)  An  economic and feasibility analysis based upon the potential to
  decarbonize the facility, considering among other things the net present
  value of the life cycle cost of the thermal systems  and  other  systems
  proposed,  inclusive  of the social cost of carbon, capital expenses for
  initial implementation and major equipment replacements, and operational
  expenses, including labor costs.
    2. The authority shall complete the decarbonization  action  plans  no
  later  than January thirty-first, two thousand twenty-six, provided that
  such date shall be extended for justifiable delay outside the control of
  the authority, including, but not  limited  to,  previously  planned  or
  current  major  renovations  or  replacements to the facilities, delayed
  permitting or approval by building owners, local authorities,  or  other
  essential  parties, external resource bottlenecks, pending or unresolved
  investigations into utility grid capacity or similar circumstances where
  crucial information is not yet available or determined.  Such  extension
  shall  be  limited  to the time necessary to address the factors causing
  such delay.


   3. The authority shall complete and submit  a  report,  on  or  before
  January thirty-first, two thousand twenty-five, and annually thereafter,
  to  the  governor,  the  speaker  of  the  assembly,  and  the temporary
  president of the senate, and shall post such report on  the  authority's
  website  so  that  it is accessible for public review. Such report shall
  include, but not be limited to: (a) the progress of the  decarbonization
  action  plans;  (b)  any  difficulties  in preparing the decarbonization
  action  plans;  and  (c)  any  anticipated  delays  in  completing   the
  decarbonization  action  plans  by  January  thirty-first,  two thousand
  twenty-seven.
    4. The authority is  authorized  to  allocate  up  to  thirty  million
  dollars  to  prepare  the  decarbonization  action  plans.  The owner or
  operator  of  state-owned  facilities  shall  not  be  responsible   for
  reimbursing  the  authority  for  the  costs  the  authority  incurs  to
  establish the decarbonization action plans provided for in this section,
  provided that the authority is authorized  to  obtain  reimbursement  of
  such  costs  from  any  other  available  funding  sources, and provided
  further, that nothing in this  subdivision  is  intended  to  limit  the
  authority  from  receiving  compensation for any services it provides to
  any owner or operator  of  state-owned  facilities,  including  services
  related  to  implementation of decarbonization plans and decarbonization
  projects, on such terms and conditions as the parties agree.
    5. The authority may ask and  shall  receive  from  the  state  energy
  research  and development authority, the office of general services, the
  state university of New York, the dormitory authority, the department of
  environmental conservation, and any owners and operators of  state-owned
  facilities,  any  information or staff technical assistance necessary to
  carry out its powers and duties under this section.
    6. The chiller. The state university of New York shall utilize  up  to
  thirty  million  dollars of the 2023-24 New York state urban development
  corporation capital appropriation  for  the  replacement  of  absorption
  chillers  in  the  central  chiller plant of the state university of New
  York at Albany.
    7. Any project, including any thermal  energy  project,  that  may  be
  funded  as  a result of a decarbonization action plan completed pursuant
  to this section shall: (a) be deemed a public work  project  subject  to
  article  eight of the labor law; (b) require that the component parts of
  any geothermal systems or any  other  heating  or  cooling  systems  are
  produced  or made in whole or substantial part in the United States, its
  territories or possessions, subject to a waiver provision similar to the
  one contained in subdivision two of section sixty-six-s  of  the  public
  service  law;  (c)  contain a requirement that any public owner or third
  party acting on behalf of a public owner  enter  into  a  project  labor
  agreement  as defined by section two hundred twenty-two of the labor law
  for all construction work; and (d) require  the  payment  of  prevailing
  wage  standards  consistent  with  article  nine  of  the  labor law for
  building services work. Notwithstanding any  provision  of  law  to  the
  contrary,  all  rights  or  benefits,  including terms and conditions of
  employment, and protection of civil service  and  collective  bargaining
  status  of  all  existing  public  employees  and the work jurisdiction,
  covered job titles, and work assignments, set forth in the civil service
  law  and  collective  bargaining  agreements  with  labor  organizations
  representing public employees shall be preserved and protected. Any such
  project  shall  not  result  in  the:  (i) displacement of any currently
  employed worker or loss of position (including partial  displacement  as
  such a reduction in the hours of non-overtime work, wages, or employment
  benefits)  or result in the impairment of existing collective bargaining
  agreements; (ii) transfer of existing duties and  functions  related  to


 maintenance  and operations currently performed by existing employees of
  authorized entities to a contracting entity; or (iii) transfer of future
  duties and functions ordinarily performed  by  employees  of  authorized
  entities to a contracting entity.






   § 140. Fire  and emergency protection in public buildings. 1. It shall
  be the duty of each superintendent or chief executive officer of each of
  the public institutions and buildings of the state, supported wholly  or
  partly  by  the  funds  of  the  state,  to  provide  that the following
  regulations for the protection of the incarcerated individuals  of  said
  buildings  and the buildings be complied with: There shall be provided a
  sufficient number of stand-pipes, with connections or  outlets  on  each
  floor,  and  sufficient  fire  hose to properly protect the entire floor
  surface. Sufficient portable fire extinguishers  shall  be  provided  on
  each  floor  of  each  building to provide adequate fire protection. All
  fire hose shall be inspected under the  direction  of  the  engineer  at
  least  once  every  six  months  and shall be maintained at all times in
  proper condition. On each floor of every public building having  two  or
  more stories where the rooms are connected by an interior hallway, there
  shall  be  posted by each stairway, elevator or other means of egress, a
  printed scale floor plan of that particular story, which shall show  all
  means of egress, clearly labeling those to be used in case of fire. Such
  posted floor plan shall clearly indicate exits which would be accessible
  for a person having a disability, as such term is defined in subdivision
  twenty-one  of section two hundred ninety-two of the executive law. Such
  floor plan shall be posted in  at  least  two  other  conspicuous  areas
  through  the  building.  Said  floor plan shall be no smaller than eight
  inches by ten inches and shall be posted in such a manner that it cannot
  be readily removed. Unless exit doors at floor  level  are  provided  at
  fire  escapes  suitable steps must be provided under other openings used
  as exits to fire  escapes  which  are  not  at  floor  level.  Painters'
  supplies  and  inflammable  liquids  of  all kinds must not be stored in
  buildings occupied by wards of the state or employees.  All  attics  and
  basements  must  be  constantly  kept  free from rubbish or articles not
  necessary to the proper conduct of the institution or building, and must
  be regularly swept, cleaned and all broken or needless articles promptly
  removed.
    2. Subject to regulations promulgated pursuant to this subdivision, it
  shall be an  additional  duty  of  each  such  superintendent  or  chief
  executive  officer  of  each of the public institutions and buildings of
  the state to  equip  each  such  building  with  an  automated  external
  defibrillator.  The  commissioner  of  general services shall promulgate
  regulations providing for a phase-in schedule of  the  duty  created  by
  this  section.  Such regulations shall address the appropriate number of
  automated external defibrillators for such buildings, based on the  size
  or occupancy of the buildings; the training of personnel and use of such
  automated  external defibrillator; and any other matter deemed necessary
  by such commissioner to effectuate the duty prescribed by this section.
    3. The moneys necessary to carry out the provisions  of  this  section
  shall  be  supplied  from  the  moneys  annually  appropriated  for  the
  maintenance of the above described institutions.




   § 141. Display  of  foreign flags on public buildings. It shall not be
  lawful to display the flag or emblem of any  foreign  country  upon  any
  state,  county  or  municipal building; provided, however, that whenever
  any foreigner shall become the guest of the United States, the state  or
  any  city,  upon  public  proclamation  by the governor or mayor of such
  city, the flag of the country of which such  public  guest  shall  be  a
  citizen may be displayed upon such public buildings.




   § 142. Water  conservation  in  public  buildings. The commissioner of
  general services shall establish a water conservation  program  for  all
  state  owned public buildings except for academic buildings, dormitories
  and other facilities of the state university system. Such program  shall
  include a survey of water use and conservation in such buildings.




   § 143. Lighting restrictions. 1. Definitions. As used in this section:
    a. "Direct light" means light emitted by a fixture from the lamp, from
  a reflector, or through a refractor.
    b.  "Facade  lighting"  means  permanent  outdoor  fixtures  that  are
  specifically intended to illuminate the exterior surfaces  of  buildings
  or structures.
    c.  "Fully  shielded  fixture"  means  a fixture that allows no direct
  light from the fixture above a horizontal plane  through  the  fixture's
  lowest light-emitting part, in its mounted position.
    d. "Fixture lumens" means total lumens emitted by a fixture.
    e.  "Glare" means light emitted by a fixture that causes discomfort or
  reduced visibility.
    f. "Illuminance" means the luminous power incident per unit area of  a
  surface.
    g.  "Lamp"  means  a  light  bulb or other component of a fixture that
  changes electricity into visible light.
    h. "Light trespass" means light that falls beyond the property  it  is
  intended to illuminate.
    i.  "Lumen"  means  a  standard unit of measurement of the quantity of
  light emitted from a lamp.
    j. "Fixture" means a complete lighting unit, including a lamp together
  with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and protect
  the lamp and to connect the lamp to the power supply.
    k. "Ornamental roadway lighting" means a roadway lighting fixture that
  serves a decorative function in addition to a roadway lighting function,
  having an historical period appearance or decorative appearance.
    l.   "Parking-lot   lighting"   means   permanent   outdoor   fixtures
  specifically intended to illuminate uncovered vehicle parking areas.
    m.  "Permanent outdoor fixture" means a fixture for use in an exterior
  environment installed with mounting not intended for relocation.
    n. "Roadway lighting" means permanent  outdoor  fixtures  specifically
  intended to illuminate public roadways.
    o.  "Sky  glow"  means a condition caused by light directed upwards or
  sideways reducing one's ability to view the night sky.
    p.  "State  agency"  means  any  state  department,   office,   board,
  commission,  agency, or a public authority or public benefit corporation
  at least one of whose members is appointed by the governor.
    2. No state agency operating in the state shall install or cause to be
  installed any new or replacement permanent outdoor  fixture  unless  the
  following conditions are met:
    a.  In  the  case of roadway lighting or parking-lot lighting; whether
  mounted to poles, buildings or other structures, the  fixture  is  fully
  shielded.
    b.  In the case of building-mounted fixtures not specifically intended
  for roadway lighting, parking-lot  lighting,  or  facade  lighting,  the
  fixture  is  fully  shielded  when its initial fixture lumens is greater
  than three thousand lumens.
    c. In the case of facade lighting, the fixture is shielded  to  reduce
  glare, sky glow, and light trespass to the greatest extent possible.
    d.  In  the  case of ornamental roadway lighting fixtures, the fixture
  allows no more than seven  hundred  lumens  from  the  fixture  above  a
  horizontal plane through the fixture's lowest light emitting part.
    e. For illumination by new permanent outdoor fixtures for applications
  described  in  paragraph  a,  b,  c  or  d  of  this  subdivision,  only
  illuminance levels that are no  greater  than  those  required  for  the
  intended  purpose may be used, as established by the commissioner of the
  office of general  services  in  consultation  with  the  department  of
  transportation  and  the  New York State Energy Research and Development


 Authority, and given due consideration to  lighting  industry  standards
  and practices.
    f.  In the case of roadway lighting unassociated with intersections of
  two or more streets or highways, the department  of  transportation  has
  determined  that the purpose of the lighting installation or replacement
  cannot be achieved by installation  of  reflectorized  roadway  markers,
  lines, warnings or informational signs, or other passive means.
    3. This section shall not apply:
    a. if a federal law, rule or regulation preempts state law;
    b.  if  the  outdoor lighting fixture is used temporarily by emergency
  personnel requiring additional illumination for emergency procedures  or
  temporarily used by repair personnel for road repair;
    c.  to  navigational lighting systems and other lighting necessary for
  aviation and nautical safety;
    d. to lighting for athletic playing areas; provided, however, that all
  such lighting shall be selected and installed  to  shield  the  lamp  or
  lamps  from direct view and to minimize upward lighting and glare to the
  greatest extent possible;
    e. if the state agency determines a safety  or  security  need  exists
  that cannot be addressed by any other method;
    f.  to  the  replacement  of  a previously installed permanent outdoor
  fixture that is  destroyed,  damaged  or  inoperative,  has  experienced
  electrical  failure  due  to  failed  components,  or  requires standard
  maintenance;
    g. to lighting intended for tunnels and roadway underpasses; or
    h. if the combined cost of acquiring and operating a fixture complying
  with paragraphs a, b and c of this  subdivision  is  more  than  fifteen
  percent  greater  than  the  cost  of acquiring and operating comparable
  non-compliant fixtures over the life of the lighting  system  and  if  a
  written  determination  with  findings  has  been made that no compliant
  fixture exists that would meet the cost limitation.
    4. The office of general services, in consultation with the department
  of transportation and the New York state energy research and development
  authority, and given due consideration to  lighting  industry  standards
  and  practices,  shall  establish rules and regulations to implement the
  provisions of this section.




   § 144. Lactation room in public buildings. 1. As used in this section:
    (a)  "covered  public  building"  means a public building owned by the
  state of New York, under the supervision and control of the commissioner
  of general services, that is determined by said commissioner to be  open
  to the public; and
    (b)  "lactation  room"  means a hygienic place, other than a bathroom,
  that:
    (1) is shielded from view;
    (2) is free from intrusion;
    (3) contains a chair, a working surface, and, if the  public  building
  is otherwise supplied with electricity, an electrical outlet; and
    (4) is intended to be used for the primary purpose of breastfeeding or
  expressing breast milk.
    2.  A  covered  public building shall contain a lactation room that is
  made available for use by a  member  of  the  public  to  breastfeed  or
  express breast milk.
    3. A covered public building shall be excluded from the requirement of
  subdivision two of this section if:
    (a)  the public building does not have a room that could be repurposed
  as a lactation room or  a  space  that  could  be  made  private,  at  a
  reasonable cost; or
    (b)  new  construction would be required to create a lactation room in
  the public building and the cost of such construction is unfeasible.
    4. Nothing  in  this  section  shall  be  construed  to  authorize  an
  individual  to  enter  a  public  building  that  the  individual is not
  otherwise authorized to enter.


   §  145.  Gender neutral single-occupancy bathrooms. 1. As used in this
  section:
    (a) "state agency" means any state department, office, board,  bureau,
  commission,   agency,   or   any  public  authority  or  public  benefit
  corporation at least one of whose members is appointed by the governor.
    (b) "state-owned building" means any building owned by a state  agency
  used for official state business.
    (c)  "state-leased  building"  means  any  building  or portion of any
  building leased by a state agency for office or residential occupancy.
    (d) "single-occupancy bathroom" means a bathroom intended for  use  by
  no  more  than  one occupant at a time or for family or assisted use and
  which has a door for entry into and egress from the bathroom that may be
  locked by the occupant to ensure privacy and security.
    2. Each state agency shall ensure that all single-occupancy  bathrooms
  under  its  jurisdiction  be designated as gender neutral in state-owned
  buildings and, where practicable, in state-leased buildings.




   §  146.  Prohibit  symbols of hate. 1. The state of New York shall not
  sell or display any symbols of hate or any similar  image,  or  tangible
  personal property, inscribed with such an image unless the image appears
  in a book, digital medium, museum, or otherwise serves an educational or
  historical purpose.
    2.  For the purposes of this section, the term "symbols of hate" shall
  include, but not be limited to, symbols  of  white  supremacy,  neo-Nazi
  ideology or the Battle Flag of the Confederacy.




   §  147.  Municipal  officers  or  employees prohibited from displaying
  political advertisements on public property. 1.  For  purposes  of  this
  section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
    (a)  "Municipal  officer  or  employee" shall have the same meaning as
  defined pursuant to section eight hundred of the general municipal  law,
  except  that  it  shall  also  include  members  of  any  volunteer fire
  department which is part of such municipality.
    (b) "Political advertisement"  shall  mean  any  poster,  sign,  flag,
  banner,  picture,  sticker,  patch, bumper sticker, article of clothing,
  accessory or any other item meant to  advertise  or  promote  a  certain
  individual for political office.
    2.  A  municipal officer or employee, whether paid or unpaid, shall be
  prohibited from displaying or causing  to  be  displayed  any  political
  advertisement on or within any public building occupied in the discharge
  of  official  duties  by an individual employed or holding office in the
  government of the municipality by which  such  officer  or  employee  is
  employed or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or on any public flag
  pole,  monument,  sign  or any other permanent structure, as well as any
  other location  specified  pursuant  to  section  ninety-nine-z  of  the
  general  municipal law that such municipal officer or employee interacts
  with as part of their official capacity.
    3. This section shall not apply when such  a  political  advertisement
  appears  in  a  book,  digital  medium,  museum,  or otherwise serves an
  educational or historical purpose, or in  instances  where  the  certain
  individual  who  is  the  subject  of  such  political  advertisement is
  deceased.




   § 150. Laws  repealed.   Of the laws enumerated in the schedule hereto
  annexed, that portion specified in the last column is hereby repealed.




   § 151. When   to   take   effect.   This  chapter  shall  take  effect
  immediately.




   § 152.   Chapter  inapplicable  to  state university construction. The
  provisions of this  chapter  shall  not  apply  to  academic  buildings,
  dormitories  and  other facilities constructed, acquired, reconstructed,
  rehabilitated or improved for the use of the  state  university  of  New
  York  or any state-operated institution or statutory or contract college
  under the jurisdiction thereof or for the use of the  students,  faculty
  and staff of the state university or any such state-operated institution
  or  statutory  or  contract  college under the jurisdiction thereof, and
  their families, or to contracts entered into  by  the  state  university
  construction  fund  or the state university trustees pursuant to article
  eight-a of the education law or to real property held in the name of the
  state  for  purposes  of  the  state  university  of  New  York   or   a
  state-operated  institution  or  statutory or contract college under the
  jurisdiction thereof; provided, however, that nothing  herein  contained
  shall  be  deemed to affect the power of any officer, department, board,
  commission, bureau, division,  public  benefit  corporation,  agency  or
  instrumentality    of    the   state   from   constructing,   acquiring,
  reconstructing,  rehabilitating  or   improving   such   facilities   in
  accordance  with  the provisions of article eight-a of the education law
  if duly authorized by law; and  provided  further  that  nothing  herein
  contained  shall  be  deemed to affect the power of the state university
  trustees to enter into  any  short  form  contract  for  minor  work  of
  construction,   reconstruction,   alteration,  or  repair  of  any  such
  facilities  operated  under  the  jurisdiction  of  such   trustees   in
  accordance with the provisions of section twenty of this chapter.