Section  1. Short title.  This chapter shall be known and may be cited
  and referred to as the "public housing law."




   §  2.  Policy  of state and purpose of chapter.  It is hereby declared
  that in certain areas of cities, towns and villages of the  state  there
  exist   insanitary   and   substandard   housing   conditions  owing  to
  overcrowding and concentration of  the  population,  improper  planning,
  excessive land coverage, lack of proper light, air and space, insanitary
  design  and  arrangement,  or  lack  of proper sanitary facilities; that
  these conditions are chiefly in areas where low rent  dwellings  prevail
  and  that  such  conditions  and  dwellings  are a menace to the health,
  safety, morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of the citizens  of  this
  state;  that  there  is  not  an  adequate supply of adequate, safe, and
  sanitary dwelling accommodations for persons of low income;  that  these
  conditions  cause  an  increase  and  spread  of  disease  and crime and
  constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare, and  comfort
  of  the citizens of the state; that these conditions inflict blight upon
  the economic value of large areas, impair private  investments  and  the
  source  of  public revenues; that these conditions cannot be remedied by
  the ordinary operation of  private  enterprise;  that  these  conditions
  require  that provision be made for the investment of public and private
  funds at low interest rates in low rent housing and the  acquisition  at
  fair  prices  of adequate parcels of property, the gradual demolition of
  existing insanitary and unsafe  housing  and  the  construction  of  new
  housing  facilities,  under  public  supervision  in  accord with proper
  standards of sanitation and safety and  at  a  cost  which  will  permit
  monthly  rentals  which  persons  of  low income can afford to pay; that
  loans and subsidies by the state and its subdivisions are necessary  for
  such  purposes;  that  the  clearance,  replanning,  reconstruction  and
  rehabilitation of substandard and insanitary areas or the  providing  of
  adequate,  safe  and  sanitary  low rent housing accommodations in these
  areas and elsewhere for persons and families of low income, or  both  of
  these,  are public uses and purposes for which public money may be spent
  and  private  property  acquired;  that  these  conditions  require  the
  creation  of  the agencies and instrumentalities hereinafter prescribed,
  which are declared to be agencies and instrumentalities of the state for
  the purpose of attaining the ends herein recited; and the  necessity  in
  the  public  interest  for  the provisions hereinafter enacted is hereby
  declared as a matter of legislative determination.




   §  3. Definitions.   The following terms, whenever used or referred to
  in this chapter, shall have the following meaning,  unless  a  different
  meaning clearly appears from the context:
    1. The term "commissioner" means the state commissioner of housing and
  community  renewal.  Reference  in this chapter or in any other general,
  special or local law to state commissioner of housing shall be deemed to
  mean and refer to  the  state  commissioner  of  housing  and  community
  renewal which is hereby made the new title of such office.
    2.  The  term  "authority"  means  a  public  corporation  which  is a
  corporate governmental agency (except a county or municipal corporation)
  organized pursuant to law to accomplish  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen  of  the  constitution and includes the
  following municipal housing authorities established prior to  the  first
  day of January, nineteen hundred thirty-nine pursuant to chapter four of
  the laws of nineteen hundred thirty-four and amendments thereof, namely,
  Buffalo   municipal  housing  authority,  Lackawanna  municipal  housing
  authority, New York city housing authority, Peekskill housing authority,
  Port Jervis housing authority, Schenectady municipal housing  authority,
  Syracuse   municipal  housing  authority,  Tarrytown  municipal  housing
  authority, Tuckahoe housing authority, municipal  housing  authority  of
  the city of Utica, New York, and Yonkers housing authority.
    3.  The  term  "housing  company"  means  a  limited profit or limited
  dividend housing corporation organized pursuant to articles two or  four
  of the private housing finance law.
    4.   The   term   "multiple   dwelling"  means  an  existing  building
  accommodating three or more families living independently of each other.
    5. The terms "municipal corporation" and "municipality" mean  a  city,
  town or village; and the term "municipal" shall be deemed to relate to a
  city, town or village.
    6.   The   term  "mayor"  means  the  chief  executive  officer  of  a
  municipality.
    7. The term "local legislative body" means: (a) in a city,  the  board
  of  aldermen, common council, council, commission or other board or body
  now or hereafter vested by its charter or other law with jurisdiction to
  enact ordinances  or  local  laws,  except  that  in  a  city  having  a
  population  of one million or more the term shall, as to such city, mean
  the officer or agency vested with power under the charter of such  city,
  or  by  other  law,  to act pursuant to this chapter; (b) in a town, the
  town board; (c) in a village, the board of trustees.
    7-a. The term "governing body of a district" means: (a)  in  a  school
  district,  the  board  of education or board of trustees; in the case of
  common school districts having one trustee, such trustee; (b) in a  fire
  alarm  district  or a fire protection district, the town board; (c) in a
  fire district, the board of  fire  district  commissioners;  (d)  in  an
  improvement district, the town board, except that if there be a separate
  board  of  commissioners, the term shall mean the town board acting with
  the approval of the board of commissioners.
    8. The term "state comptroller" means the comptroller of the state  of
  New York.
    9.  The  term  "municipal  comptroller"  means  the  comptroller  in a
  municipality  having  a  comptroller;  in  a  municipality   having   no
  comptroller, it means the chief financial officer of such municipality.
    10. The term "state" means New York state.
    11.  The  term "government" includes the state, a municipality and the
  federal government, and any  agency  or  instrumentality,  corporate  or
  otherwise,  of  any  of  them  acting  for and on behalf of the state, a
  municipality or the federal government.


   12. The term "area" means a section of the  municipality  wherein  the
  commissioner  or an authority or a municipality finds that insanitary or
  substandard housing conditions exist. An area may include  land  whether
  improved  or unimproved, and buildings or improvements not in themselves
  insanitary or substandard, the inclusion of which is deemed necessary by
  the  authority  or the municipality or the commissioner, or for projects
  of housing companies by the commissioner, for the  effective  clearance,
  replanning,  reconstruction  or rehabilitation of the area of which such
  land or property is a part.
    13. The term "plan" means a plan or  undertaking  for  the  clearance,
  replanning  and  reconstruction  or  rehabilitation of a substandard and
  insanitary area or areas  and  for  recreational  and  other  facilities
  incidental  or appurtenant thereto to effectuate the purposes of article
  eighteen of the constitution or any other provision of the  constitution
  delegating  any  similar  power  or  providing  homes for persons of low
  income.
    14. The term  "project"  means  a  specific  work  or  improvement  to
  effectuate  all or any part of a plan. The term shall include the lands,
  buildings or any dwelling  units  therein,  and  improvements  acquired,
  owned,  constructed,  managed or operated hereunder, to provide dwelling
  accommodations for persons of low income, and such stores,  offices  and
  other non-housing facilities as well as social, recreational or communal
  facilities,  as  may  be  deemed  by the authority or municipality to be
  incidental or appurtenant to a project. Subject  to  the  provisions  of
  article  eighteen  of  the  constitution with respect to state projects,
  such dwelling accommodations may be  provided  in  any  section  of  the
  municipality,  whether or not such section has insanitary or substandard
  housing conditions. A project may be a federal project, a state project,
  a municipal project or, subject to the limitations contained in  section
  seventy-five of this chapter, any combination of these.
    15.  The  term  "federal project" means a project aided or financed in
  whole or in part, by the federal government.
    16. The term "state project" means a  project  aided  or  financed  in
  whole  or in part by the state and not by the federal government, except
  as may be provided in section seventy-five of this chapter.
    17. The term "municipal project" means a project other  than  a  state
  project or a federal project.
    18.  The  terms  "persons  of low income" and "families of low income"
  mean persons or families who are in the low income groups and who cannot
  afford to pay enough to cause private enterprise in  their  municipality
  to build a sufficient supply of adequate, safe and sanitary dwellings.
    19.  The term "mortgage" means mortgages, deeds of trust, building and
  loan contracts or other instruments creating a lien.
    20. The terms "real property" or "property" shall  include  lands  and
  improvements,  lands  under water, waterfront property, the water of any
  lake, pond  or  stream,  and  any  and  all  easements,  franchises  and
  hereditaments,  corporeal or incorporeal, and every estate, interest and
  right therein, legal and  equitable,  in  lands  or  water,  and  right,
  interest,  privilege,  easement  and  franchise  relating  to  the same,
  including terms for years and liens by  way  of  judgment,  mortgage  or
  otherwise.
    21.  The  term  "obligee"  shall  include  any  bondholder, trustee or
  trustees for any bondholders or  any  lessor  demising  property  to  an
  authority  or  municipality  used  in  connection  with  a project or an
  assignee or assignees of such lessor's interest, and a government, which
  is a party to any contract with the authority or municipality.
    22. The term "going state rate of interest" means, at  any  time,  the
  annual  rate  of  interest specified in the bonds of the state issued to


 provide funds for a loan to effectuate the provisions of  this  chapter,
  and  if  no  such  bonds have been issued, then the term means an annual
  interest rate of two and one-half per centum.
    23.  The  term "low rent housing" means dwellings within the financial
  reach of families of low income  and  embraces  recreational  and  other
  facilities incidental and appurtenant thereto.
    24.  The term "project cost" means the cost of any or all undertakings
  necessary  for  planning,  financing  (including  payment  of   carrying
  charges),  land  acquisition,  demolition,  construction, equipment, and
  site  development  of  new  buildings,  reconstruction,  rehabilitation,
  repair  or  remodeling of existing buildings, but, except as to existing
  housing company projects, or parts thereof, sold,  leased  or  otherwise
  conveyed  to  an authority, not beyond the point of physical completion,
  and the cost of tenant placement service in connection with  a  project.
  In  the case of new construction, the "project cost" shall be sufficient
  to encourage excellence of architectural design, variety and interest in
  building materials, and aesthetic  objectives  compatible  with  prudent
  budgeting.  Where  a  housing  company  project,  or  a part thereof, is
  purchased by, leased or otherwise conveyed to  an  authority,  the  term
  "project  cost"  may  include  the cost of such purchase, lease or other
  conveyance as determined and certified by the commissioner.
    25. The term "condemnation" means the acquisition of real property  in
  the  manner  provided  by  the  eminent  domain  procedure  law  by  the
  municipality in which the real property is to be taken.
    26. The term "planning commission" means any agency of a  municipality
  authorized  to  prepare,  adopt  or amend the map of the municipality or
  empowered  to  prepare  and  adopt  and  from  time  to  time  modify  a
  comprehensive or master plan of the municipality.
    27.  The  term  "tenant  services" shall include but not be limited to
  counseling  on  household  management,  housekeeping,  budgeting,  money
  management,  child  care,  and  similar  matters  or  services which are
  directly related to meeting  tenant  needs  and  providing  a  wholesome
  living  environment; and referral to appropriate agencies when necessary
  for the provision of such services.




   §  10.  Division  of housing and community renewal.  There shall be in
  the executive department a division of housing  and  community  renewal.
  Reference  in this chapter or in any other general, special or local law
  to the division of housing shall be deemed to  mean  and  refer  to  the
  division  of  housing and community renewal which is hereby made the new
  title of such division.




   § 11. Commissioner of housing and community renewal; appointment; term
  of office; vacancies; salaries.  The head of the division of housing and
  community  renewal  shall  be  the commissioner of housing and community
  renewal who shall be appointed by the governor  and  shall  hold  office
  during  his pleasure. The commissioner shall receive an annual salary to
  be fixed by the governor within the amount  appropriated  therefor.  The
  commissioner  shall  be the chief executive officer of the division, and
  he may, by order filed in the executive department, delegate any of  his
  powers  to  or  direct  any  of  his duties to be performed by a deputy,
  except the power to appoint or remove officers or employees  or  to  fix
  their compensation.




   § 12. Officers and employees.  Subject to approval by the governor, or
  pursuant  to  rules prescribed by him, the commissioner may appoint such
  officers and employees as may be required for  the  performance  of  the
  powers  and  duties  of the division, determine their qualifications and
  fix their compensation within the amount provided by appropriation


   §  12-b. Refunds.  Moneys received by the state division of housing or
  the commissioner of housing pursuant to this  chapter  and  the  private
  housing finance law or under any agreement prior to July first, nineteen
  hundred  sixty-one  may  be  refunded:  (a)  where  such moneys were not
  required by law or the commissioner's rules or  regulations;  (b)  where
  such moneys were in excess of the amounts that may be required by law or
  as fixed by the commissioner pursuant to law or the commissioner's rules
  or  regulations.  Any  such  moneys  received after July first, nineteen
  hundred sixty-one shall not be so refunded unless application  for  such
  refund  has  been made within three years after its receipt by the state
  division of housing.




   §  13.  Disqualification  of  commissioner,  officers  and  employees.
  Neither the commissioner, nor any officer or employee in the division of
  housing shall acquire any interest direct or indirect in a project or in
  any property then or thereafter included or planned to be included in  a
  project,  nor  retain  any  interest  direct or indirect in any property
  acquired subsequently to his appointment or employment  which  is  later
  included  or  to  his knowledge planned to be included in a project, nor
  shall he have any  interest  direct  or  indirect  in  any  contract  or
  proposed  contract  for materials or services to be furnished or used in
  connection with a  project.  If  the  commissioner  or  any  officer  or
  employee  in the division of housing owns or controls an interest direct
  or indirect in any property included in any project, which was  acquired
  prior  to his appointment or employment, he shall disclose such interest
  and the date of acquisition thereof in writing to the  governor  or  the
  commissioner,  as  the case may be, and such disclosure shall be entered
  in a special record of the division of housing kept for such purpose.




   § 14. Powers and duties of the commissioner; generally. 1. In addition
  to  the powers hereinafter granted, the commissioner, his counsel or any
  other officer or employee of the division specially  designated  by  the
  commissioner shall have the following powers:
    (a) assist in the preparation of legislation and formulate regulations
  in relation to authorities and their functions;
    (b)   investigate   into   monopolies   of   building  materials,  and
  extortionate, illegal or unfair activities or  practices  affecting  the
  cost  of  construction  or  production  of  buildings and cooperate with
  federal and state investigating officers to end such abuses;
    (c) make reports from time to time to the  governor  with  respect  to
  matters within his jurisdiction;
    (d) investigate into the affairs of authorities and into the dealings,
  transactions or relationships of authorities with third persons;
    (e)  administer  oaths, take affidavits, hear testimony and take proof
  under oath at public or private hearings;
    (f) make or order inspections  of  all  places  to  which  his  duties
  relate;
    (g)   subpoena  and  require  the  attendance  of  witnesses  and  the
  production of books and papers  pertaining  to  the  investigations  and
  inquiries authorized by this chapter and examine them in relation to any
  matter he has power to investigate;
    (h)  issue commissions for the examination of witnesses who are out of
  the state or unable to attend before him or are excused from attendance;
    (i) subject to the powers of the state  comptroller  or  of  municipal
  comptroller, as the case may be, prescribe methods and forms for keeping
  accounts, records and books to be used by an authority;
    (j)  require an authority to file periodic reports not more often than
  quarterly, covering its operations and activities, in a form  prescribed
  by him;
    (k) investigate the possibility of negotiating a fixed annual wage for
  laborers,   workmen  or  mechanics  employed  in  the  housing  industry
  generally for the purpose of stabilizing employment in such industry;
    (l) investigate into housing needs and conditions  in  the  state  and
  into  the  means  of  improving  such conditions; collect and distribute
  information relating to housing needs  and  conditions  and  methods  of
  dealing therewith.
    (m)  assist,  participate  in  and  otherwise  cooperate  with, at the
  request of, the person or persons or department  of  any  county,  city,
  town,  village or other local government charged with the enforcement of
  laws,  ordinances,  codes  and  regulations  in  relation  to   multiple
  dwellings in the discharge of such duties.
    (n) enter into contracts with the federal government to receive grants
  to  assist  in  financing tenant services; enter into contracts with and
  distribute the proceeds of such  grants  to  other  state  agencies  and
  officials,  housing  authorities,  other public corporations, non-profit
  and other private organizations when, in the commissioner's  discretion,
  such services might be better provided under such contracts.
    (o)  apply  for and contract with, or receive and accept assistance as
  an agent of the state, acting by and through the division of housing and
  community renewal, in the form of gifts, grants, loans of  funds  or  of
  property,  or  other aid in any form, from the federal government or any
  agency or instrumentality thereof for purposes of (i) providing  housing
  for   persons   of   low   income,   (ii)   the  clearance,  replanning,
  reconstruction and rehabilitation of substandard or  insanitary  housing
  or   areas,  (iii)  the  development  or  redevelopment  of  distressed,
  deteriorated   or    underutilized    communities    or    deteriorating
  neighborhoods,   or   (iv)   the   construction   or  rehabilitation  of


 recreational and other facilities incidental thereto, and to do any  and
  all  things  which  may be required under any federal law, regulation or
  contract in connection with such assistance. No action pursuant to  this
  paragraph  shall  be  taken on behalf of or for the benefit of a unit of
  local government except at the request of or with the  consent  of  such
  unit.  The  power  herein  granted  shall  not  limit  the  power of any
  municipality or agency thereof, or any housing authority or other public
  corporation or any private entity to apply for  and  contract  with  the
  federal government or any agency or instrumentality thereof for purposes
  of receiving such gifts, grants, loans or other aid.
    (p)  develop,  publish  and  distribute a land development guide which
  shall describe those issues which are relevant to the development of  an
  appropriate  local land use ordinance for localities of varying size and
  composition. Such guide may, in  the  discretion  of  the  commissioner,
  contain model ordinances, local laws and procedures which may be adopted
  by  localities  in  regulating the development of land. Such guide shall
  describe the merits and problems  of  procedures  which  localities  may
  include  in any land development law ordinance including but not limited
  to:
    (i) the utilization of a single consolidated application form for  use
  by  all  local  agencies  having jurisdiction to review and approve such
  development;
    (ii) coordination of staff review and communications between staff and
  the applicant;
    (iii) the elimination of separate public hearings by reviewing  state,
  county  and  local agencies having jurisdiction whenever practicable and
  if requested by the applicant;
    (iv)  the  concurrent  running  of  all  applicable  time  limits  for
  decisions by all approving and reviewing agencies; and
    (v)  other  matters  that will encourage efficiency and clarity in the
  land development approval process including the possible  use  of  state
  inducements  for  localities to address land use development issues. For
  the preparation of such guide, the commissioner shall establish and meet
  regularly with an advisory committee of no more than twelve persons. One
  member shall be appointed by the temporary president of the senate,  one
  member  shall  be  appointed  by  the minority leader of the senate, one
  member shall be appointed by the speaker of the assembly and one  member
  shall  be  appointed  by  the  minority  leader  of  the  assembly.  The
  commissioner shall appoint all other members of the  advisory  committee
  and shall designate the chairman of the advisory committee. The advisory
  committee   membership   shall  be  as  representative  of  the  various
  geographical areas of the state as  is  practicable  and  shall  include
  representatives  of  New  York  city  and other local governments, state
  government,   planning   agencies,   builder   organizations,    housing
  development  companies,  nonprofit  housing  development  organizations,
  environmental  organizations  and  professional  design   organizations.
  Advisory  committee  members  shall  receive  no  compensation for their
  services, but shall be  allowed  their  actual  and  necessary  expenses
  incurred in the performance of their duties.
    The commissioner shall publish the first such guide, no later than the
  thirty-first  day  of  March,  1991.  Models  published pursuant to this
  subdivision  shall  be  distributed  to  local  governments  and   other
  interested agencies, organizations and persons.
    (w)  enter  into  contracts,  as  an  agent of the state, with private
  entities to encourage the development of  new  multi-family  housing  in
  municipalities  found  by the legislature to be suffering from a housing
  emergency at the time of contracting. Such  contracts  shall  include  a
  commitment  by  the  state that any such new housing shall remain exempt


 from rent control,  rent  stabilization  and  any  other  form  of  rent
  regulation   for   a  term  of  fifty  years  except  where  equivalent,
  co-terminus and general controls of prices  and  wages  are  imposed  or
  where  the  owner  or  developer  of  such housing voluntarily agrees to
  accept such regulation in consideration for tax  or  other  governmental
  benefits. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, an
  agreement  by the developer to build new multi-family housing in an area
  suffering from a housing  emergency  shall  be  deemed  good  and  valid
  consideration for the foregoing commitment by the state.
    (x)   enforce   the   emergency  tenant  protection  act  of  nineteen
  seventy-four,  the  emergency  housing  rent  control  law,  the   local
  emergency  housing  rent  control  act,  the  rent  stabilization law of
  nineteen sixty-nine and any  regulations,  rules  and  policies  enacted
  pursuant  thereto,  in  addition to any other laws, rules or regulations
  related to housing that is financed, administered, overseen or otherwise
  regulated by  the  agency  or  its  related  entities  which  constitute
  component  parts  of  the  division;  such  enforcement  authority shall
  include, but not be limited to, all of the powers granted by  the  other
  provisions  of  this  subdivision,  the statutes, rules, regulations and
  other documents governing the administration of housing by the division,
  and, where applicable, the power to issue orders.
    2.  Subject  to  approval  by  the  state  comptroller,  and  by   the
  attorney-general  as  to form, the commissioner shall have power to make
  and execute contracts and other instruments necessary or  convenient  to
  the  exercise  of  his powers relating to state loans and subsidies. The
  commissioner shall have power to sue in the name of the  people  of  the
  state;  to enforce, by appropriate actions or proceedings, any rights of
  the state conferred by  any  law,  mortgage,  lien,  bond,  contract  or
  agreement  and  shall  be  represented  in  all litigated matters by the
  attorney-general.
    3. Subject to approval by the state comptroller, the commissioner  may
  consent  to  the  modification of any contract or agreement to which the
  state is a party pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
    4. The agency shall promulgate regulations, rules and  policies  which
  provide  for the rights of family members to succeed in certain cases to
  the rights of tenants protected by the emergency tenant  protection  act
  of  nineteen  seventy-four,  the emergency housing rent control law, the
  local emergency housing rent control act, the administrative code of the
  city of New  York  and  any  regulations,  rules  and  policies  enacted
  pursuant  thereto.  Such  regulations,  rules and policies shall contain
  provisions which include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
    (a) that unless otherwise prohibited by occupancy  restrictions  based
  upon  income  limitations  pursuant  to  federal,  state  or  local law,
  regulations or other requirements of governmental agencies,  any  member
  of the tenant's family, as defined in paragraph (c) of this subdivision,
  shall  succeed  to the rights of a tenant under such acts and laws where
  the tenant has permanently vacated the housing  accommodation  and  such
  family  member  has resided with the tenant in the housing accommodation
  as a primary residence for a period of no less than two years, or  where
  such  person is a "senior citizen" or a "disabled person," as defined in
  paragraph (c) of this subdivision, for a period  of  no  less  than  one
  year,  immediately  prior  to  the  permanent  vacating  of  the housing
  accommodation by the tenant, or from the inception  of  the  tenancy  or
  commencement of the relationship, if for less than such periods. For the
  purposes  of  this  paragraph, "permanently vacated" shall mean the date
  when the tenant of record permanently  stops  residing  in  the  housing
  accommodation  regardless  of  subsequent  contacts with the unit or the
  signing of lease renewals or continuation of rent payments. The  minimum


 periods of required residency set forth in this subdivision shall not be
  deemed  to be interrupted by any period during which the "family member"
  temporarily relocates because he or she:
    (i) is engaged in active military duty;
    (ii) is enrolled as a full time student;
    (iii)  is  not in residence at the housing accommodation pursuant to a
  court order not involving any term or provision of the  lease,  and  not
  involving  any  grounds  specified  in  the  real  property  actions and
  proceedings law;
    (iv) is engaged in employment requiring temporary relocation from  the
  housing accommodation;
    (v) is hospitalized for medical treatment; or
    (vi) has such other reasonable grounds that shall be determined by the
  commissioner upon application by such person.
    (b)  that a tenant may in a form prescribed by the division of housing
  and community renewal, at  any  time,  advise  the  landlord  of,  or  a
  landlord  may  at  any  time  but  no more often than once in any twelve
  months, request from the tenant, the names of all persons other than the
  tenant who are residing in the housing accommodation, and the  following
  information pertaining to such persons:
    (i)  if the person is a "family member" as defined in paragraph (c) of
  this subdivision; and
    (ii) if the person is, or upon the passage of the  applicable  minimum
  period  of  required residency, may become a person entitled to be named
  as a tenant on a renewal lease or to protection from  eviction  pursuant
  to  paragraph  (a) of this subdivision, and the date of the commencement
  of such person's primary residence with the tenant; and
    (iii) if the person is a "senior citizen" or a  "disabled  person"  as
  defined in paragraph (c) of this subdivision.
    Failure  of  the  tenant  to provide such information to the landlord,
  regardless of whether the landlord requests the information, shall place
  upon all such persons not so made known to the  landlord,  who  seek  to
  exercise  the  right  to  be named as a tenant on a renewal lease or the
  right to protection from eviction as provided for in  this  subdivision,
  the affirmative obligation to establish such right.
    (c)  that  for  the  purposes of such regulations: (i) "family member"
  shall  be  defined  as  a  husband,  wife,   son,   daughter,   stepson,
  stepdaughter,  father,  mother, stepfather, stepmother, brother, sister,
  grandfather,  grandmother,  grandson,  granddaughter,   daughter-in-law,
  son-in-law,  mother-in-law  or father-in-law of the tenant; or any other
  person residing with the  tenant  in  the  housing  accommodation  as  a
  primary  residence who can prove emotional and financial commitment, and
  interdependence between such person and the tenant. Although  no  single
  factor shall be solely determinative, evidence which is to be considered
  in  determining  whether  such  emotional  and  financial commitment and
  interdependence existed, may include, without limitation,  such  factors
  as  listed  below.  In  no event would evidence of a sexual relationship
  between such persons be required or considered.
    (A) longevity of the relationship;
    (B) sharing of or relying upon each other for payment of household  or
  family expenses, or other common necessities of life;
    (C)  intermingling  of  finances  as evidenced by, among other things,
  joint ownership of bank accounts, personal  and  real  property,  credit
  cards,  loan  obligations,  sharing  a  household budget for purposes of
  receiving  government  benefits,  or  such  other  factors  as  may   be
  determined by regulation;


   (D)  engaging  in  family-type  activities by jointly attending family
  functions,  holidays   and   celebrations,   social   and   recreational
  activities, or such other factors as may be determined by regulation;
    (E) formalizing of legal obligations, intentions, and responsibilities
  to  each  other  by  such  means as executing wills naming each other as
  executor or beneficiary, conferring upon each other a power of  attorney
  or  authority to make health care decisions each for the other, entering
  into a personal relationship contract,  making  a  domestic  partnership
  declaration, or serving as a representative payee for purposes of public
  benefits, or such other factors as may be determined by regulation;
    (F)  holding themselves out as family members to other family members,
  friends, members of the community or religious institutions, or  society
  in general, through their words or actions;
    (G)  regularly  performing  family  functions, such as caring for each
  other or each other's extended family  members,  or  relying  upon  each
  other for daily family services;
    (H)  engaging  in  any  other pattern of behavior, agreement, or other
  action  which  evidences  the  intention  of   creating   a   long-term,
  emotionally-committed relationship.
    (ii)  a "senior citizen" is defined as a person who is sixty-two years
  of age or older;
    (iii) a "disabled person" is defined as a person who has an impairment
  which  results   from   anatomical,   physiological   or   psychological
  conditions, other than addiction to alcohol, gambling, or any controlled
  substance,  which  are demonstrable by medically acceptable clinical and
  laboratory diagnostic techniques, and which are expected to be permanent
  and which substantially limit one or more of such  person's  major  life
  activities.
    5.  In  order to effectuate the collection, administration and payment
  of rent payments pursuant to article seven of the real property  actions
  and  proceedings  law,  the  division  of  housing and community renewal
  shall, in cooperation with the office of  court  administration,  select
  through  a  competitive  process,  approved  by the state comptroller, a
  competent financial institution for the deposit and management  of  such
  payments.
    6.  Wherever the commissioner has the discretion to determine contract
  awards through a competitive application process, the commissioner shall
  give preference to applications that propose  feasible  projects  to  be
  developed  and  will be located on a brownfield site that has received a
  certificate of completion.
    7. The lease rider promulgated by the  commissioner  pursuant  to  the
  emergency  tenant protection act of nineteen hundred seventy-four or the
  rent stabilization law of nineteen hundred sixty-nine which is  provided
  to  tenants  shall set forth information relating to fees which an owner
  may charge tenants separate and apart from and in addition to  the  rent
  for the housing accommodation, as well as a description of such fees.




   §  15.  Actions and proceedings against the commissioner or the state;
  intervention by commissioner in certain actions and proceedings.    With
  regard  to  duties or liabilities arising out of this chapter, the state
  or the commissioner may be sued in the same manner as a private  person.
  In any action or proceeding affecting any state project the commissioner
  shall  be  given  notice  thereof,  and he shall take such steps in such
  action or proceeding as may be necessary to protect the public interest.
  If, in the opinion of the commissioner, it is necessary or desirable  in
  the  public  interest, that he intervene in such action or proceeding he
  shall be permitted to do so as a matter of right. Whenever in connection
  with a state project under any instrument or law, a notice of default in
  writing is required to be  served  upon  an  authority  or  municipality
  before  the  institution  of  any  action  or proceeding, a copy of such
  notice shall be served upon the commissioner at least five  days  before
  commencement  of  the  action  or  proceeding. No costs shall be awarded
  against the commissioner or the state in any such litigation.




   §  16.  Powers  and  duties  of  commissioner  with  respect  to state
  projects.  With respect to any state  project,  the  commissioner  shall
  have  the  following  duties and powers: 1. To order such repairs of the
  buildings and structures constituting the project as may be necessary.
    2. To order the authority  or  the  municipality  if  the  project  is
  undertaken  or  operated  by the municipality, to do such acts as may be
  necessary to comply with the provisions of this chapter, or any rule  or
  regulation adopted by the commissioner, or the terms of the contract for
  state  aid,  or to refrain from doing any act in violation of any of the
  foregoing.
    3. To enforce his orders  by  mandamus  or  injunction  in  a  summary
  proceeding.
    4.  To permit the consolidation of two or more approved state projects
  or the extension or  amendment  thereof  or  the  consolidation  of  any
  approved  state  project  with a proposed project. In any such case, the
  consolidated state project shall be treated as an original state project
  and an application shall be submitted as in  the  case  of  an  original
  state project and the rents and costs of the consolidated project may be
  averaged. Consolidation hereunder may be permitted regardless of whether
  the state projects to be consolidated are contiguous or adjacent to each
  other.  Such  contracts  as  may  have been made with regard to approved
  state  projects  may,  upon  consolidation  of  the  projects,  also  be
  consolidated  and  contracts  for  consolidated  state projects shall be
  subject to all the provisions of this chapter, governing original  state
  projects.




   §  17. Occupancy preference.  The occupancy of any state project shall
  be restricted to persons of low income and preference shall be given  to
  persons  who  live  or shall have lived in the substandard or insanitary
  area  or  areas  which  have  been  or  will  be   cleared,   replanned,
  reconstructed or rehabilitated pursuant to a plan.




   §  18.  Effects  of  breach  or  of  acquisition  of projects by third
  persons.  In every contract for a loan by  the  state  or  for  periodic
  subsidies  by  the state, or both, a substantial breach of the condition
  set forth therein providing for the maintenance of the  project  as  low
  rent  housing  shall  be defined in such terms as the commissioner shall
  deem to be in the public interest and consistent with the provisions and
  purposes of this chapter. In every such contract the commissioner  shall
  retain  the  right,  in the event of such a substantial breach or in the
  event of the acquisition of title to the project by a third party, other
  than a government authorized to engage in the administration of low rent
  housing and approved by the commissioner, in any manner including a bona
  fide foreclosure under a mortgage or other lien held by a  third  party,
  to increase the interest payable thereafter on the unpaid balance of any
  loan  made pursuant to the contract to a rate not in excess of the going
  state rate of interest (at the time of such breach or acquisition)  plus
  two  per  centum  per  annum  or  to declare any such unpaid balance due
  forthwith and to reduce or  terminate  any  periodic  subsidies  payable
  under the contract.




   §  19.  Rules and regulations.  The commissioner shall have the power,
  from time to time, to make, promulgate, modify, amend and  repeal  rules
  and  regulations  to  effectuate  his powers and duties. No such rule or
  regulation except such  as  relates  to  the  organization  or  internal
  management  of  the  division of housing, shall be effective until it is
  filed in the office of the department of state.




   §   19-a.  Electronic  lease  regulations.  1.  The  commissioner,  in
  consultation with the electronic facilitator as defined in section three
  hundred three of the state technology law, shall  promulgate  rules  and
  regulations authorizing the use of electronic records or signatures on a
  voluntary  basis by tenants for residential leases and lease renewals of
  units for which the  owner  is  required  to  file  annual  registration
  statements,  pursuant to either section twelve-a of the emergency tenant
  protection act  of  nineteen  seventy-four  or  section  26-517  of  the
  administrative  code  of the city of New York, in a manner that conforms
  with the requirements of article three of the state technology law.
    2. Such rules and regulations shall include, but not  be  limited  to,
  procedures  regarding  notification  to  tenants  regarding  affirmative
  consent to the use of electronic records and that the use of  electronic
  records  and  signatures  is voluntary pursuant to section three hundred
  nine of the state technology law.
    3. The division shall also develop a form in  the  top  six  languages
  other than English spoken in the state according to the latest available
  data from the U.S. Bureau of Census that confirms a tenant's affirmative
  consent  to the use of electronic records. Such form shall clearly state
  the requirement that the use of electronic  records  and  signatures  is
  voluntary  and cannot be required by a landlord, cite the relevant parts
  of the electronic signatures and records act, and require that copies of
  this signed consent form  be  provided  to  the  tenant.  No  electronic
  records  shall  be  accepted  by  any  court or any unit of the division
  unless such consent form is provided to such courts or the division.




   §  20. Annual reports. 1. The commissioner shall, on or before October
  first in each year, beginning in nineteen hundred ninety, submit one  or
  more reports to the governor, the temporary president of the senate, the
  speaker  of the assembly, the minority leader of the senate and minority
  leader of the assembly on the activity and implementation of  the  state
  housing  assistance  programs for the previous fiscal year. In addition,
  the commissioner shall, on  or  before  February  first  in  each  year,
  beginning in nineteen hundred ninety-one, submit an interim report which
  contains,  in  tabular  format  only,  the  non-narrative  data compiled
  through November thirtieth of each year. The commissioner  shall  submit
  on  or  before  February first, nineteen hundred ninety a report for the
  fiscal year commencing April first, nineteen  hundred  eighty-eight  and
  the  most  up to date non-narrative data, in tabular format only, but in
  no event less  than  the  data  compiled  through  September  thirtieth,
  nineteen hundred eighty-nine. All such reports shall include, but not be
  limited  to  the  low  income housing trust fund program, the affordable
  home ownership development program, the urban initiatives  program,  the
  rural  area revitalization program, the rural rental assistance program,
  the homeless housing and assistance program, the  housing  opportunities
  program  for  the elderly, the state of New York mortgage agency forward
  commitment and mortgage insurance programs, the housing  finance  agency
  secured  loan  rental  program,  the turnkey/enhanced housing trust fund
  program, the special needs housing program, the  permanent  housing  for
  the  homeless  program,  the  infrastructure  development  demonstration
  program and the mobile home cooperative fund program. For the purpose of
  producing such report or reports, the commissioner shall  be  authorized
  to  rely  on  information  provided  by  each  administering  agency  or
  authority. Such report or reports shall, to the extent applicable  to  a
  specific  program,  include  but  not be limited to: (i) a narrative for
  each  program  reported  describing  the   program   purpose,   eligible
  applicants,   eligible  areas,  income  population  to  be  served,  and
  limitations on funding;  (ii)  for  each  eligible  applicant  receiving
  funding  under  the  Housing Trust Fund or the Affordable Home Ownership
  Development programs during the year specified herein, such  applicant's
  name  and  address,  a description of the applicant's contract amount, a
  narrative description of  the  specific  activities  performed  by  such
  applicant,  and  the  income levels of the occupants to be served by the
  units all as proposed by the applicant  at  the  time  the  contract  is
  awarded;  (iii)  a  description  of  the  distribution of funds for each
  category of project funded under each program; (iv) the number of  units
  or  beds  under  award, under contract, under construction and completed
  based on a change in project status during the year  for  each  program;
  (v)  the  number  of  units  or beds assisted during the year under each
  program; (vi) the amount and type of assistance provided for such  units
  or  beds  placed under contract; (vii) based on total project costs, the
  number of  units  or  beds  under  contract  and  assisted  through  new
  construction,   substantial   rehabilitation,  moderate  rehabilitation,
  improvements to existing units or beds, and through acquisition only for
  each program; (viii) for the number of  units  or  beds  under  contract
  assisted  through new construction, substantial rehabilitation, moderate
  rehabilitation, improvements to existing  units  or  beds,  and  through
  acquisition   only,  the  level  of  state  assistance  expressed  as  a
  percentage of total project cost; (ix) for those units  and  beds  under
  contract  a  calculation  of  the  amount  of  non-state  funds provided
  expressed as a percentage of total project cost; (x) the number of units
  or beds completed and under award, under contract and under construction
  for each program based on the current program pipeline; (xi)  for  units
  or  beds  for which mortgage assistance was provided by the state of New


 York mortgage agency, the  number  of  existing  and  newly  constructed
  units;  and  (xii)  a list, by program, of units or beds assisted within
  each county. To the extent that any law  establishing  or  appropriating
  funds  for  any of the aforementioned programs requires the commissioner
  to produce a  report  containing  data  substantially  similar  to  that
  required  herein,  this  report  shall  be  deemed to satisfy such other
  requirements.
    2. The commissioner shall, on or  before  December  thirty-first,  two
  thousand  nineteen,  and  on  or  before  December  thirty-first in each
  subsequent year, submit and make publicly  available  a  report  to  the
  governor,  the  temporary  president  of  the senate, the speaker of the
  assembly, and on its website, on the implementation  of  the  system  of
  rent regulation pursuant to chapter five hundred seventy-six of the laws
  of  nineteen  hundred  seventy-four, chapter two hundred seventy four of
  the  laws  of  nineteen  hundred  forty-six,   chapter   three   hundred
  twenty-nine  of  the  laws of nineteen hundred sixty-three, chapter five
  hundred fifty-five of the laws of nineteen hundred  eighty-two,  chapter
  four  hundred  two of the laws of nineteen hundred eighty-three, chapter
  one hundred sixteen  of  the  laws  of  nineteen  hundred  ninety-seven,
  sections  26-501,  26-502,  and 26-520 of the administrative code of the
  city of New York and the housing stability and tenant protection act  of
  2019.  Such  report  shall  include  but  not be limited to: a narrative
  describing the programs and activities undertaken by the office of  rent
  administration and the tenant protection unit, and any other programs or
  activities  undertaken  by  the  division  to implement, administer, and
  enforce the system of rent regulation; and in tabular format,  for  each
  of  the  three fiscal years immediately preceding the date the report is
  due: (i) the number of rent  stabilized  housing  accommodations  within
  each  county;  (ii) the number of rent controlled housing accommodations
  within each county; (iii) the number of applications for  major  capital
  improvements  filed  with  the division, the number of such applications
  approved as submitted, the number of  such  applications  approved  with
  modifications,  and  the  number of such applications rejected; (iv) the
  median and mean value of applications  for  major  capital  improvements
  approved;  (v)  the  number  of  units  which  were  registered with the
  division where the amount charged to and paid by  the  tenant  was  less
  than the registered rent for the housing accommodation; (vi) for housing
  accommodations  that  were registered with the division where the amount
  charged to and paid by the tenant was less than the registered rent  for
  the  housing  accommodation,  the median and mean difference between the
  registered rent for a housing accommodation and the  amount  charged  to
  and  paid  by  the tenant; (vii) the median and mean registered rent for
  housing accommodations for which the lease was renewed  by  an  existing
  tenant;   (viii)  the  median  and  mean  registered  rent  for  housing
  accommodations for which a lease was signed by  a  new  tenant  after  a
  vacancy;  (ix)  the  median  and  mean  increase,  in  dollars  and as a
  percentage, in the registered rent for housing accommodations where  the
  lease  was  signed  by  a new tenant after a vacancy; (x) the median and
  mean increase, in dollars and as a percentage, in  the  registered  rent
  for  housing  accommodations  where the lease was signed by a new tenant
  after a vacancy, where the amount changed  to  and  paid  by  the  prior
  tenant  was the full registered rent; (xi) the median and mean increase,
  in dollars and as a percentage,  in  the  registered  rent  for  housing
  accommodations  where  the  lease  was  signed  by  a new tenant after a
  vacancy, where the amount changed to and paid by the  prior  tenant  was
  less  than  the  registered  rent;  (xii)  the number of rent overcharge
  complaints processed  by  the  division;  (xiii)  the  number  of  final
  overcharge   orders   granting   an  overcharge;  (xiv)  the  number  of


 investigations commenced by the tenant protection  unit,  the  aggregate
  number  of  rent stabilized or rent controlled housing accommodations in
  each county that were  the  subject  of  such  investigations,  and  the
  dispositions  of such investigations. At the time the report is due, the
  commissioner  shall  make  available  to  the  governor,  the  temporary
  president  of  the  senate,  the speaker of the assembly, and shall make
  publicly available, and on its website in machine readable  format,  the
  data used to tabulate the figures required to be included in the report,
  taking any steps necessary to protect confidential information regarding
  ongoing  investigations,  individual  buildings, housing accommodations,
  property owners, and tenants.




   §   21.   Definitions.   1.  (a)  "Applicable  percentage"  means  the
  appropriate  percentage  (depending  on  whether  a  building  is   new,
  existing,  or  federally  subsidized) prescribed by the secretary of the
  treasury for purposes of section 42 of the internal revenue code for the
  month which is the earlier of
    (i) the month in which the eligible low-income building is  placed  in
  service, or
    (ii) at the election of the taxpayer,
    (A) the month in which the taxpayer and the commissioner enter into an
  agreement  with  respect  to  such  building  (which  is  binding on the
  commissioner, the taxpayer, and all successors in interest)  as  to  the
  housing credit dollar amount to be allocated to such building, or
    (B)  in the case of any building to which subsection (h)(4)(B) of such
  section 42 applies, the month in which the  tax-exempt  obligations  are
  issued.
    (b) A month may be elected under subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (a) of
  this  subdivision  only if the election is made not later than the fifth
  day after the close of such month. Such election, once  made,  shall  be
  irrevocable.
    (c)  If, as of the close of any taxable year in the credit period, the
  qualified basis of an eligible low-income building exceeds such basis as
  of the close of the first year of  the  credit  period,  the  applicable
  percentage  which  shall apply to such excess shall be two-thirds of the
  applicable percentage originally ascribed to such building.
    2. "Compliance period" means, with respect to any building, the period
  of fifteen taxable years beginning with the first taxable  year  of  the
  credit period with respect to such building.
    3.  "Credit  period"  means,  with  respect to any eligible low-income
  building, the period of ten taxable years beginning with
    (a) the taxable year in which the building is placed in service, or
    (b) at the election of the taxpayer, the succeeding taxable year,
  but only if the building is an eligible low-income building  as  of  the
  close of the first year of such period. The election under paragraph (b)
  of this subdivision, once made, shall be irrevocable.
    4.   "Eligibility   statement"   means   a  statement  issued  by  the
  commissioner certifying  that  a  building  is  an  eligible  low-income
  building.  Such statement shall set forth the taxable year in which such
  building is placed in service, the dollar amount of  low-income  housing
  credit  allocated  by  the  commissioner to such building as provided in
  subdivision five of section twenty-two of this article,  the  applicable
  percentage  and  maximum  qualified  basis with respect to such building
  taken  into  account  in  determining  such  dollar  amount,  sufficient
  information to identify each such building and the taxpayer or taxpayers
  with  respect  to  each such building, and such other information as the
  commissioner, in consultation with  the  commissioner  of  taxation  and
  finance, shall prescribe. Such statement shall be first issued following
  the  close  of  the  first  taxable  year  in  the  credit  period,  and
  thereafter, to the extent required by the commissioner of  taxation  and
  finance,  following  the  close  of  each taxable year of the compliance
  period.
    5. "Eligible low-income building" means a  building  located  in  this
  state which either
    (a)  is a qualified low-income building as defined in section 42(c) of
  the internal revenue code, or
    (b) would be a qualified low-income building under such section if the
  20-50  test  specified  in  subsection  (g)(1)  of  such  section   were
  disregarded  and  the 40-60 test specified in such subsection (requiring
  that at least forty percent of residential units be both rent-restricted


 and occupied by individuals whose income is sixty  percent  or  less  of
  area median gross income) were a 40-90 test.
    6.  "Qualified  basis"  of  an  eligible low-income building means the
  qualified basis of such building determined under section 42(c)  of  the
  internal  revenue  code, or which would be determined under such section
  if the 40-90 test specified in paragraph (b) of subdivision five of this
  section applied under such section 42 to determine if such building were
  part of a qualified low-income housing project.
    7. References in this article to section 42 of  the  internal  revenue
  code shall mean such section as amended from time to time.




   §  22.  Allowance  of  credit,  amount  and limitations. 1. A taxpayer
  subject to tax under article nine-A, twenty-two, or thirty-three of  the
  tax  law  which  owns  an  interest  in  one or more eligible low-income
  buildings,  or  a  transferee  of  such  a  taxpayer  as  described   in
  subdivision  eight  of  this  section, shall be allowed a credit against
  such tax for the amount of low-income housing credit  allocated  by  the
  commissioner  to  each  such building. Except as provided in subdivision
  two of this section, the credit amount so allocated shall be allowed  as
  a credit against the tax for the ten taxable years in the credit period.
    2.  Adjustment  of  first-year  credit  allowed  in eleventh year. The
  credit allowable for the first taxable year of the  credit  period  with
  respect  to  any  building  shall be adjusted using the rules of section
  42(f)(2) of the internal revenue code (relating to first-year adjustment
  of qualified basis by  the  weighted  average  of  low-income  to  total
  residential  units), and any reduction in first-year credit by reason of
  such adjustment shall be allowable for the first taxable year  following
  the credit period.
    3.  Amount of credit. Except as provided in subdivisions four and five
  of this section, the amount of low-income housing credit  shall  be  the
  applicable percentage of the qualified basis of each eligible low-income
  building.
    * 4. Statewide limitation. The aggregate dollar amount of credit which
  the  commissioner  may  allocate  to eligible low-income buildings under
  this article  shall  be  one  hundred  forty-two  million  dollars.  The
  limitation  provided  by  this subdivision applies only to allocation of
  the aggregate dollar amount of credit by the commissioner, and does  not
  apply  to  allowance  to  a  taxpayer  of  the credit with respect to an
  eligible low-income building for each year of the credit period.
    * NB Effective until April 1, 2024
    * 4. Statewide limitation. The aggregate dollar amount of credit which
  the commissioner may allocate to  eligible  low-income  buildings  under
  this  article  shall  be  one  hundred  fifty-seven million dollars. The
  limitation provided by this subdivision applies only  to  allocation  of
  the  aggregate dollar amount of credit by the commissioner, and does not
  apply to allowance to a taxpayer  of  the  credit  with  respect  to  an
  eligible low-income building for each year of the credit period.
    * NB Effective April 1, 2024 until April 1, 2025
    * 4. Statewide limitation. The aggregate dollar amount of credit which
  the  commissioner  may  allocate  to eligible low-income buildings under
  this article shall be  one  hundred  seventy-two  million  dollars.  The
  limitation  provided  by  this subdivision applies only to allocation of
  the aggregate dollar amount of credit by the commissioner, and does  not
  apply  to  allowance  to  a  taxpayer  of  the credit with respect to an
  eligible low-income building for each year of the credit period.
    * NB Effective April 1, 2025
    5. Building limitation. The dollar amount of credit allocated  to  any
  building  shall  not  exceed  the  amount the commissioner determines is
  necessary for the financial feasibility of the project and the viability
  of the building as an eligible low-income building throughout the credit
  period. In allocating a dollar amount of credit  to  any  building,  the
  commissioner  shall  specify  the  applicable percentage and the maximum
  qualified basis which may be taken into account under this article  with
  respect  to  such  building.  The  applicable percentage and the maximum
  qualified basis with respect to a building shall not exceed the  amounts
  determined  in  subdivisions  one  and  six,  respectively,  of  section
  twenty-one of this article.
    6. Long-term commitment to  low-income  housing  required.  No  credit
  shall  be  allowed under this article with respect to a building for the


 taxable year unless an extended  low-income  housing  commitment  is  in
  effect  as  of  the  end  of  such  taxable  year.  For purposes of this
  subdivision, the term "extended low-income housing commitment" means  an
  agreement  between  the  taxpayer  and  the  commissioner  substantially
  similar to  the  agreement  specified  in  section  42(h)(6)(B)  of  the
  internal revenue code.
    7. Credit to successor owner. If a credit is allowed under subdivision
  one  of this section with respect to an eligible low-income building and
  such building (or an interest therein) is sold during the credit period,
  the credit for the period after the sale which would have been allowable
  under such subdivision one to the prior owner had the building not  been
  sold  shall  be  allowable to the new owner. Credit for the year of sale
  shall be allocated between the parties on the basis  of  the  number  of
  days during such year that the building or interest was held by each.
    8.  (a)  A  taxpayer  allowed  a  credit  pursuant to this article may
  transfer the credit, in whole or in part, to another person  or  entity,
  who  shall  be  referred to as the transferee, without regard to how any
  federal low-income housing tax credit with  respect  to  the  low-income
  building  may be allocated and notwithstanding that such other person or
  entity owns no interest in the eligible low-income  building  or  in  an
  entity  with  an ownership interest in the eligible low-income building.
  Transferees shall be entitled to  apply  transferred  credit  to  a  tax
  imposed under article nine-A, twenty-two or thirty-three of the tax law,
  provided  all requirements for claiming the credit are met. A transferee
  may not transfer any credit, or portion thereof, acquired by transfer.
    (b) A taxpayer allowed a credit pursuant to this  article  must  enter
  into a transfer contract with the transferee. The transfer contract must
  specify
    (i)  the  building  identification  numbers  for  all buildings in the
  project;
    (ii) the date each building was placed into service;
    (iii) the fifteen year compliance period for the project;
    (iv) the schedule of years  for  which  the  transfer  credit  may  be
  claimed and the amount of credit previously claimed;
    (v)  the  amount  of  consideration  received  by the taxpayer for the
  transfer credit; and
    (vi) the amount of credit being transferred.
    (c) No transfer shall be  effective  unless  the  taxpayer  allowed  a
  credit pursuant to this article and seeking to transfer the credit files
  a transfer statement with the commissioner prior to the transfer and the
  commissioner  approves  such  transfer.  The  transfer  statement  shall
  provide the name  and  federal  identification  numbers  of  the  filing
  transferor  and  the  taxpayer to whom the filing transferor transferred
  the credit, and the amount of credit transferred to each such person  or
  entity.  A  copy  of  the  transfer  contract  shall  be attached to the
  transfer  statement.  The  statement  shall  also  contain  such   other
  information  as  the  commissioner  may  require.  After  reviewing  the
  transfer contract and the transfer  statement,  the  commissioner  shall
  approve  or  deny  the  transfer as provided in this subdivision. If the
  commissioner approves the transfer,  the  commissioner  shall  issue  an
  approval  statement  that  provides  the  name  of  the  transferor  and
  transferee, the amount  of  credit  being  transferred  and  such  other
  information  as  the  commissioner  and the commissioner of taxation and
  finance deem necessary. A copy of the commissioner's approval  statement
  must  be  attached  to  the transferee's tax return. If the commissioner
  denies the transfer, the  commissioner  shall  provide  the  taxpayer  a
  written determination for such denial. The commissioner, in consultation
  with  the commissioner of taxation and finance, may establish such other


 procedures and standards deemed necessary for the transferability of the
  low-income housing credit.
    (d)  The  commissioner shall forward copies of all transfer statements
  and attachments thereto and approval statements  to  the  department  of
  taxation  and  finance within thirty days after the transfer is approved
  by the commissioner.




   §  23.  Project  monitoring.  The  commissioner  shall  establish such
  procedures deemed necessary for monitoring  compliance  of  an  eligible
  low-income  building  with  the  provisions  of  this  article,  and for
  notifying  the  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance  of  any   such
  noncompliance.




   § 24. Credit recapture. If, as of the close of any taxable year in the
  compliance  period,  the  amount  of the qualified basis of any building
  with respect to the taxpayer is less than the amount of such basis as of
  the close of the preceding taxable year, the credit under  this  article
  may be recaptured as provided in section eighteen of the tax law.




   § 25. Regulations, coordination with federal low-income housing credit
  provisions.  1.  The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations
  necessary to administer the provisions of this act.
    2. The provisions of section 42 of the  internal  revenue  code  shall
  apply  to the credit under this article, provided however, to the extent
  such provisions are inconsistent with this article,  the  provisions  of
  this article shall control.
    3.  The  allocation  of  the credit established by this article may be
  made without regard to  and  in  a  separate  manner  from  any  federal
  low-income  housing  credit  that  may  be  allocated with respect to an
  eligible low-income building.




   §  30.  Organization  of authorities.   1. In the case of an authority
  hereafter established by a special act of the legislature, the mayor  of
  a city or village, or the town board of a town, shall file in the office
  of  the  commissioner, and a duplicate in the office of the secretary of
  state, a certificate signed by him or it and setting forth: (a) the date
  of the passage of the special act establishing the  authority;  (b)  the
  name of the authority; and (c) the names of the members and their terms,
  specifying which member is chairman.
    2.  Except as otherwise provided by special act of the legislature, an
  authority shall consist of not less  than  three  nor  more  than  seven
  members.  The  members  of an authority who are first appointed shall be
  not more than five in number and shall be designated to serve for  terms
  of  one,  two,  three, four and five years respectively from the date of
  their appointment, depending upon the number of members constituting the
  authority. Thereafter the term of office of appointive members shall  be
  five  years.  A member shall continue to hold office until his successor
  is appointed or elected and has  qualified.  The  mayor  of  a  city  or
  village,  or  the  town  board  of  a town, shall appoint the appointive
  members, designate the first chairman and file with the  commissioner  a
  certificate of appointment or the reappointment of any member.
    3.  A  majority  of  the  members  of  an authority shall constitute a
  quorum.
    4. Not more than one member of an authority may be an official  or  an
  employee  of  the  municipality  at  any  one time. In the event that an
  official or an employee of the municipality  shall  be  appointed  as  a
  member  of  the  authority,  acceptance or retention of such appointment
  shall not be deemed a forfeiture of his municipal office or  employment,
  or  incompatible  therewith  or affect his tenure or compensation in any
  way. The term of office of a member of an authority who is  an  official
  of the municipality shall terminate at the expiration of the term of his
  municipal office.
    5.  Notwithstanding  any other provision of law, each authority having
  supervision over one hundred or more occupied  dwelling  units  and  not
  located  in  a  city  having a population of more than one million shall
  include  as  members  two  tenants  elected  by  the  residents  of  the
  authority's  housing for terms of two years each.  Each authority coming
  within the provisions of this subdivision shall, within six months after
  the effective date of this act or within six months after the  authority
  becomes  subject  to the requirements of this subdivision, adopt by-laws
  specifying  the  time  and  manner  of  the  election  of   the   tenant
  representatives.  All  residents  of  the  authority's  housing  who are
  eighteen years of age or older shall be eligible to vote. The  authority
  may  provide in the by-laws whether both tenant representatives shall be
  elected simultaneously for concurrent terms or one shall be elected each
  year with the terms overlapping and whether both shall be elected by all
  the residents or each one elected by one  half  of  the  residents.  The
  first  election  shall  be  held within one year after the date by which
  by-laws for the election are required to be adopted. The  by-laws  shall
  be  subject  to  the  approval  of the commissioner, and if an authority
  fails within the six-month period to adopt acceptable by-laws  for  such
  election  the  commissioner  shall  specify  the  time and manner of the
  election.  Upon the taking of office of the two elected tenant  members,
  the  size of an authority shall be increased by two members and the term
  of any member appointed pursuant to this subdivision  prior  to  January
  first, nineteen hundred seventy-five shall end and a new member shall be
  appointed  for a term of five years. Acceptance or retention by a tenant
  of membership on an authority, whether by election  or  by  appointment,
  shall  not  be deemed incompatible with, or a forfeiture of his tenancy.


 An elected tenant representative shall  cease  to  serve  as  such  upon
  termination  of his tenancy for any reason, or upon his becoming subject
  to removal from occupancy due to the operation of  section  one  hundred
  fifty-six  of  this  chapter.  Any  compensation  paid  to an elected or
  appointed tenant member for his  services  to  an  authority  shall  not
  affect his eligibility for membership on such authority or for continued
  occupancy, but may be used in the determination of his rent. Any vacancy
  in  the  office  of  an elected tenant representative shall be filled as
  soon as may be practical by a new election.




   § 31. Scope of authority's jurisdiction.  The territorial jurisdiction
  of  an  authority established for a city or village shall be coterminous
  with the territorial limits of such city or village, and the territorial
  jurisdiction of an authority established for a town  shall  include  all
  such  town,  except that such territorial jurisdiction shall not include
  any territory that lies within the boundaries of  any  village,  whether
  such  village  has  or  has not established an authority. The members of
  such town authority  shall  if  they  consent  and  when  authorized  by
  resolutions  of  the  town  board  and  the  village  board,  act as the
  authority in and for said village, the same as if it  had  been  created
  especially for said village.




   §  32. Officers and employees; compensation and expenses.  1. When the
  office of the first  chairman  of  the  authority  becomes  vacant,  the
  authority  shall select a chairman from among its members.  An authority
  shall select from among its members a vice-chairman, and it may  employ,
  subject  to  the  provisions  of the civil service law applicable to the
  municipality in which it is established, a general manager, a secretary,
  technical experts and such other officers, agents and  employees  as  it
  may  require, and determine their qualifications, duties and, subject to
  the approval of the local legislative body, fix their  compensation.  An
  authority  may call upon the corporation counsel or chief law officer of
  the municipality for such legal services as it may require and it  shall
  reimburse  the  municipality  for  the  cost of such services, or it may
  employ its own counsel and  legal  staff.  This  section  shall  not  be
  construed  to  prevent  an  authority  from  engaging by contract in the
  execution of a project architectural, engineering or other  professional
  or consultant services.
    2. An authority may delegate to one or more of its agents or employees
  such powers or duties as it may deem proper.
    3.  A member of an authority may be compensated on a per diem basis at
  a rate to be fixed by the authority not to exceed in the  aggregate  two
  thousand  dollars for a member and two thousand five hundred dollars for
  a chairman per annum and in addition shall be entitled to the  necessary
  expenses  including  traveling expenses incurred in the discharge of his
  duties.
    4. Every officer, agent or employee of an authority who shall sign the
  receipt upon the payroll of an authority as having received  the  amount
  therein  mentioned  in full payment for services rendered by him for the
  entire time specified in such  payroll  or,  in  the  event  no  payroll
  receipt is required by an authority, shall endorse a check in the amount
  shown  upon such payroll and receive payment thereof, shall be deemed to
  have made an accord and satisfaction of all claims against the authority
  for wages, salary or other compensation due  to  such  person  from  the
  authority  for the period covered by such payroll, unless at the time of
  signing such payroll or endorsing such check the person  receiving  such
  wages  or  salary  shall write legibly on the payroll in connection with
  his receipt or on such check in connection with his endorsement that the
  amount received is received under protest, and unless such protest is so
  written upon such payroll or check, no recovery shall be had against the
  authority  upon  any  further  claim  for  wages,  salaries   or   other
  compensation for the period of time covered by such payroll.




   §  33.  Transfer of officers and employees.  Officers and employees of
  any board or department in or  of  the  municipality,  selected  by  the
  authority, who shall theretofore have passed a civil service examination
  with  reference  to the position they then hold, may be transferred with
  the consent of such board or department to the authority, and  shall  be
  eligible  for  such  transfer  and appointment, without examination, and
  their salaries or compensation shall, during  the  effective  period  of
  such  transfer,  be paid by the authority. The officers and employees of
  such  municipality  transferred  to  the  authority  pursuant   to   the
  provisions  of  this  section,  who  are members or beneficiaries of any
  existing pension or  retirement  system,  shall  continue  to  have  the
  rights,  privileges,  obligations and status with respect to such system
  or systems, but during the period of their employment by  the  authority
  all contributions to any pension or retirement fund or system on account
  of  such  officers  or  employees which would, except for such transfer,
  have been paid by such municipality, shall be paid by the authority; and
  all such employees shall have the same  status  with  respect  to  their
  positions  after  transfer  to  the  authority  as  they had under their
  original appointments. Any employee so transferred may be removed by the
  authority in accordance with the provisions of the civil service law.
    In addition to  the  right  of  reinstatement  that  such  persons  so
  transferred  shall have pursuant to the provisions of section thirty-one
  of the civil service law under  the  circumstances,  and  in  the  cases
  provided   in  said  section,  such  person  shall  have  the  right  of
  reinstatement pursuant to said section not only in the  service  of  the
  authority   but   also  in  the  service  from  which  such  person  was
  transferred.




   §  34.  Vacancies  and  removals.    A vacancy occurring other than by
  reason of the expiration of the term of a member of an  authority  shall
  be  filled  for  the unexpired term.  The mayor of a city or village, or
  the town board of a town, may remove  a  member  of  the  authority  for
  inefficiency,  neglect  of duty, or misconduct in office, but only after
  the member shall have been given a copy of the charges against  him  and
  an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel in his own defense at
  a  public  hearing.  In  the  event  of  removal, the mayor of a city or
  village, or the town board of a town, shall file with the commissioner a
  record of the proceedings together with  a  copy  of  the  charges  made
  against  the  member  and  his  or  its  findings thereon.   Pending the
  determination of charges against a member, the mayor or the town  board,
  as the case may be, may suspend him from office.




   §  35.  Non-liability  of authority members.  No personal liability or
  accountability shall attach to any member of  an  authority  or  to  any
  person  executing  bonds of such authority by reason of the execution or
  issuance thereof.




   §  36.  Disqualification  of members and employees of authorities.  No
  member or employee of an authority shall acquire any interest direct  or
  indirect  in a project or in any property then or thereafter included or
  planned to be included in a project, nor retain any interest  direct  or
  indirect  in  any  property  acquired subsequently to his appointment or
  employment which is later included or to his  knowledge  planned  to  be
  included in a project, nor shall he have any interest direct or indirect
  in  any  contract  or  proposed contract for materials or services to be
  furnished or used in connection with  any  project.  If  any  member  or
  employee  of  any  authority  owns  or  controls  an  interest direct or
  indirect in any property included in any  project,  which  was  acquired
  prior  to his appointment or employment, he shall disclose such interest
  and the date of acquisition thereof in writing to the authority prior to
  such appointment and such disclosure shall be entered upon  the  minutes
  of the authority.




   §  37.  Powers  of authority. 1. An authority shall have the following
  powers in  addition  to  other  powers  granted  in  this  chapter:  (a)
  investigate  into  living  conditions  in  the municipality and into the
  means of improving such conditions; (b) determine  where  insanitary  or
  substandard  housing  conditions  exist;  (c)  publish  and  disseminate
  information; (d) prepare or arrange for preparation of plans for,  carry
  out  and operate projects; (e) construct, reconstruct, improve, alter or
  repair or provide for  the  construction,  reconstruction,  improvement,
  alteration  or repair of any project; (f) demolish structures; (g) clear
  areas; (h) lease, purchase, or otherwise acquire, manage, operate all or
  any part of  any  project,  or  any  dwelling  unit  or  units  therein,
  undertaken or completed by any government or housing company: (i) Act as
  agent  for  or  enter  into  contracts  and otherwise cooperate with the
  federal government in connection with a federal or municipal project, or
  any federally-aided  program  to  provide  dwelling  accommodations  for
  persons  of low income; (j) arrange, agree or contract with a government
  for the planning, replanning, opening, grading or  closing  of  streets,
  roads,  roadways,  alleys  or  other  places  or  for  the furnishing of
  facilities or for  the  acquisition  by  a  government  of  property  or
  property  rights  or  for  the  furnishing  of  property  or services in
  connection with a project; (k) lease or rent, as  lessor  or  sublessor,
  any  of  the  housing  or  other  accommodations  or  any  of the lands,
  buildings, structures or facilities embraced in any project or connected
  with any program to provide dwelling accommodations for persons  of  low
  income,  and  establish  and  revise  the rents or charges therefor; (l)
  enter upon any building or property in order to  conduct  investigations
  or  make  surveys,  soundings or test borings necessary to carry out its
  purposes; (m) acquire or contract to  acquire  from  any  person,  firm,
  corporation  or  government,  by  subsidy,  contribution,  gift,  grant,
  bequest, devise, purchase, condemnation or otherwise, real  or  personal
  property  or  any  interest  therein  or  lease  dwelling units from any
  person, firm or corporation for sublease to persons and families of  low
  income;  (n)  sell,  exchange,  transfer, assign or mortgage any real or
  personal property or any interest therein;  (o)  own,  hold,  clear  and
  improve real or personal property or any interest therein; (p) insure or
  provide  for  the insurance of its property or operations as required by
  law and also against such other risks as  it  may  deem  advisable;  (q)
  limit  by  contract,  the  exercise of any of its powers; (r) invest any
  funds held in reserves or sinking funds, or any funds not  required  for
  immediate  disbursement in property or securities in which savings banks
  may legally invest funds subject to their control; (s) sue and be  sued;
  (t)  have  a  seal  and  alter  the same at pleasure; (u) have perpetual
  succession;  (v)  make  and  execute  contracts  and  other  instruments
  necessary or convenient to the exercise of its powers; (w) make and from
  time  to  time  amend  and  repeal  by-laws,  rules  and regulations not
  inconsistent  with  the  provisions  of  this   chapter;   (x)   conduct
  examinations  and  investigations,  hear testimony and take proof, under
  oath at public or private hearings on any material matter,  require  the
  attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers and issue
  commissions  for  the examination of witnesses who are out of the state,
  unable to attend, or excused from attendance; (y) authorize a  committee
  designated  by  it consisting of one or more members, or counsel, or any
  officer or employee to conduct any such investigation or examination, in
  which case such committee, counsel, officer or employee shall have power
  to administer oaths, take affidavits and issue subpoenas or commissions;
  and (z) enter into agreements of cooperation with or for  the  rendition
  of  service  to an agency as defined in subdivision five of section five
  hundred two of the general municipal law to assist such  agency,  at  no


 expense  to  the  authority or providing for payment to the authority of
  the agreed proportion of compensation or costs, in connection  with  the
  management  of  properties  in,  relocation  of displacees from, and the
  demolition  of  buildings  in any urban renewal area, in accordance with
  the provisions of this chapter and, except as may be  provided  in  such
  agreements,  without  regard  to  the  requirements of any law otherwise
  applicable to such agency: and (aa) at no cost or expense to  it,  enter
  into  agreements  of  cooperation  with a municipality which need not be
  within the territorial jurisdiction of  such  authority  notwithstanding
  the  provisions  of  section  thirty-one  or  article  thirteen  of this
  chapter, or with an authority  of  such  municipality,  to  assist  such
  municipality or authority in the construction, maintenance, operation or
  management  of  a project. (bb) do all things necessary or convenient to
  carry out its powers.
    2. An authority shall file in the office of  the  commissioner  annual
  reports,  which  shall  be  open to public inspection. The reports shall
  include for the first year of ownership or operation, in addition to any
  information which the commissioner may require, a statement with respect
  to each completed project owned or operated by  the  authority,  of  the
  following  data: (a) total cost of the land; (b) cost of land per square
  foot; (c) cost of building; (d) construction costs per  cubic  foot  and
  per dwelling room; (e) approximate date of completion; (f) amount of any
  government  loan for the project; (g) amount of any periodic subsidy for
  the project; (h) average rental per room including and excluding utility
  services; (i) number of apartments, full rooms and half rooms; (j) gross
  floor area per room;  (k)  number  of  vacant  apartments;  (l)  vacancy
  percentage;  (m)  total operating expenses per annum; (n) average annual
  operating costs per room; (o)  annual  income  from  rents  of  dwelling
  units;  (p)  annual income from other sources; (q) assessed valuation of
  property at the time of its acquisition for the  project;  (r)  minimum,
  maximum  and  average  aggregate annual income of the families occupying
  the project; (s) former population on  site;  (t)  number  of  buildings
  demolished  on  site;  (u)  former  density  on site per gross acre; (v)
  present density on site per gross acre.
    Each subsequent year of such continued ownership  or  operation,  such
  report   shall  contain,  in  addition  to  any  information  which  the
  commissioner  may  require,  the  following  data:  (a)  amount  of  any
  government  loan for the project; (b) amount of any periodic subsidy for
  the project; (c) average rental per room including and excluding utility
  services; (d) number of vacant apartments; (e) vacancy  percentage;  (f)
  total  operating  expenses per annum; (g) average annual operating costs
  per room; (h) annual income from rents of  dwelling  units;  (i)  annual
  income  from  other  sources; (j) minimum, maximum and average aggregate
  annual income of the families occupying the project.
    3. An authority shall file in the office of the  commissioner,  within
  six  months  of  the  effective  date  of  regulations implementing this
  subdivision and in such format as the commissioner shall prescribe after
  consultation with the state energy office, an energy  audit  report  for
  state  and  municipal  projects which identifies potential energy-saving
  building  improvements,   including   alterations,   modifications   and
  adjustments  to  the  building structure, heating, cooling, lighting and
  ventilation systems; their relative costs;  potential  energy  and  cost
  savings;  and  simple  payback  periods,  which  for the purpose of this
  subdivision shall mean that period of time within  which  the  estimated
  cost  of  such  improvements, exclusive of the cost of capital, would be
  recovered from the  savings  generated  by  reduced  energy  consumption
  resulting  from the improvements. The energy audit shall be conducted by
  a public utility, an engineer or architect licensed by the state, or the


 managing  agent  or  other  representative  of  the  authority  if  such
  individual  has  attended an energy audit training workshop sponsored by
  the commissioner or the state energy office. A copy of the energy  audit
  report, required herein, shall be given to any duly constituted tenant's
  association  or  cooperator's  advisory  council  and  a  copy  shall be
  available for inspection  and  copying  by  any  individual  tenant  who
  requests  it.  An  authority  shall  also certify by March thirty-first,
  nineteen hundred eighty-four that all compatible  conservation  measures
  identified  in the energy audit report which have simple payback periods
  of one year or less have been implemented;  provided,  however,  if  the
  commissioner  determines  within sixty days of the date the energy audit
  report is filed  that  one  or  more  of  such  identified  conservation
  measures  cannot  be implemented by March thirty-first, nineteen hundred
  eighty-four given the projected  rent  revenues  and  any  other  monies
  available  to the authority from reserve funds, loans or grants from the
  state or federal government or any other source, the  implementation  of
  such conservation measures shall be provided for according to a schedule
  prescribed by the commissioner.
    4.  When  an authority has been paid all or part of the principal of a
  state loan pursuant to this chapter and in the event that the completion
  of the project for which the loan was made has been delayed or that  the
  funds  of  such loan for any other reason are not immediately needed for
  the development of the project, the authority shall have  the  power  to
  invest  the moneys of such loan which will not be immediately needed for
  the project in  obligations  of  the  categories  specified  in  section
  ninety-eight  of the state finance law and of maturities approved by the
  state comptroller.






	   §  38.    An authority shall file with the commissioner a copy of each
  proposed project  embodying  the  plans,  layout,  estimated  costs  and
  proposed  method  of financing.  Any change made in the project shall be
  filed with the commissioner by the authority. With reasonable promptness
  after each project shall have been completed,  and  from  time  to  time
  prior to completion upon request of the commissioner, an authority shall
  file with the commissioner a detailed statement of the cost thereof.
    Upon receipt of a copy of a proposed state project, or of any proposed
  change  therein,  the  commissioner  may  transmit  his  criticisms  and
  suggestions  with  reasonable  promptness  to  the  authority   or   the
  municipality.  No  change in a state project may be made by an authority
  or a municipality without the approval of the commissioner.




   §  39.  Projects  financed  solely  by authorities.   An authority may
  undertake projects with funds obtained solely from sale of its bonds  to
  persons, firms or corporations other than governments, provided that the
  municipality  approves such projects in the manner provided for approval
  of projects involving municipal aid.




   §  40. Aid from and cooperation with federal government.  An authority
  is empowered to  include  in  agreements  with  the  federal  government
  provisions  that  such  government shall have the right to supervise and
  approve the construction, maintenance and operation of  any  project  to
  which  such  government  may  render  any assistance, and subject to the
  restrictions contained in this chapter, any other terms,  covenants  and
  provisions which the authority may deem necessary or appropriate.




   §  41.  Power to issue authority bonds.  1. An authority may from time
  to time for any of the purposes of this chapter borrow money  and  issue
  bonds in conformity with applicable provisions of the uniform commercial
  code in such amounts and upon such terms as it may deem advisable. Bonds
  for  state  projects  and  for  projects,  other  than federal projects,
  financed without a loan from a government may be issued for periods  not
  exceeding  fifty  years and for a period not exceeding the probable life
  of the project which said period shall be calculated from  the  date  of
  the  bonds.  Bonds for projects financed with the aid of municipal loans
  may be issued for  periods  not  exceeding  the  probable  life  of  the
  project.  Bonds  for  federal  projects  may  be issued for a period not
  exceeding sixty years. An authority  shall  also  have  power  to  issue
  refunding  bonds  for the purpose of paying or retiring bonds previously
  issued by it but no such refunding bonds shall  mature  later  than  the
  expiration  of  the  maximum period permitted by this subdivision at the
  time of the issuance of the bonds to be refunded  for  the  project  for
  which  such  bonds  were  issued.    Such  period  shall be construed to
  commence from the date of issuance of the bonds to be refunded.
    2. An authority is authorized  to  issue,  whenever  it  may  deem  it
  necessary  so  to  do, notes in conformity with applicable provisions of
  the uniform commercial code without limitation as to the rate  or  rates
  of  interest  in anticipation of the sale of bonds of which a government
  shall have agreed to purchase at least eighty per centum or which  shall
  have   been  authorized  at  the  time  such  notes  are  issued  or  in
  anticipation of a loan which a government shall have agreed to  make  to
  the authority. Such notes shall mature within a period not to exceed one
  year  from  the date of their issue but may be made subject to the right
  of earlier payment. The proceeds of the sale of such notes shall be used
  only for the purposes for which may be used the proceeds of the sale  of
  bonds or of the loan in anticipation of which the notes were issued. Any
  such notes may be renewed or may be refunded through the sale of similar
  notes  but  no such renewal or refunding notes shall be issued after the
  sale of bonds. Such notes, renewal notes or refunding notes shall,  with
  the  interest  thereon,  if  any, be paid from funds made available by a
  government pursuant to agreement for the purchase of bonds or the making
  of a loan, or from the proceeds of the sale of the bonds in anticipation
  of the sale of which the notes were issued or, in the event of the  sale
  of  the  project  with respect to which such notes were issued, from the
  purchase price paid to the authority by the purchaser of  such  project.
  Such  notes,  renewal  notes  or  refunding  notes shall mature within a
  period not to exceed one year beyond  the  maturity  date  of  the  last
  maturing  notes  outstanding  on  the date when the authority or, in the
  case of state projects, the commissioner, makes the  determination  that
  the  project  has  been  completed  and  that  the project cost has been
  finally determined, which determination shall be conclusive in any suit,
  action or proceeding upon such notes, renewal notes or refunding  notes.
  The   total  amount  of  such  notes  or  renewals  thereof  issued  and
  outstanding shall at no time exceed the total amount of bonds of which a
  government shall have agreed to purchase at least eighty per  centum  or
  which shall have been authorized to be issued or the total amount of the
  loan  which a government shall have agreed to make to the authority. The
  foregoing limitations upon the time of payment of notes shall not at any
  time apply to notes or other obligations  which  may  be  issued  by  an
  authority  to a government in anticipation of the sale of bonds of which
  such government shall have agreed to purchase at least eighty per centum
  or in anticipation of a loan which such government shall have agreed  to
  make  to the authority. Except as in this section expressly provided, an
  authority shall, in addition to its other powers, have the  same  powers


 in  connection  with the issuance and securing the payments of its notes
  as it has in connection with the issuance and securing  payment  of  its
  bonds.
    2-a.   In  connection  with  a  federal  project,  an  authority  may,
  notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in subdivision two of
  this setcion, issue notes or renewal or refunding  notes  in  conformity
  with applicable provisions of the uniform commercial code after the sale
  of  bonds  for  such project and without regard to the limitations as to
  time of issuance or payment set forth in such subdivision, provided: (a)
  the total amount of such notes or renewal or refunding notes issued  and
  outstanding shall at no time exceed the difference between the estimated
  project  cost  if issued prior to the date of physical completion of the
  project or the project cost  if  issued  thereafter  and  the  principal
  amount  of  the  bonds theretofore issued for such project; and (b) such
  notes or renewal or refunding notes are secured by an agreement  between
  the   authority   and   the   federal   government   or  any  agency  on
  instrumentality thereof pursuant to which the authority agrees to borrow
  from such government or agency  or  instrumentality  thereof,  and  such
  government  or  agency  or instrumentality thereof agrees to lend to the
  authority at or prior to the maturity of such notes, monies in an amount
  which (together with any  other  monies  irrevocably  committed  to  the
  payment of principal of or interest on such notes) will be sufficient to
  pay the principal of such notes with interest thereon to maturity, which
  monies  under the terms of such agreement are required to be used by the
  authority for the purpose of paying the principal  of  and  interest  on
  such  notes  at  their  maturity. Every note issued in connection with a
  federal project which is not refunded and any renewals thereof and every
  refunding note  and  any  renewals  thereof  shall,  with  the  interest
  thereon, if any, be paid either from funds made available by the federal
  government or agency or instrumentality thereof pursuant to an agreement
  for  the  purchase  of  bonds  or the making of a loan or the payment of
  annual contributions, or from the proceeds of the sale of the  bonds  in
  anticipation of the sale of which the notes were issued.
    3.  The  authority  may  issue  its  interim  certificates,  or  other
  temporary obligations, in conformity with applicable provisions  of  the
  uniform   commercial  code,  to  the  purchaser  of  bonds  pending  the
  authorization, preparation, execution or delivery of  definitive  bonds.
  Such  interim  certificates, or other temporary obligations, shall be in
  such form, contain such terms, conditions and provisions, bear such date
  or dates, and evidence such agreements relating to  their  discharge  or
  payment  or  the  delivery  of  definitive bonds as the authority may by
  resolution determine.
    4. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained  in  subdivision
  two  of  this section respecting limitations upon the time of payment of
  notes, renewal notes or refunding notes, such notes may be issued during
  the period that negotiations for the sale of a project pursuant  to  the
  provisions  of the public housing law or the private housing finance law
  are pending, but such notes shall not be renewed or refunded beyond  the
  maturity  date  of  the  last  maturing notes outstanding on the date of
  transfer of title to such project by the  authority  to  the  purchaser.
  Negotiations  for the sale of a project shall be deemed to be pending if
  the authority shall have  adopted  a  resolution  determining  that  the
  negotiations   for  the  sale  of  such  project  are  pending.  If  the
  negotiations for such sale are thereafter abandoned, such notes, renewal
  notes or refunding notes shall mature within a period not to exceed  one
  year  beyond the maturity date of the last maturing notes outstanding on
  the date determined by resolution adopted by the authority as  the  date
  when  negotiations for the sale of the project were abandoned, or within


 a period not to exceed one year beyond the maturity  date  of  the  last
  maturing  notes  outstanding  on the date when the determination is made
  pursuant to subdivision two of this section that the  project  has  been
  completed  and  that  the  project  cost  has  been  finally determined,
  whichever period is longer.




   §  42.  Provisions of authority bonds.  Bonds of an authority shall be
  authorized by its resolution and may be issued singly or in one or  more
  series, and shall bear such date or dates, mature at such time or times,
  bear  interest  at  such  rate  or rates, without limitation, be in such
  denomination or denominations, interchangeable or otherwise, be in  such
  form, either coupon or registered, carry such conversion or registration
  privileges, have such rank or priority, be executed in such manner, with
  or  without  authentication,  and be subject to such terms of redemption
  with or without  premium,  and  be  secured  in  such  manner,  as  such
  resolution may provide. The bonds may be sold by the authority at public
  or private sale at such price or prices as the authority may determine.




   §  44.  Signature  on authority bonds.   In case any of the members or
  officers of the authority  whose  signatures  appear  on  any  bonds  or
  coupons  shall  cease to be such members or officers before the delivery
  of such  bonds,  such  signatures  shall,  nevertheless,  be  valid  and
  sufficient  for all purposes, the same as if they had remained in office
  until such delivery.




   § 45. Repurchase of authority bonds.  An authority shall have power to
  purchase  any  bonds  issued  by  it  for  the  purpose of retirement or
  investment. An authority shall not purchase such bonds  at  a  price  in
  excess  of the face value thereof plus a premium of four per centum. All
  bonds purchased for the purpose of retirement shall be cancelled.




   § 46. Suit on authority bonds.  In any suit, action or proceeding upon
  any  bond  of  an  authority  or  the  security  therefor, any such bond
  reciting in substance that it has been issued by the authority to aid in
  financing a project to provide dwelling accommodations  for  persons  of
  low  income  pursuant to the procedure required in this chapter shall be
  conclusively deemed to have been issued for a project of such  character
  and pursuant to such procedure.




   §  47.  Bond  covenants  of  an authority.   1. In connection with the
  issuance of bonds or the incurring of an obligation, and to  secure  the
  payment  of  such bonds or obligations, an authority, in addition to its
  other powers, may: (a) Pledge, covenant to pledge, or  covenant  against
  pledging,  all  or  any  part  of  its rents, fees, revenues, subsidies,
  grants or contributions to which its right then exists or may thereafter
  come into existence; covenant against permitting or suffering  any  lien
  thereon; it is the intention hereof that any pledge of revenues or other
  moneys  made  by  the authority shall be valid and binding from the time
  when the pledge is made, that revenues or other moneys  so  pledged  and
  thereafter  received by an authority shall immediately be subject to the
  lien of such pledge without any physical delivery thereof or further act
  and that the lien of any such pledge  shall  be  valid  and  binding  as
  against  all  parties  having  claims  of  any kind in tort, contract or
  otherwise against the authority, irrespective of  whether  such  parties
  have notice thereof;
    (b) Mortgage, covenant to mortgage or covenant against mortgaging, all
  or  any part of its property, real or personal, then owned or thereafter
  acquired; covenant against permitting or suffering any lien thereon;
    (c) Covenant with respect to limitations on its right to sell,  lease,
  or otherwise dispose of any project or part thereof;
    (d)  Covenant  as  to the bonds to be issued and as to the issuance of
  such bonds in escrow or otherwise, and as to the use and disposition  of
  the  proceeds thereof; provide for the replacement of lost, destroyed or
  mutilated bonds;
    (e) Covenant as to what other, or additional debts may be incurred  by
  it;
    (f) Covenant that the authority warrants the title to the premises;
    (g)  Covenant as to the rents and fees to be charged, the amount to be
  raised each year or other period  of  time  by  rents,  fees  and  other
  revenues, and as to the use and disposition to be made thereof;
    (h)  Covenant  as  to  the  use of any or all of its property, real or
  personal;
    (i) Create or authorize the creation of special funds segregating  (1)
  the  proceeds  of any loans, grants, subsidies or contributions; (2) all
  the rents, fees and revenues of any project or projects; (3) any  moneys
  held  for  the  payment  of  the  costs  of operation and maintenance of
  projects, or as a reserve  for  the  meeting  of  contingencies  in  the
  operation  and  maintenance thereof; (4) any moneys held for the payment
  of the principal of and interest on its bonds or the sums due under  its
  leases  or  as  a reserve for such payments; and (5) any moneys held for
  any other reserves or contingencies; and covenant  as  to  the  use  and
  disposal of the moneys held in such funds;
    (j)  Redeem  the  bonds and covenant for their redemption, and provide
  the terms and conditions thereof;
    (k) Covenant against extending the time for the payment of  its  bonds
  or interest thereon;
    (l)  Prescribe  the  procedure,  if  any,  by  which  the terms of any
  contract with bondholders may be amended or  abrogated,  the  amount  of
  bonds the holders of which must consent thereto, and the manner in which
  such consent may be given;
    (m)  Covenant  as  to the maintenance of its property, the replacement
  thereof,  the  insurance  to  be  carried  thereon,  and  the  use   and
  disposition of insurance moneys;
    (n) Vest in an obligee, in the event of a default by an authority, the
  right  to  cure any such default and to advance any moneys necessary for
  such purpose, and covenant that the money so advanced be  an  additional
  obligation  of  such authority with such interest, security and priority


 as may be provided in any resolutions, trust indenture, mortgage,  lease
  or contract;
    (o)  Covenant  and prescribe as to the events of default and terms and
  conditions upon which any or all of its bonds shall  become  or  may  be
  declared  due  before  maturity, and as to the terms and conditions upon
  which such declaration and its consequences may be waived;
    (p) Covenant as to the rights, liabilities, powers and duties  arising
  upon the breach by it of any covenant, condition or obligation;
    (q) Covenant to surrender possession of a project or projects or parts
  thereof  upon  the  happening  of  an  event  of default; and vest in an
  obligee the right, upon such default, without judicial  proceedings,  to
  take  possession  and use, operate, manage, and control such projects or
  any part thereof, and to collect and receive rents,  fees  and  revenues
  arising  therefrom in the same manner as such authority itself might do,
  and to dispose of the moneys collected in accordance with the  agreement
  of such obligee with the authority;
    (r) Vest in a trustee or trustees the right to enforce any covenant to
  secure,  or  pay the bonds, or otherwise relating to such bonds; provide
  for the powers, duties and limitations of liabilities of such trustee or
  trustees, and provide the terms and conditions upon which the trustee or
  trustees, or the holders of  bonds,  or  any  proportion  of  them,  may
  enforce any such covenant;
    (s)  Vest in a government, in a trustee or in other obligee the right,
  upon any happening of an event of default, to foreclose through judicial
  proceedings or through the exercise of a power of sale without  judicial
  proceedings,  any  mortgage  as  to  all  or  such  part or parts of the
  property covered thereby as such government, trustee  or  other  obligee
  shall  elect;  the  institution,  prosecution and conclusion of any such
  foreclosure proceedings or the sale of any such parts of  the  mortgaged
  property shall not affect in any manner or to any extent the lien of the
  mortgage  on  the  parts  of the mortgaged property not included in such
  proceedings or not sold as aforesaid;
    (t) Make such other covenants and do any and all such acts and  things
  as  may  be  necessary or convenient or desirable in order to secure its
  bonds or make them more marketable, notwithstanding that such covenants,
  acts or things may not be enumerated  herein;  execute  all  instruments
  necessary or convenient in the exercise of the powers herein granted, or
  in  the  performance  of its covenants or duties, which may contain such
  covenants and provisions, in addition to those above specified,  as  the
  government or any purchaser of the bonds of an authority may require.
    2.  In  case  of conflict between this section and article nine of the
  uniform commercial code, this section shall control.




   §  48.  Guaranteed  indebtedness  of  an authority.   An authority may
  contract indebtedness and authorize and  issue  bonds  guaranteed  by  a
  municipality as to principal and interest, or only as to the interest.




   §  49.  Authority  obligations as legal investments and legal security
  for  deposits  by  public  officers.    The  state,  its   subdivisions,
  municipalities,  and  all  other public bodies, and all public officers,
  all banks, bankers, trust companies,  savings  banks  and  institutions,
  building and loan associations, saving and loan associations, investment
  companies  and  other  persons  carrying  on  a  banking  business,  all
  insurance companies, insurance associations and other  persons  carrying
  on  an insurance business, and all executors, administrators, guardians,
  trustees and other fiduciaries may legally  invest  funds  belonging  to
  them  or  within  their  control  in:    (a)  any bonds, notes and other
  obligations of an authority when they are (1) secured by a pledge of the
  revenues of a project, and additionally secured by a pledge of  periodic
  subsidies  or  of  annual  contributions to be paid to an authority by a
  government, or (2) secured  by  a  first  mortgage  lien  not  exceeding
  sixty-six and two-thirds per centum of the value of the property covered
  thereby,  or  (3)  secured  by  an agreement between the authority and a
  government pursuant to which the authority agrees  to  borrow  from  the
  government,  and the government agrees to lend to the authority prior to
  the maturity of such bonds, notes or other obligations of the authority,
  monies in an amount which (together with any  other  monies  irrevocably
  committed  to  the  payment  of  principal of or interest on such bonds,
  notes or other obligations) will be sufficient to pay the  principal  of
  such  bonds,  notes  or  other  obligations  with  interest  thereon  to
  maturity, which monies under the terms of such agreement are required to
  be used by the authority for the purpose of paying the principal of  and
  interest on such bonds, notes or other obligations at their maturity, or
  (4)  guaranteed  by a municipality as to principal and interest; (b) any
  notes issued pursuant to  and  in  conformity  with  the  provisions  of
  subdivision  two  of  section forty-one of this chapter under a contract
  with the state  containing  a  covenant  for  the  payment  of  periodic
  subsidies  as  provided  in  subdivision (b) of section seventy-six-a of
  this chapter; or (c) any bonds, notes and other  obligations  issued  by
  any  public  housing  authority or agency in the United States or in the
  commonwealth of Puerto Rico when such bonds, notes or other  obligations
  are  secured  by  a  pledge  of  the  revenues of the housing project or
  projects for which the bonds, notes or other obligations are issued, and
  additionally secured by a pledge of annual contributions to be  paid  by
  the  United  States  government or any agency thereof. Such bonds, notes
  and other obligations issued by an authority pursuant  to  this  chapter
  are also hereby made securities which may be deposited with and shall be
  received  by  all  public  officers  and  bodies  of  this state and all
  municipalities, governments, and public corporations of this state,  for
  any  purpose for which the deposit of bonds or other obligations of this
  state is now or may be hereafter authorized or required.




   §  50.  Foreclosure and other remedies against an authority.  1. In an
  action  or  proceeding  to  foreclose  a  mortgage  on  property  of  an
  authority,  the authority and the municipality, in addition to all other
  necessary parties, shall be made parties defendant and shall  take  such
  steps  in said action as may be necessary to protect the public interest
  therein and no costs shall be awarded against them.  Wherever under  the
  instrument creating a lien a notice of default in writing is required to
  be  served  upon  an  authority  before the institution of a foreclosure
  action or proceeding, a copy of such notice shall  be  served  upon  the
  municipality   at  least  five  days  before  the  institution  of  such
  proceedings. At such a sale of the property of the authority pursuant to
  foreclosure or other proceedings,  the  municipality  may  purchase  the
  property affected; or, it may, prior to the institution of a foreclosure
  action  or  proceeding,  or  during such action or proceeding, make such
  payment or take such other  steps  as  may  be  necessary  to  cure  any
  defaults  that  may  have occurred and such steps as may be necessary to
  protect the property of an authority and the public interest.
    2. In addition to any other rights and remedies, but subject  to  such
  limitations  as  may  be  made  by  contract,  any  obligee,  lessor  or
  mortgagee, or any trustee  or  agent  designated  in  the  bonds  of  an
  authority  or  under  a resolution, mortgage or indenture executed by an
  authority as security for its bonds may:
    (a) by mandamus or other suit, action  or  proceeding  at  law  or  in
  equity  compel  the  authority to perform each and every term, provision
  and covenant contained  in  any  agreement  of  the  authority  with  an
  obligee, trustee, mortgagee or lessor and require the performance of any
  or  all such covenants and agreements of the authority and of the duties
  imposed upon the authority by this article;
    (b) by action or suit in equity, enjoin any acts or things  which  may
  be  unlawful  or  in  violation  of the rights of such obligee, trustee,
  mortgagee or lessor;
    (c)  by  suit,  action  or  proceeding  in  any  court  of   competent
  jurisdiction  compel possession of any project or any part thereof to be
  surrendered to such obligee, trustee, mortgagee, agent or lessor  having
  the right to such possession under any agreement with the authority;
    (d)   by  suit,  action  or  proceeding  in  any  court  of  competent
  jurisdiction obtain the appointment of a receiver of any project of  the
  authority or any part thereof and of the rents and profits therefrom. If
  such  receiver  be  appointed,  he may enter and take possession of such
  project or any part or parts thereof and operate and maintain the  same,
  and  collect  and  receive  all  fees, rents, revenues, or other charges
  thereafter arising therefrom in the same manner as the authority  itself
  might  do,  and shall keep such moneys in a separate account or accounts
  and apply the same in accordance with the obligations of  the  authority
  as the court shall direct;
    (e)  by action or suit in equity require an authority to account as if
  it were the trustee of an express trust.




   §  51.  Liability  of  state  or municipality.   1. The bonds or other
  obligations of an authority shall not be a debt  of  the  state  or  the
  municipality  and neither the state nor the municipality shall be liable
  thereon nor shall an authority have power  in  any  way  to  pledge  the
  credit of the state or the municipality, nor shall the transfer from the
  authority  to  the  municipality  or  the vesting in the municipality of
  property  theretofore  belonging  to  an  authority  impose   upon   the
  municipality any obligations except such as it may expressly assume. The
  foregoing  provisions  shall  not  apply in the event of a guaranty by a
  municipality of the bonds or obligations of an authority.
    2. Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  the  foregoing  paragraph,  a
  municipality shall be liable for the repayment of any loans and interest
  thereon  made by the state to an authority, acting as an instrumentality
  of such municipality.




   §  52. Tax exemptions of an authority. 1. An authority shall be exempt
  from the payment  of  (a)  any  taxes  or  fees  to  the  state  or  any
  subdivision  thereof  and (b) any fees to any officer or employee of the
  state or of any subdivision thereof, except where it is provided  by  or
  pursuant  to law that such officer or employee is personally entitled to
  such fees as compensation for services rendered or performed by  him  in
  his official capacity.
    2.  Bonds,  mortgages, notes and other obligations of an authority are
  declared  to  be  issued  for  a  public  purpose  and  to   be   public
  instrumentalities  and  together  with interest thereon, shall be exempt
  from tax.
    2-a. The state of New York hereby consents to the inclusion, under the
  United States internal revenue code of nineteen  hundred  fifty-four  or
  any subsequent internal revenue law of the United States of the interest
  payable  on bonds, mortgages, notes or other obligations of an authority
  which are hereafter issued and  secured  (1)  by  a  mortgage  which  is
  insured  under  section  two  hundred twenty-one (d) (3) of the national
  housing act (or any successor section under said act or  any  subsequent
  housing  act)  by  an  authority  as  mortgagor  in  connection with the
  financing of a project assisted under section eight of the United States
  housing act of nineteen hundred thirty-seven, or  (2)  by  a  pledge  of
  housing  assistance  payments  made  or  to  be made under a contract or
  contracts between an authority and the United States or  any  agency  or
  instrumentality  thereof, in the gross income of the person who receives
  or is entitled to receive such interest to the same extent  and  in  the
  same   manner  that  the  interest  on  bills,  notes,  bonds  or  other
  obligations of the United States issued subsequent to the effective date
  of section four of the public debt act of nineteen hundred forty-one  is
  includible  in  the  gross income of the holder or holders thereof under
  said internal revenue code or any subsequent internal revenue law of the
  United States  and,  notwithstanding  any  provisions  to  the  contrary
  contained  in  this  chapter or in any general, special or local law, an
  authority is authorized and empowered to issue  such  bonds,  mortgages,
  notes  or  other obligations and shall include therein such reference to
  or summary of this subdivision as it  shall  deem  proper.  The  consent
  hereby  given by the state of New York shall not be construed to consent
  to the application of any other provision of any other law,  federal  or
  state,  to an authority or to the elimination or modification in any way
  of any other exemption, privilege, or immunity thereof.
    3. Except as to state projects, the property of an authority shall  be
  exempt  from  all  local  and  municipal  taxes.  A federal or municipal
  project consisting of land and one or more multiple dwellings leased  by
  an  authority for a term of not less than ten years shall be exempt from
  such taxes during the period of such lease. A municipality may (a) fix a
  sum which shall be paid to it annually by the authority  in  respect  of
  each project; or (b) agree that the authority shall not pay or be liable
  to  pay  any  sum whatsoever in respect of a project or projects for any
  year or years; or (c) agree with an authority or government upon the sum
  to be paid by the authority for any  year  or  years  in  respect  of  a
  project  or  projects, or accept or agree to accept a fixed sum or other
  consideration in lieu of such payment; provided, however, that  the  sum
  fixed,  or  agreed to be paid by the authority, for any year shall in no
  case exceed the sum last levied as  an  annual  tax  upon  the  property
  included  in  such  project  prior to the time of its acquisition by the
  authority; and provided, further, that the sum fixed, or  agreed  to  be
  paid  by  the  authority, for any year with respect to a federal project
  shall in no case exceed the sum last levied as an annual  tax  upon  the
  property  included  in such project prior to the time of its acquisition


 by the authority or such greater amount as the  federal  government  may
  permit.
    3-a.  With  respect  to  a  federal  project  located  within a school
  district, an authority may make  payments  to  such  district,  and  the
  authority  and  the  district  may enter into agreements with respect to
  such payments.  Such payments shall not exceed the amounts permitted for
  such purposes by the federal  government.  The  power  granted  by  this
  subdivision  shall  be  in  addition  to any other power granted in this
  section or any other provision of law.
    4. (a) So much of the value  of  the  property  included  in  a  state
  project  as  represents  an  increase over the assessed valuation of the
  real property, both land and improvements, on the date of  the  contract
  for  a  state  loan,  or, in the absence of a contract for a state loan,
  then on the date of the contract for a state subsidy,  shall  be  exempt
  from  any and all state, county, city, village, town, school and special
  district taxes, except that the assessed valuation may be  increased  or
  decreased  to  reflect  a change in the level of assessment as certified
  pursuant to title two of article twelve of the real property tax law. In
  no event may any assessing  unit  assess  the  property  included  in  a
  project at an amount in excess of the actual cost of the project.
    (b) In any assessing unit in which there has been a change in level of
  assessment  as  provided  in  title  two  of  article twelve of the real
  property tax law, the commissioner of taxation and finance shall certify
  the change in level of assessment factor in the manner provided in title
  two of article twelve of the real property tax law. The term  "assessing
  unit"  as used in this subdivision means a city, town, village or county
  having a county department of assessment with the power to  assess  real
  property.
    5. The tax exemptions specified in subdivisions three and four of this
  section  shall  not  operate  for  a  period  of  more than fifty years,
  commencing in each instance from the date on which the benefits of  such
  exemption  first become available and effective, except that in the case
  of a federal project the tax exemption may operate for a period  not  to
  exceed  sixty  years,  and except that in the case of a project, or part
  thereof, leased from a housing company or in the case of  a  federal  or
  municipal  project consisting of land and one or more multiple dwellings
  leased by an authority for not less than ten years the tax exemption may
  operate for a period not exceeding the term of such lease.
    6.  Upon  the  completion  of  the  sixty-year  period   provided   in
  subdivision  five  of  this section applicable to federal projects, each
  authority  that  was  eligible  for  the  tax  exemption  specified   in
  subdivisions  three  and  four  of this section shall be exempt from all
  local and municipal taxes imposed by state  and  local  governments  for
  sixty  years  after the expiration of the initial exemption period. Upon
  the completion of the fifty-year period provided in subdivision five  of
  this  section applicable to state and municipal projects, each authority
  that received the tax exemption specified in subdivision three  or  four
  of  this  section may, on the expiration of the tax exemption period, be
  granted an additional tax exemption period  of  up  to  fifty  years.  A
  municipality may (a) fix a sum which shall be paid to it annually by the
  authority  in  respect  of each project; or (b) agree that the authority
  shall not pay or be liable to pay any sum whatsoever  in  respect  of  a
  project  or  projects  for  any  year  or  years;  or  (c) agree with an
  authority or government upon the sum to be paid by the authority for any
  year or years in respect of a project or projects, or accept or agree to
  accept a fixed sum or other  consideration  in  lieu  of  such  payment;
  provided,  however,  that  the  sum  fixed,  or agreed to be paid by the
  authority, for any year shall in no case exceed the sum last  levied  as


 an  annual  tax  upon the property included in such project prior to the
  time of its acquisition by the authority or, in the case  of  a  federal
  project, such greater amount as the federal government may permit.
    With respect to a federal project located within a school district, an
  authority  may make payments to such district, and the authority and the
  district may enter into agreements with respect to such  payments.  Such
  payments shall not exceed the amounts permitted for such purposes by the
  federal  government.  The  power granted by this subdivision shall be in
  addition to any other  power  granted  in  this  section  or  any  other
  provision of law.




   §  53.  Depositories  of  authority funds.   In order to protect funds
  deposited by an authority all banks, bankers, trust companies  or  other
  persons  carrying on a banking business, organized under the laws of the
  state, are authorized to give to the authority an undertaking with  such
  sureties  as  shall be approved by the authority, faithfully to keep and
  pay over upon the order of the authority any such  deposits  and  agreed
  interest  thereon, or in lieu of said sureties, to deposit as collateral
  such securities and in such amounts as  may  be  agreed  upon  with  the
  authority  pursuant  to a collateral deposit agreement in form and terms
  satisfactory to the authority.   The collateral to  be  deposited  shall
  consist  of  securities  in which savings banks may legally invest funds
  within their control.




   §  54.  Filing  by authority of by-laws, rules and regulations.  1. An
  authority shall file with the commissioner a copy of any by-laws,  rules
  and  regulations and amendments thereto adopted by it from time to time,
  which  shall  become  effective  upon  approval  by  the   commissioner;
  provided,  however,  that  if  the commissioner shall fail to approve or
  disapprove such proposed by-laws, rules and regulations  and  amendments
  within   three  months  after  such  filing,  such  by-laws,  rules  and
  regulations and amendments shall become effective upon the expiration of
  such three-month period.
    2. All rules and regulations, and amendments thereto,  adopted  by  an
  authority  from  time to time, except such as relate to its organization
  or internal management, shall be filed in the office of  the  department
  of state.




   §  55.  Projects  undertaken by municipalities.   Any municipality may
  undertake  one  or  more  projects,  and  for  that  purpose,  any  such
  municipality is hereby given the rights, powers and privileges and shall
  be  subject  to  the  duties  and obligations granted to or imposed upon
  authorities with respect to projects by the provisions of this  chapter.
  The  municipality,  however,  shall  be subject to the provisions of the
  local finance law, except as otherwise provided in section 20.00 of such
  law.




   § 55-a. Facilities incidental or appurtenant to a project.
    In  addition  to  any  other  lawful  method  for  the provision by an
  authority of facilities  incidental  or  appurtenant  to  a  project,  a
  municipality  may  in  connection with any project of an authority, upon
  approval by the local legislative body, contract with an  authority  for
  the  preparation  of  plans  and  construction  by the authority for the
  municipality, as part of a combined occupancy structure,  of  a  social,
  recreational,  health,  educational,  or  other  non-housing facility or
  facilities deemed by the municipality and the authority to be incidental
  or  appurtenant  to  such  project,  including  material  and  equipment
  customarily  provided  in connection with such facility and required for
  the operation thereof, and for the conveyance, grant or surrender in fee
  of its interest in the facility or facilities by the  authority  to  the
  municipality upon reimbursement of the authority by the municipality for
  all  costs  incurred  by  the  authority for development of the facility
  during construction or upon conveyance thereof. The  authority  and  the
  municipality  may  provide  for, grant and reserve such easements, space
  rights and air rights as they  may  deem  necessary  to  effectuate  the
  project  and  complete  the  facility.  The cost of any such non-housing
  facility  or  facilities  to  be  built  by  the   authority   for   the
  municipality,  which cost is to be reimbursed by the municipality to the
  authority, shall not be included in project  cost  for  the  purpose  of
  determining  the amount of periodic subsidies, if any, to be paid by the
  state for the project pursuant to section seventy-three of this chapter.
  Notwithstanding the provisions of any other general,  special  or  local
  law  to the contrary, such contract may provide that the authority shall
  have sole charge and control over the plans and specifications  for  and
  the construction and supervision during construction of such facility or
  facilities;  provided  that  the  plans  and  specifications for and the
  construction of the project and the non-housing facility  or  facilities
  shall  be subject to approval of the agency or agencies of the state and
  municipality  having  jurisdiction  thereof  as  provided  by  law.  The
  authority  shall in constructing such facility or facilities comply with
  the requirements of this chapter. As  used  in  this  section  "combined
  occupancy  structure"  shall  mean  any  improvement  on  real  property
  including  fee  interests,  easements,  space  rights  or  air   rights,
  containing  a non-housing facility or facilities in combination with the
  residential portion of a project and intended to increase  from  both  a
  planning  and  economic viewpoint the effective utilization of available
  land  areas.  A  combined  occupancy  structure  shall  also  include  a
  structure  in  a  project  or  development  under  the  auspices  of the
  authority wherein housing portions of structures placed upon the overall
  site are not built in space rights over the non-housing portion, so long
  as some part of the housing portion is constructed over the  non-housing
  portion.  The  foregoing  authorization  shall  be  in  addition  to any
  existing powers of an authority or municipality under this chapter,  and
  is  not  intended  to  nor  shall  it  impair  any existing powers of an
  authority pursuant to this chapter  to  provide  non-housing  facilities
  deemed  incidental  or  appurtenant  to  a  project, and to operate such
  facilities or lease the same to a municipality or agency thereof, public
  or non-profit body, or other person or corporation, for  such  operation
  or use.




   § 56. Authorities created prior to the enactment of this chapter.  Any
  authority created prior to the enactment of this chapter pursuant to the
  provisions  of  the municipal housing authorities law shall continue, as
  now constituted, in existence as an authority under  the  provisions  of
  this chapter.




   §  57.  Dissolution of authorities.   An authority or the municipality
  may apply to the supreme court in any county in which  the  municipality
  or  any  part thereof is located, for an order dissolving the authority.
  The court thereupon shall hold a hearing in open court after such notice
  of hearing as the court may require.  Upon a showing to the satisfaction
  of  the  court  that  provision  has  been  made  for  the  payment   or
  satisfaction  of all of the outstanding obligations of the authority and
  for the necessary expenses for the liquidation thereof,  the  court  may
  order  that  the  authority  be  dissolved.  Upon  such  dissolution the
  property of the authority shall  be  and  become  the  property  of  the
  municipality.




   §  58.  Sale  or  lease  of  municipal  projects by authorities. 1. An
  authority, subject to the approval of the local legislative body of  the
  municipality  in  which such authority has territorial jurisdiction, may
  sell or lease any municipal project of such authority to any corporation
  created pursuant to article two of the private housing finance law on  a
  co-operative  basis,  and an authority may enter into a contract for the
  sale of or sell or lease a  municipal  project  to  such  a  corporation
  either  prior  to,  at  the  date  of,  or  subsequent  to  the physical
  completion of such project and, in the event of a sale or lease  of  any
  such project prior to the physical completion thereof, the authority may
  agree  to complete and may complete construction and development of such
  project. No such corporation to which such a municipal project  is  sold
  or leased as provided in this section shall pay a dividend on any of its
  stock or pay interest on any of its income debentures.
    2.  Any  sale or lease of a municipal project by an authority pursuant
  to subdivision one of this section may be made without  public  bidding,
  public  sale  or  public  offering pursuant to such negotiated contract,
  agreement   or   lease,   containing   such   provisions,   limitations,
  requirements,  terms and conditions, as the authority selling or leasing
  such project, in its  discretion,  may  determine  to  be  necessary  or
  desirable;  provided,  that,  in  the  event  of  a  sale of a municipal
  project, the purchase price to be paid to the authority on or  prior  to
  date  of transfer of title to such project by the authority, or upon the
  physical completion of such project, shall not be less than  the  amount
  required  by  the  authority to pay and retire, or to make provision for
  the payment and retirement of, all bonds, notes  and  other  obligations
  issued  by the authority to finance the project cost, and to pay or make
  provision for the payment of all obligations incurred or to be  incurred
  by the authority as part of the project cost.
    3. Notwithstanding  the  provisions of section thirty-three of article
  two of the private housing finance law, the real property in a municipal
  project sold or leased as provided in subdivision one of  this  section,
  when  the  transfer  thereunder  becomes effective, shall be exempt from
  local  and  municipal  taxes,   other   than   assessments   for   local
  improvements,  to such extent as may be granted by the local legislative
  body of any municipality in which such  project  is  located;  provided,
  however, that any corporation to which such project is so sold or leased
  shall  pay  to  each  municipality  in  which a project is located, with
  respect to each such project, local and municipal taxes in  amounts  not
  less  than  the  sum or sums contracted to be paid by the authority as a
  payment in lieu of taxes with respect to  such  project  and  which  the
  authority  would be obligated to pay to the municipality had it not sold
  or leased the project to such a corporation.  The  tax  exemption  shall
  operate  and  continue  so  long  as capital loans of the corporation to
  which such project shall have been sold or leased are  outstanding,  but
  in no event shall such exemption for a municipal project located outside
  a city of one million or more persons continue for a period of more than
  thirty  years,  commencing  in  each instance from the date on which the
  benefits of such exemption became available to and  effective  for  such
  corporation.
    Notes,  bonds,  mortgages  and other obligations of such a corporation
  are declared to be  issued  for  a  public  purpose  and  to  be  public
  instrumentalities  and,  together with interest thereon, shall be exempt
  from tax.
    4. The provisions of section thirteen of article two  of  the  private
  housing  finance  law  requiring  the  approval  by  the commissioner of
  housing of the persons incorporating a  limited-profit  housing  company
  and  the  provisions  of  section fourteen of article two of the private


 housing finance law requiring the consent of the commissioner of housing
  to the filing of the certificate of incorporation of such a  company  in
  the office of the secretary of state and the amendment thereof shall not
  apply  to  a  corporation created pursuant to article two of the private
  housing finance law on a cooperative basis for the purchase or lease  of
  a  municipal  project  pursuant  to  this  section; nor shall any of the
  provisions of article two of the private housing finance law  conferring
  upon the commissioner of housing any powers in respect of limited-profit
  housing  companies  apply to such a corporation. The application of this
  subdivision shall be limited to corporations undertaking a project  with
  the  aid  of  a  municipal loan under article two of the private housing
  finance law.
    5. Any project that received a tax exemption under this  section  may,
  upon  the  expiration  of  the  tax  exemption  period,  be  granted  an
  additional tax exemption period of up to fifty years, or until such time
  as the project is no longer operated under the restrictions and for  the
  purposes set forth in this article, whichever is sooner.




   §  58-a.  Sale  of  dwelling units by authorities.   1. Subject to the
  approval of the commissioner in the case of a state project, the federal
  government in the case of a federal project or in the case  of  dwelling
  units  leased  by  an  authority  pursuant  to the provisions of section
  twenty-three of the  United  States  housing  act  of  nineteen  hundred
  thirty-seven, as amended, and thereafter purchased by the authority, and
  the  local  legislative  body  in  the  case  of a municipal project, an
  authority may sell a dwelling unit which is suitable by  reason  of  its
  detached  or  semi-detached  construction  to  the  tenant  in occupancy
  thereof, provided that such tenant is  a  family  of  low  income  whose
  annual   income   is   within   the   income  limits  for  admission  to
  limited-profit housing in the municipality  under  article  two  of  the
  private housing finance law.
    2.  Any sale by an authority pursuant to paragraph one of this section
  may be made pursuant to such negotiated contract,  agreement  or  lease,
  containing   such   provisions,  limitations,  requirements,  terms  and
  conditions as the authority  in  its  discretion  may  determine  to  be
  necessary  or  desirable,  including  a  covenant  by the purchaser that
  before offering such dwelling unit for sale within a period of  time  to
  be  specified  in  such  covenant  the  purchaser  shall first offer the
  dwelling unit to the authority at a price not greater than the  purchase
  price  paid  therefor by the purchaser; provided that the purchase price
  to be paid to the authority shall not be less than the  amount  required
  by  the  authority  to  pay  or  make  provision  for the payment of all
  outstanding obligations of the authority with respect to  such  dwelling
  unit, as determined by the authority.




   § 58-b. Sale or lease of project in connection with federal program of
  assistance  for low income housing.  In order to obtain for a project or
  portion thereof the benefits of any federal program  of  assistance  for
  housing  of persons and families of low income, an authority, other than
  an authority in a city with a population of more than one million,  may,
  subject  to  the  approval of the commissioner and the local legislative
  body, contract to sell or lease, and  sell  or  lease,  the  project  or
  portion  thereof upon such terms and conditions as it deems appropriate.
  The commissioner shall not approve the transaction  unless  he  makes  a
  finding  that:  (a)  the  federal  assistance available upon the sale or
  lease will enable the project  to  provide  decent,  safe  and  sanitary
  housing  within  the  financial  reach  of  persons  and families of low
  income; and (b) sufficient provision has been made to pay  or  otherwise
  assure  the  payment  or  retirement  of  all  bonds,  notes  and  other
  obligations issued  to  finance  the  project  or  portion  thereof.  In
  connection  with  such transaction, the authority, the municipality, the
  commissioner, the attorney general, and the comptroller,  may  take  all
  necessary   and  appropriate  actions,  including  the  modification  or
  termination of any applicable loan  and  subsidy  agreement.  The  power
  granted  by this section shall be in addition to any other power granted
  to an authority by any other provision of this chapter or any other law.




   §  59.  Disposal of records.  1. Notwithstanding the provisions of any
  general, special or  local  law,  any  municipal  housing  authority  or
  officer  or  employee  thereof  is  hereby empowered to destroy, sell or
  otherwise dispose of any book, paper, map,  photograph,  microphotograph
  or other record regardless of its physical form or characteristic, which
  has  been made, acquired, or received or is now in its custody and which
  the authority determines no longer has sufficient administrative, legal,
  fiscal, research or historical value to warrant its continued  retention
  and  preservation,  provided  the authority authorizes such destruction,
  sale, or other disposition.
    2. The provisions of this section shall not  apply  to  the  following
  records of municipal housing authorities unless copies for retention are
  reproduced as provided in section sixty of this chapter:
    (a)  The  official  copy  of  the  minutes  of  any  municipal housing
  authority including appendices and attachments thereto.
    (b) The official copy of any annual report of  any  municipal  housing
  authority to the commissioner.
    (c)  Records  which  have not been retained for such period of time as
  may be required:
    (1) by the federal government or any of its agencies;
    (2) by rules and regulations of the state comptroller;
    (3) by rules and regulations of the commissioner.




   §  60.  Reproduction of records.   Any municipal housing authority may
  cause any paper, document or other record kept or recorded by it  to  be
  recorded,   copied  or  reproduced  by  any  photographic,  photostatic,
  microfilm, microcard, miniature  photographic  or  other  process  which
  accurately  reproduces  or forms a durable medium for so reproducing the
  original. Such reproduction, when satisfactorily  identified,  shall  be
  deemed  to  be  an  original  for  all  purposes and is as admissible in
  evidence as the  original  itself  in  any  judicial  or  administrative
  proceeding,  and  an  enlargement  or  facsimile of such reproduction is
  likewise admissible in evidence  if  the  original  reproduction  is  in
  existence and available for inspection under direction of the court.




   §  61. Tenant meetings in common areas. Any group, committee, or other
  organization  comprised  of  tenants  residing  in   housing   authority
  developments  conducting  a  meeting  authorized pursuant to section two
  hundred thirty of the real property law shall have  the  right  to  meet
  without  being required to pay a fee in any area owned by such authority
  which is devoted to the common use of  all  tenants.  Such  areas  shall
  include  but  not  be limited to a community or social room where use is
  normally subject to a fee,  provided,  however,  that  such  meeting  is
  conducted  in  a  peaceful  manner,  at  reasonable  hours  and  without
  obstructing access to the  premises  or  facilities.  Five  days'  prior
  written  notice of such a meeting must be given to the management office
  of the project development. If such common area is  unavailable  on  the
  requested  day,  the management office must provide the group, committee
  or other organization comprised of  tenants  with  any  times  that  the
  common area will be available during a fourteen-day period commencing on
  the fifth day after written notice was given to the management office.




   §  70.  State loans.   The commissioner may, in the name of the state,
  enter into contracts for loans to an authority or a municipality for one
  or more projects, though a project has received or will receive aid from
  any other source, except the  federal  government.  All  such  contracts
  shall  be  subject  to  approval  by  the  state comptroller, and by the
  attorney-general as to form.  Any such loan shall be in such  amount  as
  the  commissioner,  in  his discretion, may deem necessary to insure the
  completion, availability for lawful occupancy and use of the project. No
  loan shall be made in an amount greater  than  the  project  cost,  plus
  working capital in an amount not to exceed two per centum of the project
  cost  or  one hundred thousand dollars, whichever is less, nor until the
  municipal comptroller and local legislative  body  have  attached  their
  separate  approvals  to  the  loan  contract.  The commissioner may make
  temporary loans or advances to a housing authority  in  anticipation  of
  such  loan  and  no  such  temporary  loan or advance shall be deemed to
  constitute part of such loan unless such temporary loan or  advance  has
  been  made  out  of the proceeds of definitive housing bonds sold by the
  state pursuant to section sixty of the state finance law.




   §  71.  Conditions precedent to state loans.  1. No loan shall be made
  unless the commissioner finds that: (a) the  project  is  in  conformity
  with a plan or undertaking for the clearance, replanning, reconstruction
  or  rehabilitation of a substandard and insanitary area or areas and for
  recreational and other facilities incidental or appurtenant thereto;
    (b) The municipality in which  such  project  is  to  be  located  has
  enacted   or  will  enact  zoning  regulations,  or  other  restrictions
  adequately protecting the area or areas in which the project  is  to  be
  undertaken, against future uses likely to depreciate unduly the value of
  such project;
    (c)  The estimated revenues, including any governmental grants, of the
  project or part for which such loan is to be made will be sufficient  to
  cover  all probable costs of operation and maintenance, of fixed charges
  and operating and depreciation reserves;
    (d) The plans and  specifications  conform  or  will  conform  to  the
  requirements  of  this  and  all other laws applicable thereto, assuring
  adequate light, air, sanitation and fire protection;
    (e) Adequate open  spaces  for  recreation  are  provided  within  the
  project  or  provision  therefor  has  been  made  conveniently near the
  project; stating the manner in which such spaces  are  provided  or  are
  proposed to be within the project or near thereto;
    (f)  Adequate  school  facilities  are  near  the project or provision
  therefor has been made, listing such facilities;
    (g) The occupants of the proposed  housing  accommodations  will  have
  convenient access to probable places of employment;
    (h)  That an adequate number of dwelling units especially designed for
  the convenience and safety of aged persons as  may  be  defined  by  the
  commissioner  shall be provided where a survey of the community in which
  the project is located indicates a need  therefor,  and  that  provision
  will be made to insure that such aged persons shall have priority in the
  rental thereof. Where all, or substantially all of the dwelling units in
  a  project  have been especially designed for the convenience and safety
  of aged persons, the  finding  required  under  paragraph  (f)  of  this
  subdivision need not be made.
    (i)  an  adequate number of dwelling units especially designed for the
  convenience and safety of handicapped persons as may be defined  by  the
  commissioner  shall be provided where a survey of the community in which
  the project is located indicates a need therefor, that provision will be
  made to insure that such handicapped persons shall have priority in  the
  rental   thereof,   and   that  a  project  is  designed  to  facilitate
  unobstructed ingress to and egress from a project.
    2. Such findings shall be conclusive evidence  of  the  facts  therein
  contained  except  upon  proof  of  fraud  or  wilful misfeasance by the
  commissioner.




   §  72.  Terms and security for state loans.  1. Loans shall be made at
  the rate of interest paid or to be paid  by  the  state  for  the  funds
  loaned  to  the authority or municipality, plus a proportionate share of
  the actual direct cost of  the  borrowing  as  certified  by  the  state
  comptroller. Such loan shall be repaid in equal annual installments over
  or within a period of fifty years, but in no case to exceed the probable
  life of the buildings and improvements of the project or part thereof to
  which  the  proceeds thereof are to be applied. The probable life of the
  buildings and improvements of such projects is hereby determined  to  be
  fifty  years.  Each  installment  shall  equal the amount payable by the
  state for moneys borrowed for the loan and shall be paid not later  than
  five days before each such payment by the state is required.
    2.  The  loan  contract  shall  provide  that  upon  any  date when an
  installment of principal shall become due and payable the authority  may
  anticipate  any  installment which would otherwise thereafter become due
  and payable. In the case of loans to municipalities, the  loan  contract
  may contain such a provision.
    3.  Should  the  authority  or  municipality  fail  to make payment of
  interest or principal upon any  due  date,  the  state  comptroller  may
  deduct and retain from any moneys otherwise payable by the state to such
  authority or municipality, the amount of such interest and principal and
  credit such authority or municipality with the amount of such deduction.




   §  73.  State subsidies. The commissioner may in the name of the state
  enter into contracts to make periodic subsidies (1) to an authority or a
  municipality for one  or  more  projects  to  assist  in  achieving  and
  maintaining  the  low  rent  character  of  a  project,  or,  (2)  to  a
  municipality to assist in the clearance, replanning, reconstruction  and
  rehabilitation  of  substandard  and insanitary areas pursuant to and in
  accordance with the provisions of this chapter,  the  general  municipal
  law and any other laws authorizing municipalities to establish and carry
  out  a  federal  program  of  urban renewal with federal aid, payable in
  either case only with moneys appropriated therefor from the general fund
  of the state, provided, however, (a)  that  no  contracts  for  periodic
  subsidies  shall  be entered into in any one year requiring payments for
  both such purposes aggregating more than two million eight hundred sixty
  thousand dollars in any one year, of which  amount  not  more  than  two
  million five hundred thousand dollars shall be with respect to contracts
  for  payments  to  assist  in  achieving  and  maintaining  the low rent
  character of projects; (b) that there shall not be  outstanding  at  any
  one  time  contracts for periodic subsidies requiring payments exceeding
  an aggregate of forty-four million dollars in any  one  year,  of  which
  amount  not  more than forty-two million fifty thousand dollars shall be
  with respect to contracts  for  payments  to  assist  in  achieving  and
  maintaining  the  low rent character of the projects. All such contracts
  shall be subject to approval  by  the  state  comptroller,  and  by  the
  attorney general as to form.
    The  periodic  subsidy  for  any project shall be payable on an annual
  basis, in amounts which need not be uniform,  over  a  fixed  period  of
  years not exceeding the life of the project assisted by such subsidy and
  in  any  event  for  not more than fifty years. Portions of the periodic
  subsidy payable for any one year may  be  paid  from  time  to  time  as
  required. The period of years during which the periodic subsidy shall be
  payable  shall  commence  on  the  date of substantial completion of the
  project, as determined by the commissioner. The maximum subsidy  payable
  in  any  one year on any one project shall not exceed a sum equal to the
  largest annual interest charge on  funds  borrowed  from  the  state  to
  finance  such  project  plus  one  per  centum  of  the project cost not
  including, however, funds borrowed from the state for working capital.
    Where all or any part of the funds necessary to  finance  the  project
  are borrowed from sources other than the state or federal government the
  periodic  subsidy  may  equal  but  shall  not exceed the largest annual
  interest charge on all borrowed funds plus one per centum of the project
  cost. The periodic subsidies shall be further  limited  to  amounts  and
  periods necessary in the determination of the commissioner to assure the
  low-rent character of the project involved.
    The contract of the commissioner providing for such periodic subsidies
  shall guarantee their payment over such fixed period of years. The faith
  of  the  state  is  pledged  to  the  payment  of all periodic subsidies
  contracted for by the commissioner. Such  periodic  subsidies  shall  be
  paid  upon  the audit and warrant of the state comptroller upon vouchers
  approved by the commissioner.
    No state subsidy shall be made available for any  project  unless  and
  until:  (a)  the  municipality  in  which such project is situated shall
  contract or have contracted to make subsidies  to  such  project  in  an
  amount at least equal to the subsidy contracted to be made by the state,
  all  or  any  part  of  which  municipal  subsidy  may be in the form of
  exemption of the project from county, city, village,  town,  school  and
  special  district  taxes  to the extent specified in subdivision four of
  section fifty-two of this chapter; (b) the findings required by  section
  seventy-one  of  this  chapter  have been made by the commissioner. Such


 findings shall be conclusive evidence of  the  facts  therein  contained
  except  upon  proof of fraud or willful misfeasance by the commissioner.
  For the purpose of determining the amount of subsidy to  be  paid  by  a
  municipality  in  any  year  pursuant to clause (a) of this paragraph, a
  project shall be deemed to have been granted tax exemption for that year
  for so much of the actual incurred development cost of  the  project  at
  the close of the period for which state subsidy is payable as represents
  an  increase over the assessed valuation of the real property, both land
  and improvements, included in the project on the date  of  the  contract
  for  a state subsidy, notwithstanding the fact that at the close of such
  period tax assessments or assessment-rolls reflecting the  actual  value
  of the project have not as yet been prepared, entered, or completed, nor
  that  the due date for the payment of the taxes has not as yet occurred,
  and provided further that whenever  there  has  been  a  change  in  the
  overall level of assessment and the commissioner of taxation and finance
  has certified a percentage change in the level of assessment pursuant to
  the provisions of subdivision four of section fifty-two of this chapter,
  the  value of the tax exemption shall be computed by multiplying the tax
  rate which is to be applied to the  assessed  value  deemed  to  be  tax
  exempt  under  this  paragraph  by the percentage change in the level of
  assessment plus one hundred percent.




   §  74.  Restrictions on additional subsidies.  No subsidy, in addition
  to any periodic subsidy originally contracted for in aid of any  project
  or  projects, shall be paid by the state to a municipality or authority,
  acting as an instrumentality thereof, for the purpose of  enabling  such
  municipality  or  authority  to  remedy  an  actual  default or avoid an
  impending default in the payment of principal or interest  on  any  loan
  which  has  been  theretofore  made by the state to such municipality or
  authority pursuant to this chapter.




   §  75.  Restriction on use of state aid.  No state moneys allocated to
  an authority or a municipality hereunder shall be mingled or  commingled
  with  financial  aid  or  assistance  from the federal government or any
  agency thereof, except with the approval of the commissioner.




   §  76.  Pledge of subsidy.   Payments under any contracts for periodic
  subsidies by the state may be pledged by an authority  as  security  for
  loans  obtained  from  any source for the project to which such periodic
  subsidies relate.




   §  76-a.  Private financing.   To facilitate the enlistment of private
  capital through the sale by authorities or municipalities of their bonds
  and other obligations to  persons,  firms  or  corporations  other  than
  governments,  in  financing state projects, and to maintain the low-rent
  character of such projects---
    (a) Every contract entered into by the state with an authority  and  a
  municipality,  or  solely with a municipality, to make loans or periodic
  subsidies  or  both  (including  contracts  which  amend  or   supersede
  contracts  previously  made,  provided that such amending or superseding
  contracts do  not  relate  to  state  projects  with  respect  to  which
  definitive housing bonds of the state have been sold pursuant to section
  sixty of the state finance law, and do not relate to state projects with
  respect  to which serial bonds of a municipality have been sold pursuant
  to sections ten and eleven of the local finance law) may provide that---
    (1) upon the occurrence of a substantial default  in  respect  to  the
  covenants  or  conditions  to  which  the  authority  or municipality is
  subject (as such substantial default shall be defined in such contract),
  the authority or municipality shall be obligated at the  option  of  the
  commissioner,  either to convey title to the state in any case where, in
  the determination of the  commissioner  (which  determination  shall  be
  final  and  conclusive),  such  conveyance  of  title  to  the  state is
  necessary to achieve  the  purposes  of  this  chapter,  or  to  deliver
  possession  to  the  state of the project, as then constituted, to which
  such contract relates;
    (2)  the  state  shall  be  obligated  to  reconvey  or  to  redeliver
  possession of the project, as constituted at the time of reconveyance or
  redelivery,  to  such authority or municipality upon such terms as shall
  be prescribed in such contract and as soon as practicable: (i) after the
  commissioner shall be satisfied that all defaults with  respect  to  the
  project  have been cured, and that the project will, in order to fulfill
  the purposes of this chapter, thereafter be operated in accordance  with
  the  terms  of  such  contract;  or  (ii)  after  the termination of the
  obligation to make periodic subsidies available  unless  there  are  any
  obligations or covenants of the authority or municipality which are then
  in  default.  Any  prior  conveyances  and reconveyances, deliveries and
  redeliveries of possession shall not exhaust  the  right  to  require  a
  conveyance  or  delivery  of  possession  of  the  project  to the state
  pursuant to sub-paragraph (1) of subdivision (a),  upon  the  subsequent
  occurrence of a substantial default.
    (b) Whenever such contract to make loans or periodic subsidies or both
  shall  include  provisions  which  the  commissioner,  in said contract,
  determines  are  in  accordance  with  the  provisions   authorized   by
  subdivision  (a)  hereof,  and  the periodic subsidies, pursuant to such
  contract, have been pledged by the  authority  or  the  municipality  as
  security   for  the  payment  of  the  principal  and  interest  on  the
  obligations  of  the  authority  or   municipality,   the   commissioner
  (notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter) shall continue to
  make periodic subsidies available for the project so long as any of such
  obligations remain outstanding. Acquisition of title to a project by the
  state,  or  delivery  of possession thereof to the state, as provided in
  subdivision (a) hereof, shall not constitute an assumption of  liability
  by  the state of the bonds or notes of the authority or municipality for
  which  the  periodic  subsidies  or  loans  have   been   pledged.   The
  commissioner  may  covenant  in  such contract (in lieu of retaining the
  right to reduce or terminate periodic subsidies under  section  eighteen
  of this chapter and notwithstanding any other provisions of law) that in
  any  event  such periodic subsidies shall in each year be at least equal
  to an amount which, together with such income  or  other  funds  as  are


 actually  available  from  the  project for the purpose at the time such
  periodic  subsidy  is  made,  will  suffice  for  the  payment  of   all
  installments,  falling  due  within  the  said  year,  of  principal and
  interest  on  the  obligations for which the periodic subsidies provided
  for in the contract shall have been pledged as security;  provided  that
  such  periodic  subsidies  shall not exceed the amounts and shall not be
  made for a period longer  than  the  amounts  and  period  specified  in
  section  seventy-three  of  this  chapter and provided further that such
  periodic subsidies shall not exceed the amounts and shall  not  be  made
  for  a  period  longer  than  the  amounts  and  period specified in the
  contract.
    (c) Obligations of an authority or municipality which (1) are  secured
  either  (A)  by a pledge of a state loan under an agreement between such
  authority or municipality and the state, or (B) by a pledge of  periodic
  subsidies to be made by the state and (2) bear, or are accompanied by, a
  certificate  of  the  commissioner that such obligations are so secured,
  shall be incontestable in the hands of a bearer. The full faith  of  the
  state  is  pledged  to  the  payment of all loans and periodic subsidies
  contracted for by the commissioner as security for such obligations.






	   §  92.  Real  estate  tax  for  debt  service.    If a city issues its
  obligations for any project or to raise  funds  to  loan  in  aid  of  a
  project,  such  city  may  levy  an ad valorem tax on real estate to the
  extent that revenues derived in any year from taxes levied  pursuant  to
  this  chapter, together with revenues from the project or projects aided
  by the proceeds of any such obligations  shall  become  insufficient  to
  provide  fully  for  the  payment of principal and interest in that year
  upon obligations issued for either or both purposes.




   §  93.  Authorization  to make loans.  A municipality is authorized to
  make or contract to make loans  to  an  authority  and  to  any  housing
  company  operating  within  the territorial limits of such municipality.
  Loans  to  housing  companies  shall  not  be  greater  in  amount  than
  seventy-five per centum of the project cost.




   § 94. Authorization to make subsidies. A municipality is authorized to
  make  or  contract to make capital or periodic subsidies to an authority
  operating within the territorial limits of  such  municipality,  payable
  only with moneys locally appropriated therefor from the general or other
  funds  available  for  current  expenses  of such municipality. Periodic
  subsidies shall not be contracted for a period longer than the  life  of
  the project assisted thereby, and in no event for more than fifty years.
  If  the amount of any periodic subsidy shall be equal to or greater than
  the interest on and the amounts required annually for the payment of the
  indebtedness contracted by the authority on account of a project in  any
  year, such contract shall constitute a guarantee of the principal of and
  the  interest  on  such indebtedness, and such contract and the payments
  thereunder may be pledged by the authority as security  in  addition  to
  all other security which the authority may give for such indebtedness.
    A municipality may levy one or more of the taxes enumerated in section
  one  hundred  ten  for  the  purpose  of making municipal subsidies. The
  revenues resulting from the imposition of such tax or taxes, other  than
  the  taxes  described  in  subdivision (e) of section one hundred ten of
  this chapter in a city having a  population  of  one  million  or  more,
  notwithstanding  the  provisions of any general, special or local law to
  the contrary, shall be deposited in the city treasury and credited to  a
  separate  account.  During  each  fiscal  year  of such municipality, an
  amount not in excess of the amount of the subsidies to be made  by  such
  municipality  during  such  fiscal year shall be charged to such account
  and credited to the general fund for the reduction of taxation  or  into
  the  general  or  other  fund  available  for  current  expenses of such
  municipality. No other payment shall be charged  to  such  account.  The
  provisions  of  section  one  hundred  eleven  of  this chapter shall be
  applicable to any tax or taxes imposed pursuant to this section.
    In a city having a population of one million  or  more,  the  revenues
  from  the  taxes described in subdivision (e) of section one hundred ten
  of this chapter shall be deposited in the general fund and a payment  of
  an  equal  amount  shall  be made, in the same fiscal year or as soon as
  practicable thereafter, for the purposes described in such section.




   §  95.  Authorization  to guarantee.   A municipality is authorized to
  guarantee for a period not exceeding the probable life of a project, the
  principal of and interest on, or  only  the  interest  on,  indebtedness
  contracted  by  an  authority operating within the territorial limits of
  such municipality in connection with such project.




   §  96.  Administrative  expenses  of authority.   Each municipality in
  which  an  authority  is  situated  may  annually  appropriate  to  such
  authority  the  amount required by said authority for its administrative
  expenses. The amount thereof shall be within the discretion of the local
  legislative body of such municipality. Such payments may be made out  of
  any  fund  available  for that purpose. No administrative expenses of an
  authority shall be paid from any state  loan  or  subsidy  or  from  the
  rental income of any state project.




   §  97.  Procedure for municipal aid.  Contracts for municipal loans or
  subsidies to an authority or contracts for loans to  a  housing  company
  shall  be  approved  in  the same manner as is required for approval and
  final authorization of capital projects  or  permanent  improvements  in
  such municipality. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
  project commenced prior to the date of enactment of this chapter.




   §  98.  Conditions  in contracts for municipal aid.  In every contract
  for  a  loan  by  a  municipality  or  for  periodic  subsidies   by   a
  municipality,  or both, a substantial breach of the conditions set forth
  therein providing for the maintenance of the project as low rent housing
  shall be defined in such terms as the municipality shall deem to  be  in
  the  public  interest and consistent with the provisions and purposes of
  this chapter. In any such contract the  municipality  shall  retain  the
  right,  in  the  event  of  such a substantial breach or in the event of
  acquisition of title to the project by  a  third  party,  other  than  a
  government  authorized  to  engage  in  the  administration  of low rent
  housing, and approved by the municipality, in  any  manner  including  a
  bona  fide  foreclosure  under  a mortgage or other lien held by a third
  party, to increase the interest payable thereafter on the unpaid balance
  of any loan made pursuant to the contract, to a rate not  in  excess  of
  the  going rate of interest (at the time of such breach or acquisition),
  plus two per centum per annum or to declare any such unpaid balance  due
  forthwith  and  to  reduce  or  terminate any periodic subsidies payable
  under the contract.




   §  99. Municipal services.  In connection with projects located within
  its  respective  territorial  boundaries,  a  municipality,   a   school
  district,  a  fire  alarm  district,  a fire district, a fire protection
  district, or an improvement district  may,  upon  such  terms,  with  or
  without   consideration,   as   the   local  legislative  body  of  such
  municipality or the governing body of such district may deem  advisable,
  render  or  contract to render services to an authority, housing company
  or a government, or provide  and  maintain  parks,  sewerage,  or  other
  facilities  adjacent  to or in connection with a project. A municipality
  or a district hereinabove described  may  also  render  or  contract  to
  render  such  services and to provide such facilities in connection with
  projects located outside its respective territorial boundaries upon such
  terms and consideration as shall, in  the  determination  of  the  local
  legislative  body  of  such  municipality  or the governing body of such
  district, which  determination  shall  be  conclusive,  compensate  such
  municipality  or  district  for the cost of furnishing such services and
  facilities.  A  municipality  may  enter  into  an  agreement  with   an
  authority,  housing company or a government, upon such terms as it shall
  determine, with or without compensation, to open, pave,  install,  close
  or  change  the grade of streets, roads, roadways, alleys, sidewalks, or
  other places, to change the municipal map,  to  plan,  replan,  zone  or
  rezone  any section of the municipality. In connection with the exercise
  of this power a municipality may,  if  it  deems  advisable,  incur  the
  entire  expense  of  any  such  public  improvements  located within its
  territorial boundaries  without  assessment  against  abutting  property
  owners,  or  contract with an authority upon such terms, with or without
  consideration, as it may deem advisable, with respect to the exercise by
  the municipality or government of its powers  relating  to  the  repair,
  closing  or  demolition  of  unsafe, insanitary, or unfit dwellings, and
  with respect to aid and cooperation by the municipality or government in
  the planning, undertaking, construction or operation of projects.




   § 100. Jurisdiction and powers of municipality unimpaired.  Nothing in
  this  chapter  shall be construed to prevent or relieve the municipality
  from furnishing or supplying services  or  facilities  from  other  than
  housing  funds of a character or nature heretofore or formerly furnished
  or supplied by the municipality. The municipality may furnish and supply
  from other than housing funds  such  services  and  facilities  for  the
  tenants  of  a  project  of an authority as it furnishes and supplies to
  other residents of the municipality.




   §  101. Notwithstanding any local or special law or charter provision,
  a municipality shall, irrespective  of  the  boundaries  of  a  project,
  provide  for  the  tenants  of  such  project,  police,  fire and health
  protection services of the same character and  to  the  same  extent  as
  those provided for other residents of the municipality.




   §  102.  Authorization to make subsidies for the aid, care and support
  of the needy.  Notwithstanding the provisions of section ninety-four  of
  this  article,  a municipality is authorized to make or contract to make
  capital subsidies for the construction, reconstruction, development  and
  capital  improvement  of public housing to an authority operating within
  the territorial limits of such municipality, payable either with  moneys
  locally  appropriated  therefor  from  the  general  fund or other funds
  available for current expenses of such municipality or from the proceeds
  of borrowings or other moneys available from the capital fund  or  other
  funds available for capital improvements of such municipality.




   §  110.  Special city and village taxes. In order to obtain funds with
  which  to  make  capital  or  periodic  subsidies  pursuant  to  section
  ninety-four  a city or a village having a population of five thousand or
  more as determined by the last federal census may, and in order to incur
  indebtedness pursuant to any of  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  in
  excess of the limitations prescribed by any article of the constitution,
  other  than  article  eighteen, a city or such village shall levy one or
  more of the following taxes:
    (a) An excise tax on the sale of tickets of  admission  to  places  of
  public  exhibition,  amusement  or  entertainment for which a payment is
  exacted. Such tax shall not be in excess of  the  following  rates:  one
  cent  on  each admission charge not in excess of fifty cents per person,
  exclusive of all other taxes; two cents  on  each  admission  charge  in
  excess  of fifty cents, but not in excess of one dollar per person; five
  cents on each admission charge in excess  of  one  dollar,  but  not  in
  excess  of  two  dollars  per  person; ten cents on admission charges in
  excess of two dollars per person.
    (b) An excise tax on the possession of each telephone  connected  with
  any public telephone exchange now or hereafter installed on the premises
  of  subscribers for telephone service in any place other than a building
  or space owned or leased by any federal, state or  municipal  government
  or  public  authority. Such tax shall not be in excess of five cents per
  month for each such telephone and shall be imposed upon the  individual,
  copartnership  or  corporation  occupying  the  premises  in  which such
  telephone is installed. The local law imposing such  tax  shall  provide
  that   the  amount  of  the  tax  shall  be  paid  by  such  individual,
  copartnership or corporation occupying  such  premises,  to  the  public
  utility  operating such public telephone exchange, for and on account of
  the municipality and  such  public  utility  shall  be  liable  for  the
  collection  thereof;  such  public  utility shall have the same right in
  respect to collecting the  tax  from  the  occupant  or  in  respect  to
  non-payment of the tax by the occupant, as if the tax were a part of the
  service  charge  for  such  telephone  and  payable at the time such tax
  becomes due and owing.
    (c) An excise tax on occupancy. Such  tax  may  be  imposed  upon  any
  individual,  copartnership  or  corporation  occupying  premises in such
  municipality as the owner, tenant or concessionaire for residence or for
  any gainful purpose. Such tax shall be in an amount  of  not  more  than
  twelve dollars per year for each separate premises so occupied, the rate
  of  tax  to  depend  upon  the  size of such premises or upon such other
  reasonable standard as may be fixed by local law.  Such  local  law  may
  provide  that  any tax imposed upon a tenant and concessionaire shall be
  paid by such tenant and concessionaire to the owner for and  on  account
  of the municipality and the owner shall be liable for the collection and
  the  payment  thereof;  and  that the owner shall have the same right in
  respect to collecting the tax from such tenant or concessionaire, or  in
  respect to non-payment of the tax by the tenant or concessionaire, as if
  the  tax  were a part of the rent of the premises occupied and such rent
  were payable at the time such tax shall become due and owing.
    For the purposes of this subdivision the word  "premises"  shall  mean
  any real property, or any part thereof, any kind of space, or structure,
  except premises, as herein defined, which are located in, upon, above or
  under any public street, highway or public place, separately occupied by
  any  person for his own use for gainful purpose or by any concessionaire
  for such use for gainful purpose, whether by ownership, lease, sublease,
  profit-sharing arrangement or otherwise.
    (d)  An  excise  tax  on  the  sale  of  patent  medicines,  sold  for
  consumption within the territorial limits of such municipality. Such tax


 shall  not  be in excess of ten per centum of the purchase price of such
  patent medicines. The local law may provide that the amount of  the  tax
  shall  be  paid by the purchaser to the vendor for and on account of the
  municipality,  and the vendor shall be liable for the collection and the
  payment thereof; and the vendor shall have the same right in respect  to
  collecting  the  tax  from the purchaser or in respect to non-payment of
  the tax by the purchaser, as if the tax were  a  part  of  the  purchase
  price of the patent medicines, and payable at the time of the sale.
    (e)  (1)  An  excise  tax on the sale of tobacco other than cigarettes
  sold for consumption within the territorial limits of such municipality.
  Such tax shall not be in excess of ten per centum of the purchase  price
  of  such  tobacco.  The local law imposing such tax may provide that the
  amount of the tax shall be paid by the purchaser to the vendor  and  for
  and  on  account of the municipality, and the vendor shall be liable for
  the collection and the payment thereof. The vendor shall have  the  same
  right  in respect to collecting the tax from the purchaser or in respect
  to non-payment of the tax by the purchaser as if the tax were a part  of
  the purchase price of the tobacco, and payable at the time of the sale.
    (2)  Any  city  having  a  population  of one million or more imposing
  excise taxes on the sale of tobacco other than  cigarettes  pursuant  to
  paragraph  one  of  this  subdivision  is hereby authorized to adopt and
  amend  local  laws  to  administer,  collect  and  enforce  such  taxes,
  including  the  issuance of tax warrants in a manner consistent with the
  issuance of warrants pursuant to chapter thirteen of title eleven of the
  administrative code of the city of  New  York.  Such  enforcement  shall
  include but not be limited to the filing with the county clerk of a copy
  of  such  warrants,  the entry in the judgment docket of the information
  specified in section 11-1314 of the administrative code of the  city  of
  New  York,  and the creation of a lien upon the title to and interest in
  real and personal property of the person against  whom  the  warrant  is
  issued.
    (f)  An  excise  tax  on  the possession and operation of each vending
  machine now or hereafter installed in any place other than a building or
  space owned or leased by any federal, state or municipal  government  or
  public  authority.  Such  tax  shall not be in excess of fifty cents per
  month for each such machine and may  be  imposed  upon  the  individual,
  copartnership  or  corporation  occupying  the  premises  in  which such
  machine is installed. The local law imposing such tax may  provide  that
  the amount of the tax shall be paid by such individual, copartnership or
  corporation   occupying  such  premises  to  the  owner  or  distributor
  operating such vending machine for and on account  of  the  municipality
  and  such  owner  or operator shall be liable for the collection and the
  payment thereof; and the owner or operator shall have the same right  in
  respect  to  collecting  the  tax  from  the  occupant  or in respect to
  non-payment of the tax by the occupant, as if the tax were a part of the
  charge for such vending machine and payable at the time such tax becomes
  due and owing.
    For the purposes of this subdivision the words "vending machine"  mean
  a machine which vends automatically or sells tangible personal property.
    The  revenues  derived  from  the  levy  of  such  taxes shall be used
  exclusively and solely for the purpose or purposes for which such  taxes
  are levied.




   §  111. Review. (a) Any such tax may be reviewed by a proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules and any  local
  law or ordinance imposing any such tax or taxes shall include provisions
  making  such  review  available  upon  reasonable conditions including a
  requirement that application for review be made within thirty days after
  the determination of the amount of the tax or taxes, and that the amount
  of the tax or taxes, interest and penalties and security for  costs,  be
  first deposited.
    (b)  Any  city  having  a  population of one million or more is hereby
  authorized to adopt and amend local laws that provide for the review  of
  any  such  tax in the same manner as the review of the tax on cigarettes
  imposed by  such  city,  including  the  ability  to  seek  conciliation
  concerning  determinations  of such tax as well as review of such tax in
  the agency or tribunal  authorized  to  review  the  tax  on  cigarettes
  imposed by such city.




   §   112.   Disposition  of  proceeds  of  taxes.  Notwithstanding  the
  provisions of any  general,  special  or  local  law  to  the  contrary,
  revenues  heretofore or hereafter resulting from the imposition of taxes
  authorized by this article for either or both of the  purposes  referred
  to  in  section  one  hundred  ten of this article, other than the taxes
  described in subdivision  (e)  of  such  section  in  a  city  having  a
  population  of  one  million  or more, shall be deposited in the city or
  village treasury and credited to a separate account. During each  fiscal
  year  of  such  city  or  village, an amount not in excess of the amount
  included in the annual budget or estimate for such fiscal year  for  the
  purpose or purposes for which such taxes were levied shall be charged to
  such  account  and  credited  to  the  general fund for the reduction of
  taxation or into  the  general  or  other  fund  available  for  current
  expenses  of  such  city or village. No other payment shall be made from
  such an account or accounts. In  a  city  having  a  population  of  one
  million  or  more,  the revenues from the taxes described in subdivision
  (e) of section one hundred ten of this article shall be deposited in the
  general fund and a payment of an equal amount shall be made, in the same
  fiscal year or as  soon  as  practicable  thereafter  for  the  purposes
  described in such section.




   §  113. Exemptions.  1. No tax authorized by paragraphs (b), (c), (d),
  (e) and (f) of section  one  hundred  ten  shall  be  imposed  upon  the
  following, or upon any transaction with the following:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political  subdivision  of  the state where it is the purchaser, user or
  consumer;
    b. The United States of America, in  so  far  as  it  is  immune  from
  taxation;
    c.  The United Nations or other world-wide international organizations
  of which the United States of America is a member; and
    d. Any corporation, or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or  foundation,  organized  and  operated  exclusively  for   religious,
  charitable, or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children  or animals, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the
  benefit of any private shareholder or  individual,  and  no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not
  all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    2.  Nothing  in  subdivision one of this section shall exempt sales by
  any shop or store operated by any college, university or other public or
  private institution for higher education from  the  taxes  described  in
  paragraphs (d) and (e) of section one hundred ten.
    3.  The  following  shall  not  be  subject  to  the tax authorized by
  paragraph (a) of section one hundred ten:
    a. Except as provided in paragraph b hereof, any admissions all of the
  proceeds of which inure:
    (1) Exclusively to the benefit of
    (a) a church, a religious organization, or a convention or association
  of churches,
    (b) an educational institution which is described in  subdivision  six
  of  section  one  hundred one of the internal revenue code of the United
  States or which  is  an  educational  institution  of  a  government  or
  political subdivision thereof, if such organization normally maintains a
  regular faculty and curriculum and normally has a regular organized body
  of  pupils  or students in attendance at the place where its educational
  activities are regularly carried on,
    (c) a corporation, association,  or  any  community  chest,  fund,  or
  foundation  organized  and operated exclusively for charitable purposes,
  which is described in subdivision six of section one hundred one of  the
  internal revenue code of the United States,
    (d)  a  society  or  organization  conducted  for  the sole purpose of
  maintaining symphony orchestras  or  operas  and  receiving  substantial
  support from voluntary contributions.
    (e)  an organization (organized prior to October one, nineteen hundred
  fifty-one) which is described in subdivision six of section one  hundred
  one  of  the  internal  revenue  code  of the United States and which is
  operated for the purpose of conducting an annual Chautauqua  program  of
  educational, cultural, and religious activities at a permanent location,
  provided  in each case no part of the net earnings thereof inures to the
  benefit of any private stockholder or individual;
    (2) Exclusively to the benefit of national guard organizations,  posts
  or organizations of war veterans, or auxiliary units or societies of any
  such  posts  or  organizations,  if such posts, organizations, units, or


 societies are organized in this state, and  if  no  part  of  their  net
  earnings inures to the benefit of any private stockholder or individual;
  or
    (3)  Exclusively  to  the  benefit of a police or fire department of a
  political subdivision,  or  exclusively  to  a  retirement,  pension  or
  disability fund for the sole benefit of members of such a police or fire
  department or to a fund for the heirs of such members.
    b.  The exemption provided under paragraph a hereof shall not apply in
  the case of admissions to:
    (1) Any athletic game or exhibition unless the  proceeds  shall  inure
  exclusively  to the benefit of elementary or secondary schools or unless
  in the case of an athletic game  between  two  elementary  or  secondary
  schools,  the  entire  gross  proceeds from such game shall inure to the
  benefit of an organization described in paragraph (d) of subdivision one
  of this section;
    (2) Wrestling matches, prize fights,  or  boxing,  sparring  or  other
  pugilistic matches or exhibitions;
    (3)  Carnivals, rodeos or circuses in which any professional performer
  or operator participates for compensation; or
    (4) Any motion picture exhibition.
    c. Any admission to agricultural fairs if no part of the net  earnings
  thereof  inures  to  the  benefit  of any stockholders or members of the
  association conducting the same; provided  the  proceeds  therefrom  are
  used exclusively for the improvement, maintenance, and operation of such
  agricultural fairs.
    d.  Any  admissions to swimming pools, bathing beaches, skating rinks,
  or other places providing facilities for physical exercise  operated  by
  the  state or a political subdivision thereof or by the United States or
  any agency or instrumentality thereof; provided the  proceeds  therefrom
  inure  exclusively  to  the benefit of the state, political subdivision,
  United States, agency or instrumentality.
    e. Any admission to a home or garden which is temporarily open to  the
  general  public  as  a  part  of  a  program  conducted  by a society or
  organization to permit the inspection of historical homes  and  gardens;
  provided  no  part  of the net earnings thereof inures to the benefit of
  any private stockholder or individual.
    f. Any admission to historic sites, houses and  shrines,  and  museums
  conducted  in connection therewith, maintained and operated by a society
  or organization devoted to the  preservation  and  maintenance  of  such
  historic  sites,  houses,  shrines, and museums; provided no part of the
  net earnings thereof inures to the benefit of any private stockholder or
  individual.
    g. Any admissions to  concerts  conducted  by  a  civic  or  community
  membership  association if no part of the net earnings thereof inures to
  the benefit of any stockholders or members of such association.




   §  119.  Options  to  purchase property or awards.   A municipality or
  authority may at any time secure options in its own name or in the  name
  of  nominees  to  purchase property or any interest therein or awards in
  condemnation made or to be made therefor. No consideration need be given
  or paid  by  a  municipality  or  authority  to  the  person,  firm,  or
  corporation giving the option. The option granted to the municipality or
  authority to purchase such real property or award shall not be withdrawn
  or  cancelled  during  the period named therein.  Any such option may be
  extended by the optionor for a period or periods beyond the period named
  therein. The option shall be in such form that acceptance thereof by the
  municipality or authority within the time limited therein, or within any
  extended period, will create a binding contract for the sale of the real
  property or award described therein.




   § 120. Acquisition of real property.  Real property may be acquired by
  a municipality, by an authority or by a municipality for an authority by
  gift,  grant,  devise,  purchase,  condemnation  or  otherwise, and with
  respect to a municipal or state project, according to the provisions  of
  the  eminent  domain  procedure law. The provisions of this article with
  respect to condemnation of property by or for an authority shall prevail
  over the provisions of any other general, special or local law.




   §  121.  Acquisition  after project approved.  When a project has been
  approved, an authority may  purchase,  lease  or  condemn,  or  obligate
  itself  to  purchase,  lease  or  condemn,  real property for a project.
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of and in  addition  to  any  other
  powers  granted  under  this  chapter, where all the dwelling units in a
  building have been leased by an authority for occupancy  by  persons  or
  families  of  low  income  in  accordance with the provisions of section
  twenty-three of the  United  States  housing  act  of  nineteen  hundred
  thirty-seven,  as  amended,  the prior approval by the local legislative
  body of such leasing program shall constitute  all  necessary  approvals
  under  this  chapter  for an authority to exercise an option to purchase
  such real property.




   §  122.  Acquisition  by a government.   Real property acquired for an
  authority by a government subsequent to the approval of a project may be
  conveyed  by  such  government  to  the  authority   with   or   without
  consideration  and  upon  such  terms  as  may  be  agreed  upon by such
  government and the authority.




   §  123.  Acquisition  of  lands  for future use.   Notwithstanding any
  provision of law, an authority or a government may acquire by  purchase,
  gift, condemnation or otherwise, such property as it may deem ultimately
  necessary or proper to effectuate the purposes of this chapter or any of
  them  although temporarily not required for such purposes, provided that
  the  local  legislative  body  and  the  planning  commission,  if  any,
  authorize  such  acquisition.  The acquisition and use of property under
  this  section  shall  be  subject  to  the  planning  and  zoning  laws,
  ordinances  and  regulations applicable to the municipality in which the
  property is situated. Proceedings to  condemn  such  property  shall  be
  brought  by  the  authority or government in the same manner as for real
  property required for a project.




   §  124.  Grant  or  lease  of  property  by  a government to or for an
  authority.  In connection with projects located within  its  territorial
  boundaries,  a  government  may, notwithstanding any other provisions of
  law, upon such terms, with or without  consideration,  as  it  may  deem
  advisable, grant, convey or lease any of its property, whether held in a
  proprietary  or  governmental  capacity,  to an authority or government,
  including real property already devoted to a public use,  provided  that
  the  government  making  the grant or lease determines that the premises
  are no longer required for the public  use  to  which  the  property  is
  devoted  and  that  it  is to the interest of the government to grant or
  lease the property to the authority for the purposes  of  this  chapter.
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section to the contrary, if
  the  property  is  listed by the government as parkland in the office of
  the assessing authority of the government or such property  is  used  as
  active  or passive parkland or is parkland, then such property shall not
  be so granted, conveyed, leased or discontinued as parkland, without  an
  act  of the state legislature approving such grant, conveyance lease, or
  discontinuance. Notwithstanding any general, special or  local  law  and
  any limitation or prohibition which may be contained therein against the
  power of alienation, any grant, sale, conveyance or lease may be made by
  a government to an authority or government in connection with a project,
  without  appraisal,  public notice, advertisement or public bidding. The
  finding of the government having jurisdiction that the  property  is  no
  longer  required for the public purpose for which it is devoted and that
  it is to the best interest of the government involved to grant or  lease
  the property, shall be conclusive.




   §  125.  Proceedings  to  condemn.    1.  To  initiate  a condemnation
  proceeding, an authority may adopt a resolution describing the  property
  and  declaring  that  the  acquisition  of the property is in the public
  interest and necessary for the public use, and that the property  sought
  to  be  condemned is or will be required for a project. A certified copy
  of the authority's resolution shall be conclusive  evidence  as  to  the
  matters  contained therein in any condemnation proceeding to acquire the
  property, or any part thereof, described in such resolution.
    2. An authority may exercise the power of condemnation pursuant to the
  provisions of the eminent domain procedure law.
    3. An authority may petition the municipality to institute proceedings
  under any applicable general, special or local law, to acquire  property
  described  in  the  petition  which  the  authority  has certified to be
  necessary for a project. The resolution granting the petition shall  set
  forth  the  amount  to  be paid by the authority to the municipality for
  such property or in lieu thereof that the authority  shall  pay  to  the
  municipality  all  sums  expended  or  required  to  be  expended by the
  municipality in the acquisition thereof, and the  time  of  payment  and
  manner   of   securing   payment  thereof,  and  may  require  that  the
  municipality shall receive, before proceeding with  the  acquisition  of
  such  property,  such  assurances  as to payment or reimbursement by the
  authority or otherwise as the municipality may deem advisable.  Upon the
  passage  of  a  resolution  by  the  local  legislative  body   of   the
  municipality  granting  the  petition,  the  authority shall cause three
  copies of surveys or maps of the property described in the  petition  to
  be made, one of which shall be filed in the office of the authority, one
  in  the  office  of  the corporation counsel or chief law officer of the
  municipality, and one in the office in which instruments affecting  real
  property  in  the  county  are  recorded.  The  filing of such copies of
  surveys or maps shall be conclusive evidence of the  acceptance  by  the
  authority   of   the  terms  and  conditions  of  such  resolution.  The
  municipality may proceed under  the  eminent  domain  procedure  law  to
  acquire  title  to  such property. When title to the property shall have
  vested in the municipality, it shall convey the same  to  the  authority
  upon payment by the authority of the sums and the giving of the security
  required by the resolution granting the petition. As soon as title shall
  have   vested   in   the  municipality,  the  authority  may,  upon  the
  authorization of the mayor, enter upon the property taken, take over and
  dispose of existing improvements, and carry out the terms of the project
  with  respect  thereto.  Whenever  in   connection   with   condemnation
  proceedings,  requirement  is made in any applicable general, special or
  local law for the performance of an act by a department  or  officer  of
  the  municipality, it shall be regarded for the purposes of this section
  as compliance therewith if with the approval of the mayor  such  act  is
  performed by the authority or by persons specially designated by it.
    4.  In  any proceedings for the assessment of compensation and damages
  for property taken  or  to  be  taken  by  condemnation  by  or  for  an
  authority, the following provisions shall be applicable:
    (a)  Evidence  of  the price and other terms upon any sale or the rent
  received or reserved, whichever  is  less,  and  other  terms  upon  any
  option,  lease or tenancy relating to any of the property taken or to be
  taken or to any similar property in the vicinity when the  option,  sale
  or lease was given, occurred or the tenancy existed, within a reasonable
  time  of  the  trial,  shall be admissible on direct examination. At any
  stage of the proceeding, the court or tribunal may  require  such  prior
  notice to be given of an intention to introduce evidence as to the sale,
  option,  leasing or tenancy of property other than the property directly


 involved in the proceeding and of particulars relating thereto as it may
  deem necessary to prevent surprise.
    (b) The deposition of any person, whether or not a party, may be taken
  in  the  manner provided for any civil action and the provisions of this
  section. Such deposition may be taken upon any question or issue in  the
  proceeding, including the facts as to any sale, option, lease or tenancy
  admissible  in evidence pursuant to this subdivision. The deposition may
  be taken at the instance of the authority, the municipality  or  of  any
  owner  or at the direction of the court, at any time during the pendency
  of the action or proceeding. At least five days' notice, or  if  service
  is through the mails, at least eight days' notice, shall be given of the
  taking  of  the  testimony, if on the part of an owner, to the authority
  and to all other owners who have appeared in the proceeding; if  by  the
  authority  or  a  municipality,  to  all owners who have appeared in the
  proceeding.
    (c) Any time during the pendency of such  action  or  proceedings,  an
  authority,  municipality or an owner may apply to the court for an order
  directing an owner or the authority or the municipality, as the case may
  be, to show cause why further proceedings should not be  expedited,  and
  the  court  may  upon  such application make an order requiring that the
  hearings proceed and that any other steps be  taken  with  all  possible
  expedition.
    (d)  For the purposes of this article, the award of compensation shall
  not be increased by reason of any increase in the value of the  property
  caused  by  the  clearance,  reconstruction  or  proposed  clearance  or
  reconstruction for the purposes of this chapter of the  property  or  of
  the  area  in which the property is situated. No allowance shall be made
  for improvements begun on property after notice to  the  owner  of  such
  property of the institution of the proceedings to condemn such property.
    (e)  Evidence  shall be admissible bearing upon the insanitary, unsafe
  or substandard condition of the premises, or the illegal use thereof, or
  the enhancement of rentals from such illegal use, and such evidence  may
  be  considered  in  fixing  the compensation to be paid, notwithstanding
  that no steps to remedy or abate such conditions have been taken by  the
  department  or  officers having jurisdiction. If a violation order is on
  file against the premises in any such department,  it  shall  constitute
  prima facie evidence of the existence of the condition specified in such
  order.
    (f) If any of the property included within the project is devoted to a
  public  use,  it  may nevertheless be acquired provided that no property
  belonging to the municipality or  to  any  government  may  be  acquired
  without  its  consent,  and  no  property  belonging to a public utility
  corporation may be acquired without the approval of  the  commission  or
  other officer or tribunal having regulatory power over such corporation.
    (g)  Upon the trial, evidence of the price and other terms upon a sale
  or assignment or of a contract for the sale or assignment of a mortgage,
  award, proposed award, transfer of a tax lien  or  lien  of  a  judgment
  relating  to  property taken, shall be relevant, material and competent,
  upon the issue of value or damage and  shall  be  admissible  on  direct
  examination.
    (h)  Upon  the  trial  a  statement,  affidavit,  deposition,  report,
  transcript of testimony in an action or proceeding, or appraisal made or
  given by any owner or prior owner of  the  premises  taken,  or  by  any
  person  on  his behalf, to any court, governmental bureau, department or
  agency respecting the value of the property for tax purposes,  shall  be
  relevant,  material  and competent upon the issue of value or damage and
  shall be admissible on direct examination.


   (i) The term "owner", as used in this section, shall include a  person
  having an estate, interest or easement in the property to be acquired or
  a lien, charge or encumbrance thereon.




   §  126.  Condemnation  of  excess  property.    A  municipality  or an
  authority may take private property by condemnation for the  purpose  of
  providing  low  rent  housing  for  families  of  low income, or for the
  clearance, replanning, reconstruction and rehabilitation  of  areas,  or
  for  both  of  such  purposes, and for recreational and other facilities
  incidental or appurtenant thereto, but in excess of  that  required  for
  public  use  after  such  purposes  shall  have  been  accomplished.  An
  authority or municipality may improve and utilize such  excess  property
  wholly or partly for any other public purpose, or may lease or sell such
  excess property with restrictions to preserve and protect the project or
  projects.  Proceedings to acquire such excess property may be brought by
  the authority or municipality  in  the  same  manner  as  for  the  real
  property required for the project and may be included in the proceedings
  for the acquisition of real property required for the project.




   §  127.  Temporary  use  or occupation of property.   1. When title to
  property has vested in a municipality or an authority by purchase or  in
  condemnation  proceedings,  the municipality or the authority, whichever
  has acquired title, may pursuant to the provisions of the eminent domain
  procedure law, agree with the previous owners of such property,  or  any
  tenants  continuing  to  occupy  or use it, or any other persons who may
  occupy or use or seek to occupy or use such property
    2. In the  event  that  a  municipality  has  purchased  or  condemned
  property  on behalf or for the benefit of an authority, the municipality
  shall,  in  transferring  title  to  an  authority,  deduct   from   the
  consideration  or  other moneys which the authority has become obligated
  to pay the municipality for such  property,  and  credit  the  authority
  with,  the amounts received by the municipality as payment for temporary
  occupation and use of the property by a former owner,  tenant  or  other
  person  as  hereinabove set forth, less the cost and expense incurred by
  the municipality for the maintenance and operation of such property.
    3. In the event that a municipality has condemned property  on  behalf
  of  or  for  the  benefit  of  an  authority,  the  lien provided for in
  subdivision (c) of section three hundred  five  of  the  eminent  domain
  procedure law shall also inure to the benefit of such authority and such
  authority shall have all the powers, rights and remedies provided for in
  that  section  as  if such authority had directly acquired title to such
  property.




   §  128.  Filing  of  instruments assigning or pledging awards.  In the
  case of the pledge, sale, transfer or assignment  of  an  award  by  the
  person entitled to receive the same by virtue of the final decree of the
  court  in a condemnation proceeding, or by other order of the court, the
  instrument  evidencing  such  pledge,  sale,  transfer  or   assignment,
  acknowledged or proved as instruments are required to be acknowledged or
  proved  for  the recording of instruments affecting real property, shall
  be filed in the office of the secretary  of  the  authority,  who  shall
  endorse  on such instrument its number and the hour, day, month and year
  of its receipt. If such final decree or other order was obtained by  the
  municipality  on  behalf  of  or  for  the  benefit  of the authority, a
  duplicate original of such instrument must also be filed  in  accordance
  with  the  provisions of any general, special or local law applicable to
  awards payable by such municipality. If an assignment of an award  shall
  be   contained  in  an  instrument  recorded  in  the  office  in  which
  instruments affecting real property are by law required to be  recorded,
  a  certified copy thereof may be filed in the office of the secretary of
  the authority in place of the original. An alphabetical index  shall  be
  kept  under  the  name  of the pledgor or assignor and of the pledgee or
  assignee, stating the title of the proceeding, the time of the filing of
  the instrument, the file number thereof, and what part of the  award  is
  assigned  thereby.  A  memorandum  of  the file number of the instrument
  shall be made by the secretary of the authority on the duplicate  decree
  of a court, opposite the place where the amount of the award so assigned
  is  set  forth.  Every  such  instrument  not  so filed shall be void as
  against any subsequent pledgee or assignee  in  good  faith  and  for  a
  valuable  consideration  from  the  same pledgor or assignor, his heirs,
  administrators or assigns, of the same award or any portion thereof, the
  assignment of which is first duly filed in the office of  the  secretary
  of  the  authority.  Payment  to  the  assignee  or  pledgee shown to be
  entitled to the award by such record in the office of the  secretary  of
  the  authority  shall  protect the authority from liability to any other
  person or persons.




   §  150.  Approval  of plan and projects.  1. The prior approval of the
  local legislative body and of the planning commission, if  any,  in  the
  manner hereinafter provided in subdivision two of this section, shall be
  requisite  to  the  final  adoption  or  approval  by  an  authority  or
  municipality of a plan or project. Where a master plan exists such  plan
  shall  conform  to  such  master plan, except as such master plan may be
  changed pursuant to the procedure prescribed by law.  Where  changes  in
  the city map and zoning amendments or variances are necessitated by such
  master  plan,  or  in  furtherance of such master plan, such amendments,
  variances and changes shall be  submitted  together  with  the  plan  or
  project herein and considered as part thereof.
    2.  Every  plan  or  project  proposed by an authority or municipality
  shall be submitted by the authority or the municipality to the  planning
  commission,  if  any,  for  approval.  The  planning commission, after a
  public hearing, notice of which shall be published  at  least  ten  days
  prior  thereto  in  the  official publication of the municipality, or if
  none exists, in a newspaper circulating in the municipality,  and  after
  considering the plan or project, may:
    a. Issue a report of unqualified approval; or
    b. Issue a report of conditional or qualified approval; or
    c. Issue a report disapproving thereof.
    The   plan   or  project  shall  be  submitted  by  the  authority  or
  municipality, together with the report of the  planning  commission,  to
  the  local legislative body for its approval. If the planning commission
  shall have issued a report of unqualified approval, the plan or  project
  may be approved in accordance with the report of the planning commission
  by  a  majority  vote  of  the  local  legislative body. If the planning
  commission shall have issued a report  disapproving  thereof,  or  shall
  have issued a report of conditional or qualified approval, or shall have
  failed to make its report within six weeks of the submission of the plan
  or  project by the authority or municipality to the planning commission,
  the local legislative  body  may,  nevertheless,  approve  the  plan  or
  project  but  only  by  a  three-fourths vote. Notwithstanding any other
  provision of law,  changes  in  the  city  map,  zoning  amendments,  or
  variances  contained  in  the plan shall be deemed approved by the local
  legislative body when it approves the plan or project. Any such  changes
  in  the city map, zoning amendments, or variances shall become effective
  on the date on which the authority shall  file  a  resolution  with  the
  local legislative body in implementation thereof.




   §  151.  Authority  construction contracts, cancellation of contracts,
  disqualification to contract with authority, statement of  non-collusion
  in  bids  or  proposals.    1. Contracts of an authority for demolition,
  excavation, construction, alteration,  renovation  or  for  purchase  of
  materials or supplies shall be in such form and contain such combination
  of  work  or  trades  and  such  terms  and  provisions as may be deemed
  advisable by the authority. All such contracts, except contracts for the
  purchase of materials or supplies, in excess of fifty  thousand  dollars
  shall  be  made  on  sealed  bids,  in  compliance  with a public notice
  advertised at least once, not less than twenty days before the date  set
  for   the   receipt   of  bids,  in  the  official  publication  of  the
  municipality, or if none exists,  in  a  newspaper  circulating  in  the
  municipality. With respect to contracts for the purchase of materials or
  supplies  in  excess  of  twenty-five  thousand  dollars,  the period of
  advertisement shall be not less than ten days before the  date  set  for
  the receipt of bids. If the authority shall deem it to its best interest
  or  necessary or desirable to effectuate the purposes of this chapter or
  the economy and efficiency in construction and operation of  a  project,
  the authority by majority vote of its members may either reject all bids
  or readvertise for bids or by unanimous vote of its members may accept a
  bid  other  than  the  lowest  bid.  In  any  such contract there may be
  inserted in the discretion of the authority, a provision that additional
  work may be done or materials and supplies furnished  or  that  work  or
  materials  may be omitted for the purpose of completing such contract in
  accordance  with  any   changes,   omissions   or   additions   in   the
  specifications of any such contract. Each contract shall provide that in
  the  case of default by the contractor the authority may adopt on behalf
  of the authority all subcontracts made by such contractor and  all  such
  subcontractors  shall  be  bound  by  such  adoption  if  made,  and the
  authority may relet, with or  without  public  advertisement,  the  work
  specified  in  the  original  contract,  exclusive of so much thereof as
  shall be provided in any subcontracts so adopted. An authority may  make
  rules  and  regulations  governing  the  qualifications  of bidders, the
  submission of combined bids by two or more contractors,  the  award  and
  execution   of  the  contract,  security,  if  any,  for  execution  and
  performance of the contract, and  any  other  matters  relating  to  the
  contract.  The  bidding  may  be  restricted  to  those  who  shall have
  qualified prior to the receipt of bids according to standards  fixed  by
  the  authority,  provided  that  notice or notices for the submission of
  qualifications shall be published in the  official  publication  of  the
  municipality,  or  if  none  exists,  in  a newspaper circulating in the
  municipality, at least once, not less than ten days prior  to  the  date
  fixed  for  the filing of qualifications.  Nothing in this section shall
  be construed to limit the power of the authority to carry out a  project
  or  any part thereof directly by the officers, agencies and employees of
  the authority, or by any government, or to purchase or acquire materials
  or supplies through the purchasing officer, department or  agency  of  a
  government.
    2.  A  clause  shall  be  inserted  in all specifications or contracts
  hereafter made or awarded by any municipal housing authority or  by  any
  official  of  any  municipal  housing  authority,  for  work or services
  performed or to be performed or goods sold or to  be  sold,  to  provide
  that  upon  the refusal by a person who directly or indirectly derives a
  monetary benefit which is traceable to such a specification or contract,
  when called before a grand jury to testify concerning any transaction or
  contract had with the state or of any political subdivision  thereof,  a
  public  authority,  a  municipal  housing  authority  or with any public
  department, agency  or  official  of  the  state  or  of  any  political


 subdivision thereof or of any public authority or of a municipal housing
  authority  or  subcontract  thereunder,  to  sign  a  waiver of immunity
  against subsequent  criminal  prosecution  or  to  answer  any  relevant
  question concerning such transaction, contract or subcontract.
    (a)  Such  person and any firm, partnership or corporation of which he
  is a member, partner, director or officer, shall  be  disqualified  from
  thereafter  selling to or submitting bids to or receiving awards from or
  entering into any contracts with  any  municipal  housing  authority  or
  official  thereof or any subcontract thereunder, or sub-contracting with
  any person, firm, partnership or corporation who or  which  has  entered
  into  any  such  contract  or contracts, in relation to such contract or
  contracts, for goods, work or services, for a period of five years after
  such refusal. No person, firm, partnership or corporation who  or  which
  has  entered  into  any  contract  or  contracts  with the state, or any
  political subdivision thereof, a public authority, a  municipal  housing
  authority,  or  with  any  public  department, agency or official of the
  state or any political subdivision thereof or of any  public  authority,
  or  of a municipal housing authority, for goods, work or services, shall
  enter into a sub-contract thereon with any person, firm  or  corporation
  which  is disqualified to contract as provided herein. Such clause shall
  also provide that
    (b) Any and all contracts made with any municipal housing authority or
  official thereof or any subcontract thereunder, since the effective date
  of this law, by such person and by any firm, partnership or  corporation
  of  which  he is a member, partner, director or officer may be cancelled
  or terminated by the municipal housing authority without  incurring  any
  penalty  or  damages on account of such cancellation or termination, but
  any monies owing by the municipal housing authority or by  a  contractor
  or  subcontractor  thereunder  for goods delivered or work done prior to
  the cancellation or termination shall be paid.
    3. (a) Any person who, when called before  a  grand  jury  to  testify
  concerning any transaction or contract had with the state, any political
  subdivision  thereof,  a public authority, a municipal housing authority
  or with a public department, agency or official of the state or  of  any
  political subdivision thereof or of a public authority or of a municipal
  housing  authority,  refuses  to  sign  a  waiver  of  immunity  against
  subsequent criminal prosecution  or  to  answer  any  relevant  question
  concerning  such  transaction  or contract, and any firm, partnership or
  corporation of which he is a member, partner, director or officer  shall
  be  disqualified  from  thereafter  selling  to or submitting bids to or
  receiving awards from or entering into any contracts with any  municipal
  housing  authority  or  any  official of any municipal housing authority
  created by the state or any political  subdivision,  or  sub-contracting
  with  any  person,  firm,  partnership  or  corporation who or which has
  entered into any  such  contract  or  contracts,  in  relation  to  such
  contract or contracts, for goods, work or services, for a period of five
  years  after  such  refusal or until a disqualification shall be removed
  pursuant  to  the  applicable  provisions  of  law.  No  person,   firm,
  partnership or corporation who or which has entered into any contract or
  contracts with the state, or any political subdivision thereof, a public
  authority, a municipal housing authority, or with any public department,
  agency  or official of the state or any political subdivision thereof or
  of any public authority, or of a municipal housing authority, for goods,
  work or services, shall enter  into  a  sub-contract  thereon  with  any
  person,  firm  or  corporation  which  is  disqualified  to  contract as
  provided herein.
    (b) It shall be the duty of the officer conducting  the  investigation
  before  the grand jury before which the refusal occurs to send notice of


 such refusal, together with  the  names  of  any  firm,  partnership  or
  corporation  of  which  the  person so refusing is known to be a member,
  partner, officer or director, to the superintendent of public  works  of
  the  state  of  New  York  and the appropriate departments, agencies and
  officials  of  the  state,  political  subdivisions  thereof  or  public
  authorities  with  whom the person so refusing and any firm, partnership
  or corporation of which he is a member, partner, director or officer, is
  known to have a contract.
    4. (a) Any firm, partnership or corporation which has  become  subject
  to  the  cancellation  or  termination  of  a contract or subcontract or
  disqualification to contract or subcontract on account of the refusal of
  a member, partner, director or officer thereof to  waive  immunity  when
  called  to  testify,  as  provided in subdivisions two and three of this
  section, may, upon ten days' notice to the attorney general and  to  the
  officer  who  conducted the investigation before the grand jury in which
  the refusal occurred, make an application  at  a  special  term  of  the
  supreme  court  held  within  the judicial district in which the refusal
  occurred  for  an  order  discontinuing   the   disqualification.   Such
  application  shall  be  in the form of a petition setting forth grounds,
  including that the cooperation by petitioner with the grand jury at  the
  time  of  the refusal was such, and the amount and degree of control and
  financial interest, if any, in  the  petitioning  firm,  partnership  or
  corporation  by  the member, partner, officer or director who refused to
  waive immunity is such that it will not be in  the  public  interest  to
  cancel  or  terminate  petitioner's  contracts  or  subcontracts  or  to
  continue the disqualification, as provided in subdivisions two and three
  of this section.
    A copy of the petition and accompanying papers shall  be  served  with
  the notices to be given pursuant to this subdivision.
    (b)  Upon  the  filing  of  such  petition  the  court  may stay as to
  petitioner, pending a decision upon the petition,  the  cancellation  or
  termination of any contracts or subcontracts resulting from such refusal
  upon such terms as to notice or otherwise as may be just.
    (c)  At  least  two  days  prior  to  the  return day, the officer who
  conducted the investigation before  the  grand  jury  and  the  attorney
  general  may  file  answers  to  the  petition  or  apply  for  an order
  dismissing the petition as a matter of law. On or before the return  day
  the petitioner may file a reply to the answer.
    (d)  Upon  the  return day the court may, upon the petition and answer
  and other papers filed, forthwith render such final order  as  the  case
  requires,  or  if  a  triable  issue  of  fact  is duly raised, it shall
  forthwith be tried before a court sitting without a  jury  or  before  a
  referee.  The  provisions  of statute or rule governing references in an
  action shall apply to a reference under this subdivision.
    (e) The court shall render a final order dismissing  the  petition  on
  the  merits  or  discontinuing the disqualification upon the ground that
  the public interest would be served by its discontinuance, and  granting
  such  other relief as to the cancellation or termination of contracts or
  subcontracts as may be appropriate, but without costs to petitioner.
    5. (a) Every bid or proposal hereafter made  to  a  municipal  housing
  authority  where  competitive  bidding  is  required by statute, rule or
  regulation, for work or services performed or to be performed  or  goods
  sold  or  to be sold shall contain the following statement subscribed by
  the bidder and affirmed by such bidder as true under  the  penalties  of
  perjury: Non-collusive bidding certification.
    (1)  By submission of this bid, each bidder and each person signing on
  behalf of any bidder certifies, and in the case  of  a  joint  bid  each


 party  thereto  certifies  as  to its own organization, under penalty of
  perjury, that to the best of his knowledge and belief:
    (i)  The prices in this bid have been arrived at independently without
  collusion, consultation, communication, or agreement, for the purpose of
  restricting competition, as to any matter relating to such  prices  with
  any other bidder or with any competitor;
    (ii)  Unless  otherwise  required  by  law, the prices which have been
  quoted in this bid have not been knowingly disclosed by the  bidder  and
  will not knowingly be disclosed by the bidder prior to opening, directly
  or indirectly, to any other bidder or to any competitor; and
    (iii) No attempt has been made or will be made by the bidder to induce
  any  other person, partnership or corporation to submit or not to submit
  a bid for the purpose of restricting competition.
    (2) A bid shall not be considered for award nor  shall  any  award  be
  made  where  (1)  (i)  (ii) and (iii) above have not been complied with;
  provided however, that if  in  any  case  the  bidder  cannot  make  the
  foregoing  certification,  the  bidder  shall so state and shall furnish
  with the bid a signed statement which sets forth in detail  the  reasons
  therefor.  Where  (1)  (i)  (ii)  and (iii) above have not been complied
  with, the bid shall not be considered for award nor shall any  award  be
  made  unless  the  municipal  housing authority to which the bid is made
  determines that  such  disclosure  was  not  made  for  the  purpose  of
  restricting competition.
    The  fact  that  a  bidder  (a)  has  published price lists, rates, or
  tariffs covering items being  procured,  (b)  has  informed  prospective
  customers  of  proposed  or  pending publication of new or revised price
  lists for such items, or (c) has sold the same items to other  customers
  at  the  same  prices  being  bid,  does not constitute, without more, a
  disclosure within the meaning of paragraph (a) of this subdivision.
    (b) Any bid hereafter made to any municipal  housing  authority  by  a
  corporate  bidder  for  work or services performed or to be performed or
  goods sold or to be sold,  where  competitive  bidding  is  required  by
  statute, rule, regulation, or local law, and where such bid contains the
  certification referred to in paragraph (a) of this subdivision, shall be
  deemed  to have been authorized by the board of directors of the bidder,
  and such authorization shall  be  deemed  to  include  the  signing  and
  submission of the bid and the inclusion therein of the certificate as to
  non-collusion as the act and deed of the corporation.
    6.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions of any other law to the contrary,
  all contracts for public work awarded pursuant  to  this  section  by  a
  municipal housing authority created under article thirteen of the public
  housing  law  shall  be in accordance with sections one hundred six, one
  hundred six-a and one hundred six-b of the general municipal law.




   §  151-a.  Separate  specifications  for  certain subdivisions of work
  involved in the construction or alteration of buildings as a part of  or
  in connection with housing projects. 1. Notwithstanding any inconsistent
  provision  of  this  chapter or any other general, special or local law,
  except as otherwise provided in section two hundred  twenty-two  of  the
  labor  law,  any  authority  or  municipality,  or  any  officer, board,
  department, commission or other agency thereof charged with the duty  of
  preparing   specifications   or  awarding  or  entering  into  contracts
  involving the erection, construction, reconstruction  or  alteration  of
  any  building or other appurtenance as a part of or in connection with a
  project or any part thereof in any part of the state under  or  pursuant
  to  the  authority  of  this  chapter, when the entire cost of such work
  shall exceed three million dollars in the counties of the Bronx,  Kings,
  New  York,  Queens,  and  Richmond;  one  million  five hundred thousand
  dollars in the counties of Nassau, Suffolk  and  Westchester;  and  five
  hundred  thousand  dollars  in all other counties within the state, must
  have  prepared  separate  specifications   for   the   following   three
  subdivisions of the work to be performed:
    a. Plumbing and gas fitting;
    b.  Steam heating, hot water heating, ventilating and air conditioning
  apparatus; and
    c. Electric wiring and standard illuminating fixtures.
    2. Such specifications must be so drawn  as  to  permit  separate  and
  independent  bidding  upon each of the above three subdivisions of work.
  All contracts hereafter awarded by any such authority  or  municipality,
  or  any  officer, board, department, commission or other agency thereof,
  involving the erection, construction, reconstruction  or  alteration  of
  any  building  as  a  part of or in connection with any project under or
  pursuant to this chapter, shall award  the  three  subdivisions  of  the
  above  specified  work  separately  to responsible and reliable persons,
  firms or corporations engaged in such classes of work.
    2-a. Each bidder on a public work contract, where the  preparation  of
  separate  specifications  is  not  required, shall submit with its bid a
  separate sealed list that names each subcontractor that the bidder  will
  use  to  perform  work on the contract, and the agreed-upon amount to be
  paid to each, for: a. plumbing and gas fitting, b.  steam  heating,  hot
  water  heating,  ventilating  and  air  conditioning  apparatus  and  c.
  electric wiring and standard illuminating fixtures. After the low bid is
  announced, the sealed list of subcontractors submitted with such low bid
  shall be opened and the names of such subcontractors shall be announced,
  and thereafter any change of subcontractor or agreed-upon amount  to  be
  paid  to  each  shall  require  the approval of the public owner, upon a
  showing presented to the public owner of  legitimate  construction  need
  for  such  change,  which shall be open to public inspection. Legitimate
  construction need shall include, but not be  limited  to,  a  change  in
  project  specifications,  a  change  in  construction  material costs, a
  change to subcontractor status as determined pursuant to  paragraph  (e)
  of  subdivision  two of section two hundred twenty-two of the labor law,
  or  the  subcontractor  has  become  otherwise  unwilling,   unable   or
  unavailable   to   perform   the   subcontract.   The  sealed  lists  of
  subcontractors submitted by all other bidders shall be returned to  them
  unopened after the contract award.
    3.  Nothing  in  this  section  shall be construed to prevent any such
  authority or municipality in charge of any such project from  performing
  any such branches of work by or through their regular employees.




   §  152.  Labor requirements.   All contracts of an authority involving
  the employment, among others, of laborers, workmen or mechanics shall be
  in conformity with the provisions of article eight of the labor law, and
  such provisions shall be deemed terms of all such contracts; and for the
  purpose of obtaining the prevailing rate  of  wages  or  fees  for  such
  contracts,  the  authority  shall  proceed  in  the  same  manner as the
  municipality  in  which  the  authority  operates.  All  such  contracts
  involving  the  employment,  among  others,  of architects, draftsmen or
  technicians, whether or not working on the site of  the  project,  shall
  contain  a  provision requiring that the wages or fees prevailing in the
  municipality  shall  be  paid  to   such   architects,   draftsmen   and
  technicians;  and  for  the  purpose of obtaining the prevailing rate of
  wages or fees, the authority shall proceed in the  same  manner  as  the
  municipality  proceeds in obtaining the prevailing rate of wages or fees
  for laborers, workmen and mechanics; and the industrial commissioner  of
  the  state  or  the  municipal  comptroller,  as  the case may be, shall
  determine such prevailing rates of wages or fees upon application of  an
  authority  in  the same manner as provided by article eight of the labor
  law for laborers, workmen and mechanics. Employees  of  all  contractors
  and  subcontractors  employed under or by virtue of such contracts shall
  have  the  right  to  organize  and  to  bargain  collectively   through
  representatives of their own choosing.




   § 153. Relocation of displaced tenants.  1. (a) Authorities shall have
  the  power to assist in relocating in suitable accommodations at rentals
  within their means families of low income  who  have  been  or  will  be
  deprived  of dwellings within areas or buildings which have been or will
  be cleared or demolished. In connection with any project, the  authority
  shall  maintain  or  provide  for  the  maintenance  of tenant placement
  service in which there shall be recorded lists  of  untenanted  suitable
  dwellings  available  to  families  of low income and shall furnish such
  information to such families. Authorities shall from time to  time  make
  studies  and  surveys  of dwelling units which may become unoccupied and
  available to families of low income and  shall  also  make  arrangements
  with  owners and lessors of such dwellings for registration thereof with
  the tenant placement service.
    (b) In connection with any state or municipal  project,  an  authority
  may  pay  so  much  of  the necessary cost of removal of families of low
  income, and  of  business  or  commercial  tenants,  from  the  area  or
  buildings  to  be cleared for the development of the project to suitable
  locations in such cases and in such amounts as may be  approved  by  the
  commissioner in the case of a state project or municipality in case of a
  municipal project, but, except as otherwise provided by law, in no event
  more  than  four  hundred  dollars  for  any family, nor more than three
  thousand dollars for any business or commercial tenant. Removal costs so
  paid by an authority shall be included in the project cost.
    (c) In connection with the development  of  any  federal  project,  an
  authority   may   contract  with  the  federal  government  and  with  a
  municipality to accept and distribute  relocation  payments  as  may  be
  agreed upon.
    2.  Any person or family residing in an area or building to be cleared
  or demolished by an authority or municipality  in  connection  with  the
  development  of  a  project  under  this  chapter  may  be admitted to a
  dwelling in any project of the authority or municipality if the probable
  aggregate annual income of such person or family  does  not  exceed  the
  income  limit  for  continued  occupancy established by the authority or
  municipality for  the  dwelling  to  which  such  person  or  family  is
  admitted.
    3.  Until  July  first  nineteen hundred seventy whenever an agency as
  defined in subdivision five of section five hundred two of  the  general
  municipal  law undertakes the clearance, rehabilitation, conservation or
  renewal of an area, or  an  authority  or  municipality  undertakes  the
  clearance,   replanning,   re-construction   or   rehabilitation   of  a
  substandard or insanitary area in connection with a project  as  defined
  in  this  chapter,  and if the commissioner determines in the case of an
  urban renewal project financially assisted by the state as  provided  in
  sections  five  hundred eight, five hundred nine and five hundred ten of
  the general municipal law or in the case of a state project  as  defined
  in  this  chapter  that  the area of such a project is one to which this
  subdivision shall apply, and an authority  or  municipality  finds  that
  there are not available suitable dwellings for the relocation of persons
  or  families  of low income who will be deprived of dwellings within the
  area of such a project, such authority or  municipality  may,  with  the
  approval  of  the  commissioner  in the case of state projects, relocate
  such persons or families by admission to a dwelling in  any  project  of
  the authority or municipality. The income of a family relocated pursuant
  to this subdivision shall not be subject to the limitation prescribed in
  subdivision  one  (a)  of section one hundred fifty-six of this chapter.
  Notwithstanding any general, special or local law, each person or family
  admitted to a project pursuant to this subdivision shall be required  to
  move from such project within one year from the date of admission unless


 the  income  of the family is within the limits prescribed for continued
  occupancy in the project  and,  in  the  opinion  of  the  authority  or
  municipality,  the removal of the family from the project would occasion
  undue hardship.




   § 154. Control of rentals on authority projects.  Subject to the terms
  of  any  loan  or  subsidy  contract with a government, the power to fix
  rents on a project  shall  rest  exclusively  with  the  authority.  But
  nothing  in this chapter shall prevent an authority or municipality from
  establishing, in  addition  to  all  other  operation  and  depreciation
  reserve  funds,  a reserve fund, or funds which may be applied in aid of
  the construction, operation or maintenance of  other  projects  of  such
  authority or municipality.




   §  155.  Compliance  with state and local laws.  All projects shall be
  subject to the planning, zoning, sanitary and building laws,  ordinances
  and  regulations  applicable in the municipality in which the project is
  situated. Zoning  regulations  or  other  restrictions  enacted  by  the
  municipality  to  adequately  protect the area or areas of a project, as
  such area or areas are shown on an approved zoning map of  such  project
  filed  with  the  municipal  officer  charged with enforcing such zoning
  regulations  or  other  restrictions,  shall  thereafter  be  maintained
  without variance unless written notice of any proposed change, amendment
  or  variance  be  given  by  the  municipality  to the housing authority
  erecting  or  owning  such  project  and  to  the  government  providing
  financial  aid  or  assistance to the project at least ten days prior to
  the date of any public hearing at which such proposed change,  amendment
  or variance is to be considered.




   §  156.  Selection  of  tenants.  Subject  to the terms of any loan or
  subsidy contract with a government, an authority shall have the power to
  select  tenants  for  its  projects.  It  shall  observe  the  following
  standards with respect thereto:
    1.  The  dwellings  in  the  project  shall be available solely a. for
  persons or families of low income whose probable aggregate annual income
  during the period of occupancy does not  exceed  six  times  the  rental
  (including  the  value or cost to them of heat, light, water and cooking
  fuel) of the dwellings to be furnished such persons or families,  except
  that  in  the  case of persons or families with four or more dependents,
  such ratio shall not exceed seven to one; in calculating annual  income,
  social  security  payments and income received from pension funds by any
  person sixty-two years of age or more shall be excluded up  to  a  total
  maximum amount of seventy-five dollars per month;
    b. also for persons or surviving spouses of persons who
    (1)  have served in the armed forces of the United States for a period
  of at least six months (or any shorter period which  terminated  due  to
  death  or injury incurred in such service), provided some portion of the
  period of service was between the first of  November,  nineteen  hundred
  fifty-five to the seventh day of May, nineteen hundred seventy-five, and
    (2)  (i)  have  been thereafter discharged or released therefrom under
  conditions other than dishonorable, or (ii) have a qualifying condition,
  as defined in section one  of  the  veterans'  services  law,  and  have
  received  a  discharge  other than bad conduct or dishonorable from such
  service, or (iii) are discharged LGBT veterans, as  defined  in  section
  one  of  the veterans' services law, and have received a discharge other
  than bad conduct or dishonorable from such service, or (iv) died in such
  service, not more than five years prior to the time of  application  for
  admission to such project, and
    (3)  whose  probable  aggregate  annual  income  during  the period of
  occupancy does not exceed seven times the rental (including the value or
  cost to them of heat, light, water and cooking fuel) of the dwellings to
  be furnished such persons or  families,  except  that  in  the  case  of
  persons  or  families with four or more dependents, such ratio shall not
  exceed eight to one.
    The "probable aggregate annual income" means the annual income of  the
  chief  wage  earner of the family plus all other income of other members
  of the family over the age of twenty-one years, plus a proportion of the
  income of members under the age of twenty-one years to be determined  by
  the  authority  solely  for  the purpose of establishing rent to be paid
  except that the authority may exclude a  proportion  of  the  income  of
  other  members  of  the  family over the age of twenty-one years for the
  purpose of determining eligibility for admission or continued occupancy,
  or for establishing rental of such family, or  for  all  such  purposes,
  subject to approval by the commissioner with respect to state projects.
    2.  The  authority  may rent or lease to a person or family a dwelling
  unit, or to a duly  authorized  agency,  as  defined  in  section  three
  hundred  seventy-one  of  the  social services law, for the operation of
  agency boarding homes or group homes  or  to  a  non-profit  corporation
  organized  under the membership corporations law or to any public agency
  as defined in section four hundred sixty-one of  the  general  municipal
  law  which  provides  residences  and  social services to dependent aged
  persons or to a social services  official  for  any  purpose  authorized
  under the social services law and for which the social services official
  has  authority  to  rent  or  lease dwelling units, one or more dwelling
  units, consisting of a room or number of rooms, but  no  greater  number
  than  it  deems necessary to provide safe and sanitary accommodations to
  the proposed occupants thereof, without overcrowding.


   3. In the event that the income of the family residing  in  a  project
  increases  and  the  ratio to the rental of the dwelling becomes greater
  than prescribed by law at the time of their admission or in  subdivision
  one  of  this  section, whichever is greater, and the income is not more
  than  fifty  per  centum  above  the  family  income  so  prescribed for
  admission to the dwelling and such  increased  income  continues  for  a
  period  of  three months or more, the authority may permit the tenant to
  continue to occupy his dwelling provided the authority is convinced that
  the tenant  cannot  secure  safe  and  sanitary  dwelling  from  private
  enterprise  or  by  reason of other facts the removal of the family from
  the project would occasion other undue hardship to the family.  However,
  the  rent of such family shall be increased in proportion to its ability
  to pay more, the amount of increase to be ruled upon and  prescribed  by
  the authority for such cases.
    4.  In  the  event  that  the ratio of the income of the family to the
  rental of the dwelling becomes greater than that prescribed  by  law  at
  the  time  of  their  admission  or  in subdivision one of this section,
  whichever is greater, and is more than fifty per centum above the family
  income so prescribed for admission to the dwelling and continues  for  a
  period  of  three  months,  the  authority  shall require such family to
  remove from the dwelling and may  take  such  steps,  including  summary
  proceedings,  as  are  necessary  to effect the removal of the family. A
  three  months'  period  shall  be  given  the   family   to   find   new
  accommodations.  Pending  removal  from  the  dwelling, the rent of such
  family shall be increased in proportion to its ability to pay more,  the
  amount  of increase to be ruled upon and prescribed by the authority for
  such cases.
    5. Notwithstanding  the  foregoing  provisions  of  this  section,  an
  authority  may  establish  income limits for continued occupancy for any
  project aided by periodic cash subsidies, exceeding the limits otherwise
  authorized under this section but not in excess of  the  highest  income
  limits  approved  by  the  commissioner  for  any  state  project in the
  municipality. The provisions of this subdivision are intended solely for
  the purpose of determining  eligibility  and  not  for  the  purpose  of
  determining rent to be paid.
    6.  Notwithstanding  any  provisions to the contrary contained in this
  chapter, if an authority determines that any person  or  family  of  low
  income residing in any project of the authority whose income exceeds the
  limits  for  continued  occupancy  is  unable  to  find decent, safe and
  sanitary  housing  within  its  financial  reach  within  the  community
  although  making  every reasonable effort to do so or because of special
  circumstance the removal of such person or family would  occasion  undue
  hardship  such  person or family may be permitted to remain in occupancy
  for the duration of such a situation. The rent of such person or  family
  shall  be increased in accordance with its ability to pay, the amount of
  such increase to be prescribed by the authority.
    7. A municipal housing authority created and established for a city of
  one hundred thousand or more shall grant a preference in  the  selection
  of  tenants to members of a police force of such city provided that such
  members otherwise qualify for occupancy in its  projects  and  provided,
  further,  that  such  city  has  adopted  a  local  law authorizing such
  preference.




   §  156-a.  Notice  of  rejection of applicants for admission.   In the
  event that the authority determines that an applicant is ineligible  for
  public  housing  it shall cause a written record stating the reasons for
  ineligibility to be filed in its office.  The applicant shall be  mailed
  a  letter  from  the  housing  authority  stating  that the applicant is
  ineligible and that the applicant may  be  apprised  of  the  reason  or
  reasons  for such ineligibility at a personal interview at the office of
  the housing authority.




   §   156-b.   Notice  of  expiration  of  application.    Whenever  the
  regulations of an authority  provide  that  an  application  for  public
  housing  expires after a period of time, the applicant shall be notified
  in  writing  by  the  authority  of  the  date  of  expiration  of  such
  application.




   § 156-c. Statement required for termination of lease.  Notwithstanding
  any other provision of law, an authority must incorporate into a written
  notice  of termination of a lease the specific grounds upon which it has
  made its determination for termination.




   §  157. Claims and actions against authorities.  1. In every action or
  special proceeding, for any cause whatsoever, prosecuted  or  maintained
  against  an  authority, other than a claim arising out of a condemnation
  proceeding, the complaint or necessary moving papers  shall  contain  an
  allegation  that  at  least  thirty  days have elapsed since the demand,
  claim or claims upon which such action or special proceeding is  founded
  were presented to the authority for adjustment and that it has neglected
  or  refused  to  make  an  adjustment or payment thereof for thirty days
  after such presentment.
    2. An action against an authority for damages for injuries to real  or
  personal  property,  or  for the destruction thereof, or for damages for
  personal injuries, alleged to have  been  sustained  by  reason  of  the
  negligence  of,  or by the creation or maintenance of a nuisance by said
  authority, or any member, officer, agent or employee thereof,  shall  be
  commenced  within  one  year  and  ninety days after the cause of action
  therefor shall have accrued, provided that a notice of the intention  to
  commence  such action shall have been served upon the authority. All the
  provisions of section fifty-e of the general municipal law  shall  apply
  to  such  notice. The authority may require any claimant hereunder to be
  examined as provided in section fifty-h of the  general  municipal  law,
  and all the provisions of such section shall apply to such examinations.
    3.  The  authority may require any person presenting for settlement an
  account or claim for any cause  against  the  authority,  except  as  to
  examination  on  claims as set forth in subdivision two of this section,
  to be sworn before a member, the secretary, counsel or  an  attorney  of
  the  authority,  touching  such  account or claim, and when so sworn, to
  answer orally as to any facts relative to the adjustment of such account
  or claim. The authority may settle or adjust  all  claims  in  favor  or
  against  the  authority,  and  all  accounts  in  which the authority is
  concerned as debtor or creditor; but  in  adjusting  and  settling  such
  claims, it shall, as far as practicable, be governed by the rules of law
  and principles of equity which prevail in courts of justice.
    4.  This  section shall not apply to claims, actions or proceedings by
  obligees on bonds or covenants of an authority, or claims arising out of
  condemnation proceedings except as provided in subdivision five herein.
    5. The rate of interest to be paid by an authority upon  any  judgment
  or  accrued claim against the authority shall not exceed nine per centum
  per annum.




   §  158.  Real  property  of  authorities  exempt from levy.   All real
  property of an authority shall be exempt from levy and sale by virtue of
  an execution, and no execution or other  judicial  process  shall  issue
  against  the  same,  nor  shall  any  judgment against an authority be a
  charge or lien upon its  real  property;  provided,  however,  that  the
  provisions  of  this  section  shall  not apply to or limit the right of
  obligees to foreclose or otherwise enforce any mortgage of an  authority
  or  the  right of obligees to pursue any remedies for the enforcement of
  any covenant of an authority or of  any  pledge  or  lien  given  by  an
  authority on its rents, fees or revenues.




   §  159.    Disclosure  of certain information prohibited.  Information
  acquired by an authority, the division of housing and community  renewal
  or  a  municipality or by an officer or employee thereof from applicants
  for dwellings in projects of  an  authority  or  municipality  or  other
  housing  programs  administered  by a housing authority, municipality or
  the division of housing  and  community  renewal,  or  from  tenants  of
  dwellings thereof or from members of the family of any such applicant or
  tenant  or  from  employers  of  such  persons or from any third person,
  whether voluntarily or by compulsory examination  as  provided  in  this
  chapter,  shall  be  for  the  exclusive  use  and  information  of  the
  authority, division of housing and community renewal or municipality  in
  the  discharge of its duties under this chapter and shall not be open to
  the public nor be used in any court in any action or proceeding  pending
  therein unless the authority, division of housing and community renewal,
  municipality  or successor in interest thereof is a party or complaining
  witness to such action or proceeding.   Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,
  the  authority  or  municipality  shall  furnish  to the commissioner of
  housing and community renewal full and complete reports relating to  any
  such  applicant  or  tenant  whenever  the  commissioner  of housing and
  community renewal shall request such  reports.    Also,  nothing  herein
  contained  shall  operate  to  prevent an authority or municipality from
  making full and complete reports to  the  commissioner  of  housing  and
  community  renewal or to the municipality in which an authority operates
  or to the federal government or  any  agency  thereof  relating  to  the
  administration of this chapter or of any project or relating to any such
  applicant or tenant, nor to prohibit an authority or municipality or any
  government  or  agency  receiving  such  information  of an authority or
  municipality, from publishing statistics or  other  general  information
  drawn from information received from such applicants or tenants.




   §  210.  Policy  and purposes of article.   It is hereby declared that
  there exists in municipalities in  this  state  a  seriously  inadequate
  supply  of  safe  and  sanitary  dwelling accommodations for persons and
  families of low income; that such shortage constitutes an emergency  and
  a  grave  menace  to  the health, safety, morals, welfare and comfort of
  citizens of this state; that there exists in such municipalities a large
  number of multiple dwellings which are inadequate, unsafe or  insanitary
  by  reason  of  the absence of proper heating facilities or by reason of
  the necessity for elimination of conditions dangerous to human  life  or
  detrimental  to health, including nuisances as defined, in section three
  hundred nine of the multiple dwelling law, or for  other  rehabilitation
  or improvement and which can be made adequate, safe and sanitary, by the
  installation  of proper heating facilities or by other rehabilitation or
  improvement  or  by  the  elimination  of  such  conditions;  that  such
  installation,  rehabilitation  or improvement cannot readily be provided
  by the ordinary unaided operation of private enterprise for occupancy by
  persons or families of low income without public aid in the form of  low
  interest  loans  to owners of such multiple dwellings for the purpose of
  such installation, rehabilitation or improvement; that the  installation
  of  proper  heating  facilities  in  such  multiple  dwellings  or other
  rehabilitation or improvement thereof for occupancy by  persons  of  low
  income  as  defined in this article is a public use and a public purpose
  for which public money may be loaned; that such conditions  require  the
  provisions hereinafter enacted; and the necessity in the public interest
  for the provisions hereinafter enacted is hereby declared as a matter of
  legislative determination.




   § 211. Definitions.  As used in this article the following terms shall
  mean:
    1.  The  term  "existing  multiple  dwelling"  shall mean any multiple
  dwelling erected before April eighteenth, nineteen  hundred  twenty-nine
  and in existence on the date upon which this article takes effect.
    2.  The  term  "agency"  shall  mean  any  officer, board, commission,
  department, or other agency of the municipality, or the authority or any
  other public authority, designated by  the  local  legislative  body  to
  carry  out  the  functions  vested  in  the agency under this article or
  delegated to the agency by the local legislative body in order to  carry
  out the purposes and provisions of this article.
    3. a. The term "persons or families of low income" shall mean "persons
  of  low  income" or "families of low income" as defined in section three
  of this chapter, whose  probable  aggregate  annual  income  during  the
  period  of occupancy does not exceed six times the rental (including the
  value or cost to them  of  heat,  light,  water  and  cooking  fuel)  of
  dwelling units occupied by such persons or families in existing multiple
  dwellings  aided  by a loan pursuant to this article, except that in the
  case of persons or families with three or more  dependents,  such  ratio
  shall  not  exceed  seven  to  one,  and  except further that the income
  limitations prescribed  by  this  paragraph  shall  be  subject  to  the
  provisions  of  subdivision  two of section two hundred thirteen of this
  chapter.
    In calculating annual income,  social  security  payments  and  income
  received from private pension funds by any person sixty-two years of age
  or  more  shall be excluded up to a total maximum amount of seventy-five
  dollars per month.  The term "probable aggregate  annual  income"  means
  the annual income of the chief wage earner of the family, plus all other
  income  of other members of the family over the age of twenty-one years,
  plus a proportion of income of gainfully employed members under the  age
  of  twenty-one years, the proportion to be determined by the agency. The
  agency may exclude a proportion of the income of other  members  of  the
  family  over  the age of twenty-one years for the purpose of determining
  eligibility for commencement of occupancy or continued occupancy, or for
  establishing rental of such family, or for all such purposes.
    b. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of this  subdivision,
  and  subject  to  the  provisions  of  subdivision  three of section two
  hundred thirteen of this chapter, the term "persons or families  of  low
  income"  shall  also mean any person or family who, immediately prior to
  the date on which a contract for a loan  with  respect  to  an  existing
  multiple  dwelling  is  entered  into pursuant to the provisions of this
  article, occupies any dwelling unit in such multiple  dwelling  and  who
  continuously  occupies  such unit during and after completion of central
  heating or other rehabilitation or  improvement  performed  pursuant  to
  such contract.
    4.  The  term  "occupancy  date"  shall  mean  the date defined in the
  contract for a loan pursuant to this article between  the  owner  of  an
  existing  multiple  dwelling  and  a municipality as the date upon which
  such multiple dwelling is to be deemed ready for occupancy, or  if  such
  term  is  not  defined  in  such  contract,  the date of issuance of the
  temporary certificate of occupancy.




   §  212.  Loans  to  owners.  1.  Notwithstanding the provisions of any
  general, special or local law, a municipality, by its local  legislative
  body,  may  make  or  contract  to  make loans to the owners of existing
  multiple dwellings within its territorial limits, in such amounts as may
  be required for  the  installation  of  proper  heating  facilities,  or
  elimination  of  conditions  dangerous  to  human life or detrimental to
  health, including nuisances as defined, in section three hundred nine of
  the multiple dwelling law, or other  rehabilitation  or  improvement  of
  such  multiple  dwellings,  and  may make temporary loans or advances to
  such owners in anticipation of the permanent municipal  loans  for  such
  purposes.
    2. Each permanent loan shall be secured by a bond and mortgage or note
  and  mortgage  upon  the multiple dwelling and the land upon which it is
  situated. The amount of any such loan, together with the amount  of  all
  prior  loans and encumbrances, shall not exceed ninety per centum of the
  value of the property, after completion of the  installation  of  proper
  heating   facilities,   or  elimination  of  such  conditions  or  other
  rehabilitation or improvement, as estimated by  the  agency.  Each  such
  bond  and mortgage or note and mortgage shall be repaid over or within a
  period of twenty years in such manner as may be provided  in  such  bond
  and  mortgage or note and mortgage and contract but in no case to exceed
  the probable life of the multiple dwelling which is hereby determined to
  be twenty years. Such bond and mortgage or note  and  mortgage  and  the
  contract  in  connection  with  such  permanent  and temporary loans may
  contain such other  terms  and  provisions  not  inconsistent  with  the
  provisions  of  this  article  as  the  local  legislative body may deem
  necessary or desirable to secure repayment of  the  loan,  the  interest
  thereon  and  other charges in connection therewith and to carry out the
  purposes and provisions of this article.
    3. The bond or note issued by the owner of such multiple dwelling  and
  the mortgage relating thereto may authorize such owner, with the consent
  of the agency, to prepay the principal of the loan subject to such terms
  and  conditions  as therein provided. Such bond or note and mortgage may
  contain such other clauses and provisions as the agency shall require.
    4.  The  agency  may  charge  the  owner  of  such  multiple  dwelling
  reasonable  fees  for financing, regulation, supervision and audit. Such
  fees shall be kept by the municipality in a separate fund to be known as
  the housing rehabilitation fund  and  shall  be  used  to  pay  for  the
  expenses  of  the  municipality  in  administering  and carrying out the
  provisions of this article.






   §  213.  Occupancy.    1.  The dwelling units in any existing multiple
  dwelling aided by a loan pursuant to this  article  shall  be  available
  solely  for persons or families of low income during the period in which
  any part of such loan remains unpaid and for a period of  at  least  ten
  years from the occupancy date.
    2.  In  the  event that after any person or family included within the
  provisions of paragraph a of subdivision three of  section  two  hundred
  eleven  of  this  chapter,  but  not  included  within the provisions of
  paragraph b of such subdivision three, begins occupancy of any  dwelling
  unit  in any multiple dwelling aided by a loan pursuant to this article,
  and during the period while such dwelling unit is subject to  a  maximum
  rent  prescribed  by  the agency pursuant to this article, the income of
  such person or family increases so as to exceed the  applicable  maximum
  prescribed  by  such  paragraph  a  by  more than fifty per centum, such
  person shall be required to move from such dwelling.
    3. a. In the event that on the date on which a contract for a loan  is
  made  with  respect  to  a multiple dwelling aided by a loan pursuant to
  this article, any person or family occupying a  dwelling  unit  in  such
  multiple  dwelling  and included within the provisions of paragraph b of
  subdivision three of section two hundred eleven of this chapter,  has  a
  probable  aggregate  annual income, as determined in accordance with the
  provisions of paragraph a of such subdivision three, which  exceeds  the
  income limits specified in such paragraph a by more than fifty per cent,
  such  person or family shall be required to move from such dwelling unit
  upon the expiration of a period of two years after  the  date  on  which
  such contract is entered into.
    b.  In  the  event that at any time within a period of two years after
  any such contract is entered into, the income  of  any  such  person  or
  family  increases  so  as  to exceed the income limits specified in such
  paragraph a by more than fifty per cent, such person or family shall  be
  required  to  move  from  such dwelling unit upon the expiration of such
  period of two years.
    c. If, at any time subsequent to the expiration of  a  period  of  two
  years  after  any  such  contract is entered into, and during the period
  while the dwelling unit occupied by any such person or family is subject
  to a maximum rent prescribed by the agency pursuant to this article, the
  income of such person or family increases so as  to  exceed  the  income
  limits  specified  in such paragraph a by more than fifty per cent, such
  person or family shall be required to move from such dwelling unit.
    4. Any person or family in  occupancy,  whether  included  within  the
  provisions of paragraph a or paragraph b of subdivision three of section
  two  hundred  eleven  of  this chapter, whose income exceeds the maximum
  prescribed by the provisions of such paragraph a  with  respect  to  the
  time  of  beginning  of  occupancy,  shall  pay  a  rental  surcharge in
  accordance with a schedule  of  surcharges  to  be  promulgated  by  the
  agency.  Rental  surcharges  collected pursuant to this section shall be
  paid by the owner to the municipality which has granted such  owner  tax
  exemption  or tax abatement pursuant to any law authorizing the granting
  of same, as reimbursement to such municipality therefor.  In  the  event
  that  such  tax exemption and tax abatement have not been granted, or in
  the event that a sum equal to the total amount of tax exemption and  tax
  abatement  granted  to  the owner has been paid to the municipality, the
  excess, if any, of surcharges shall be for the use and  benefit  of  the
  owner.
    5.  Any person or family whose removal is required by any provision of
  this article shall be subject to removal by summary proceedings.




   §  214.  Conditions  precedent  to making such loans.  1. No such loan
  shall be made by a municipality to an  owner  of  an  existing  multiple
  dwelling  unless  the  owner  of  such multiple dwelling and all persons
  holding a lien prior to that  of  the  municipality  shall  covenant  in
  writing  that  so long as any part of such loan remains unpaid and for a
  period of at least ten years from the occupancy date:  (a) Each dwelling
  unit in such multiple dwelling shall be available solely for persons  or
  families of low income;
    (b)  Preference shall be given to persons who shall have lived in such
  multiple dwelling at the time the contract for the loan was entered into
  and were required to move because of such  installation,  rehabilitation
  or improvement;
    (c)  No  charge  or rental for housing accommodations in such multiple
  dwelling shall be made or charged in excess of the rentals prescribed by
  the agency at the time such loan is made  or  as  such  rentals  may  be
  revised from time to time by the agency;
    (d)  The agency may order such repairs as will preserve the health and
  safety of the occupants of such multiple dwelling;
    (e) All persons operating or  managing  such  multiple  dwelling  will
  comply with the provisions of this article and the rules and regulations
  adopted  by  the agency pertaining to multiple dwellings aided hereunder
  and will refrain from doing any acts in violation thereof;
    (f) All  such  persons  will  permit  the  duly  authorized  officers,
  employees,  agents  or  inspectors of the agency to enter in or upon and
  inspect such multiple dwelling at all reasonable hours;
    (g) The agency shall have full power to investigate into and order the
  owner of said multiple dwelling to furnish such reports and  information
  as  the  agency  may require concerning the planning and construction of
  the installation, rehabilitation or improvement and the  management  and
  operation  of  said  multiple  dwelling. The agency shall also have full
  power to audit the books of such owner with respect to such matters;
    (h) The foregoing covenants shall run with the land.
    2. The local legislative body of the municipality shall have power  to
  impose additional terms and conditions precedent to making such loans.




   §  214-a.  Rent  control;  tax  exemption.    1.  Notwithstanding  the
  provisions of the emergency housing rent control law and the regulations
  promulgated pursuant thereto, so long  as  the  rents  for  any  housing
  accommodations in any multiple dwelling aided by a loan pursuant to this
  article  remain  subject to control by the agency, (1) the maximum rents
  for such housing accommodations shall be those prescribed by the  agency
  pursuant  to  the  provisions of this article; and (2) where the maximum
  rents for such accommodations, if the provisions of  this  article  were
  not  applicable,  would be prescribed by the provisions of the emergency
  housing rent control law and such regulations,  the  provisions  of  the
  emergency  housing  rent  control law with respect to evictions, and the
  provisions of such regulations with respect to evictions, and  no  other
  provisions   of   such   law   and  regulations,  shall  apply  to  such
  accommodations. However, upon the expiration of such rent control by the
  agency pursuant to this article, such  housing  accommodations  in  such
  dwelling, if they would have been fully subject to the provisions of the
  emergency  housing  rent  control  law  and such regulations immediately
  prior to such expiration, if not  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this
  article,  shall  again  be  subject  to  the provisions of the emergency
  housing rent control law and such regulations to the same extent and  in
  the  same  manner  as if such accommodations had not been subject to the
  provisions of this  article,  except  that  with  respect  to  any  such
  accommodations  again subject to the provisions of the emergency housing
  rent control law and such regulations,  the  maximum  rent  therefor  in
  effect  pursuant  to  the provisions of this article at the time of such
  expiration, shall be the maximum rent for such accommodations under  the
  emergency   housing   rent  control  law  and  regulations,  subject  to
  adjustment pursuant to such law and regulations, giving  due  regard  to
  all the equities.
    2.  The  municipality  may,  by  local law, provide for exemption from
  taxation of any increase in valuation resulting from  the  installation,
  alterations  or improvements performed with the aid of such loans or for
  abatement of taxation on such property, including the land, or for  both
  such  exemption  and abatement, to the same extent, for the same period,
  and under the same terms and conditions as such exemption or  abatement,
  or  both,  may  be  provided by local law enacted under the terms of any
  currently effective statute authorizing the granting of tax exemption or
  tax abatement, or both, in aid  of  the  rehabilitation,  alteration  or
  improvement  of  multiple dwellings or the elimination of unhealthful or
  dangerous conditions therein. Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of
  any general, special or local law, a property aided by a  loan  pursuant
  to  this  article  shall  not  be  ineligible  for  tax exemption or tax
  abatement or both, as provided by local law enacted pursuant to statute,
  solely because such property is not subject to control  of  rents  under
  the  emergency  housing rent control law, but such tax exemption and tax
  abatement shall terminate if  and  when  such  property  is  subject  to
  control of rents neither under the emergency housing rent control law or
  this article.




   §  215. Rules and regulations.  An agency may promulgate supplementary
  rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this  article,  not
  inconsistent with the provisions of this article.




   §  219-a.  Policy  of  state  and  purpose  of article.   It is hereby
  declared that there exists within the  state,  and  particularly  within
  certain  cities  thereof,  an acute shortage of housing; that low income
  inhabitants of the state, and  particularly  demobilized  servicemen  of
  world  war  II and their families, as well as the families of servicemen
  still serving within the military and naval forces of the United States,
  are unable to obtain adequate, safe and sanitary dwelling accommodations
  within their financial reach; that this condition is  a  menace  to  the
  health,  safety,  morals, welfare and reasonable comfort of the citizens
  of the state; that this condition has reached  the  stage  of  an  acute
  emergency  which  cannot be adequately and immediately alleviated by the
  normal  processes  of  construction  of  permanent   housing   and   the
  construction  of  permanent  public  housing projects in connection with
  slum clearance, and  that  immediate  mitigation  is  required  by  such
  emergency  means  as  are  available;  that this condition requires that
  provision be made for public emergency housing as hereinafter  provided;
  that  this  condition  requires  that  certain cities and authorities be
  authorized to cooperate and enter into agreements with a government  and
  with  each  other  to  the end that emergency housing may be obtained as
  expeditiously as possible; that this condition  requires  the  temporary
  suspension of various normal restrictions, prohibitions, limitations and
  procedures  to  the  end that emergency housing may be supplied with the
  least possible delay; that the  acquisition,  construction,  management,
  operation,  and  disposition  of such emergency housing and the real and
  personal  property  and  other  facilities  necessary,   incidental   or
  appurtenant thereto is a public use for which public money may be spent,
  private  property  acquired,  and  tax  exemption  granted; and that the
  necessity in the public interest for the provisions hereinafter  enacted
  is hereby declared as a matter of legislative determination.




   §  219-b.  Definitions.    Notwithstanding the provisions of any other
  article of this chapter the following terms, whenever used  or  referred
  to  in  this  article,  shall  have  the  following  meanings,  unless a
  different meaning clearly appears from the context:
    1. The term "emergency project" means a specific work or  improvement,
  including  lands,  buildings  and  improvements,  acquired, constructed,
  altered,  renovated,   or   reused   to   provide   emergency   dwelling
  accommodations  for  eligible  tenants,  as  hereafter  defined  in this
  section, together with such  social,  recreational,  communal  or  other
  non-housing  facilities  as  may  be  deemed by the authority or city or
  government undertaking such project  to  be  incidental  or  appurtenant
  thereto.  Emergency  projects  as  defined  herein  shall  be  deemed to
  constitute low rent housing within the meaning of  article  eighteen  of
  the  constitution and shall be deemed to be in conformity with a plan or
  undertaking  for  the  clearance,  replanning  and   reconstruction   or
  rehabilitation of a substandard and insanitary area and for recreational
  and other facilities incidental or appurtenant thereto.
    2.  The  term  "eligible  tenant"  means:  (a)  distressed families of
  servicemen; (b) distressed veterans and their families;  (c)  distressed
  single  servicemen  and  veterans;  and  (d) other distressed persons or
  families of low income. The term "servicemen" shall include  any  person
  who is serving, and the term "veterans" shall include any person who has
  served during world war II, under conditions other than dishonorable, in
  the  military  or  naval  forces  or  the  merchant marine of the United
  States. Persons and families who are without adequate housing because of
  eviction or inadequate income or for other reasons, or are  affected  by
  unusual  hardships, and are unable to find adequate housing within their
  financial reach shall be deemed to be distressed.   Eligible tenants  as
  defined  herein  shall  be deemed to be persons of low income within the
  meaning of article eighteen of the constitution. Subject to the terms of
  any contract with a government, an authority shall  have  the  power  to
  select eligible tenants for emergency projects.




   §  219-c.  Additional  powers  of  certain authorities.   An authority
  operating in a city having more than one million inhabitants shall  have
  the  following  powers  in  addition to the other powers granted by this
  chapter:
    1.  Prepare  or  arrange  for  preparation  of  plans  for,   acquire,
  construct,  lease,  carry  out, manage, operate and dispose of emergency
  projects, and with regard to emergency projects shall have and exercise,
  except as in this article otherwise expressly provided, all the  powers,
  rights  and  privileges  granted  to  an authority under this chapter in
  reference to any project of an authority,  but  without  regard  to  the
  limitations  prescribed by sections ninety-seven, one hundred fifty, one
  hundred fifty-one, one hundred fifty-five, and one hundred fifty-six  of
  this chapter.
    2.  Act  as agent for, or enter into contracts and otherwise cooperate
  with a government in connection with emergency projects.
    3. Issue  bonds  and  notes  for  the  purposes  of  this  article  in
  accordance  with the powers granted under article three of this chapter,
  except that such bonds may be  issued  for  periods  not  exceeding  the
  probable  life of the emergency project for which they are issued, which
  probable life is hereby determined to be ten years. The  powers  granted
  by  this  section shall include the power of such authority to issue its
  bonds or notes to finance  all  or  any  part  of  the  development  and
  operation  of emergency projects which a city has undertaken by contract
  with a government, and as to which the authority will act  as  agent  or
  lessee  for  the city, notwithstanding that the city agrees to reimburse
  the authority for all or any part of the development  and  operation  of
  the emergency project.
    4.  Issue  refunding bonds for the purpose of paying or retiring bonds
  previously issued by it for emergency projects  but  no  such  refunding
  bonds shall have a maturity date later than the end of the probable life
  of the emergency project for which they are issued.




   § 219-d. Additional powers of certain cities.  A city having more than
  one  million  inhabitants shall have the following powers in addition to
  the other powers granted by this chapter:
    1. Undertake one or more emergency projects and for that purpose  such
  city  shall  have the rights, powers and privileges and shall be subject
  to the duties and obligations granted to  or  imposed  upon  authorities
  with respect to such projects by the provisions of this article.
    2. Such city shall have the power to designate or appoint an authority
  as  its  agent  to acquire, construct, lease, manage, operate or dispose
  of, in the name of the authority or in the name of the city, one or more
  emergency projects. When acting as the agent of a city,  either  in  its
  own  name  or in the name of the city, an authority shall be governed by
  the provisions of this article and of such other laws, not  inconsistent
  with  this  article, as govern the conduct of authorities, and shall not
  be governed by the laws, local laws, ordinances, rules, and  regulations
  governing the conduct of cities.
    3.  A  city  may  render and provide or contract to render and provide
  services and facilities in  connection  with  an  emergency  project  in
  accordance with the provisions of section ninety-nine of this chapter.
    4.  To  effectuate  any of the purposes of this article such city may:
  (a) incur indebtedness; (b) issue and sell its  bonds  for  periods  not
  exceeding  the  probable  life of the project for which they are issued;
  (c) issue refunding bonds for the purpose of paying  or  retiring  bonds
  previously  issued  by  it  for emergency projects but no such refunding
  bonds shall have a maturity date later than the end of the probable life
  of the emergency project for which they are issued; (d) make or contract
  to make loans to an authority operating within the territorial limits of
  such city; (e) make or  contract  to  make  to  such  authority  capital
  subsidies  or periodic subsidies for a period not exceeding the probable
  life of the project; (f) guarantee the principal of and interest on,  or
  only  the  interest  on,  indebtedness contracted by such authority; (g)
  and, unless otherwise expressly limited by this  article,  exercise  all
  the  powers,  rights  and  privileges  granted to municipalities by this
  chapter. The probable life of an emergency project  undertaken  by  such
  city is hereby determined to be ten years.
    5.  Such  city may at any time and without regard to any restrictions,
  procedures or time limitations contained in  its  charter  or  in  other
  laws, local laws, rules or ordinances governing the appropriation of its
  funds,  appropriate  for  the purposes of this article, from its general
  fund or from such other funds as are available for the current  expenses
  of  such  city,  such  sums  as  it  may  deem necessary and feasible to
  effectuate the purposes of this article; provided that such city  shall,
  at  least two days prior to the meeting of the local legislative body at
  which any appropriation made  hereunder  is  acted  upon,  cause  to  be
  published  in  the  official publication of such city a notice that such
  appropriation will be made, and shall, within  twenty  days  after  such
  meeting,   cause   to   be   similarly  published  a  notice  that  such
  appropriation has been made.
    6. Such city may enter into contracts for the demolition,  excavation,
  construction,  alteration,  and  renovation  of,  or for the purchase of
  materials and supplies for, an emergency project without regard  to  the
  requirements for advertising of or invitation for bids or for the making
  of  awards  contained  in  any  general,  special or local law, charter,
  ordinance, rule or regulation.
    7. When an authority acts as  agent  or  lessee  for  a  city  in  the
  acquisition,  construction,  management,  operation or disposition of an
  emergency project, the  city  shall  have  the  power  to  indemnify  or


 contract  to  indemnify  such  authority  against  any  deficit, loss or
  liability arising therefrom.
    8.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of any general, special or local
  law, any contract made, indebtedness incurred,  appropriation  made,  or
  action taken by a city, provided there is compliance with the provisions
  of  this  article, shall be sufficiently and finally authorized if it is
  approved by the local legislative body of the city.




   *  § 219-e. Suspension of building restrictions.  1. The provisions of
  the multiple dwelling law and of any other law, charter,  administrative
  code,  building law, local law, ordinance, rule or regulation pertaining
  to  the  construction,  maintenance,  use  and  occupation  of   housing
  accommodations  and  incidental facilities, as well as the provisions of
  any general, special or local law, rule or regulation pertaining to  the
  planning and zoning of buildings, shall not apply to the construction by
  a  government  or  authority  of  an  emergency  project,  and  shall be
  suspended with respect to the maintenance, use and  occupation  thereof,
  and  the  equipment  and  fixtures  contained  therein,  as long as such
  project is operated by a government or  authority  for  the  purpose  of
  providing  emergency  housing, or by an educational institution to which
  the rights and interest  of  the  United  States  have  been,  or  shall
  hereafter be, relinquished and transferred pursuant to the provisions of
  chapter six hundred eighty-eight, public law seven hundred ninety-six of
  the  eightieth  Congress  (section fifteen hundred seventy-five of title
  forty-two, U. S. code) or any amendment  thereto,  for  the  purpose  of
  providing emergency housing. Any provision of general, special, or local
  law or any rule or regulation requiring the issuance of a certificate of
  occupancy  or  other  form  of  license or permit, as a condition to the
  occupancy of any building, shall likewise be suspended  with  regard  to
  emergency projects.
    2.  The  provisions  of this section shall remain in effect during the
  period of the housing  emergency  and  the  acute  shortage  of  housing
  accommodations  but  in  no  event  beyond  July first, nineteen hundred
  fifty-four.
    * NB Expired July 1, 1954 by its own terms




   §  219-f.  Disposition  of emergency projects.  Each emergency project
  shall be removed and disposed of as soon as practicable after  the  city
  in  which  the project is located determines that the emergency declared
  in this article has ended, but in no event beyond July  first,  nineteen
  hundred  fifty-four, and provided that an authority or city may contract
  with the federal government or with an agency or instrumentality thereof
  for such termination date for occupancy, removal and disposition  of  an
  emergency project, and upon such terms, as the federal government or its
  agency or instrumentality may require.




   §  219-g.  Limitations.    An  authority or city shall not initiate an
  emergency project after July first, nineteen hundred fifty nor unless it
  shall find (which finding shall be conclusive in  any  suit,  action  or
  proceeding)  that  within  its  territorial  jurisdiction,  there  is  a
  shortage of adequate, safe and sanitary dwellings for  eligible  tenants
  which impedes the orderly demobilization of the war effort and that such
  dwellings  would  not  otherwise  be  provided  when needed for eligible
  tenants.




   §  219-h. Tax exemptions.  The provisions of subdivisions one, two and
  three of section fifty-two of this chapter shall apply with equal  force
  and effect to emergency projects so long as such projects are controlled
  by  an  authority or a city, provided, however, that any bonds, notes or
  other obligations or evidences of indebtedness issued by an authority or
  a city shall at all times be exempt from all taxation by  the  state  or
  any subdivision thereof.




   §   219-i.  Miscellaneous.     1.  All  actions  taken,  contracts  or
  commitments made, appropriations made, indebtedness incurred, all  bonds
  or   other  obligations  heretofore  issued,  including  any  guarantees
  thereof, and the proceedings authorizing the issuance thereof,  and  all
  things  done  by  or between an authority, city, or government, prior to
  the enactment of this article and subsequent to January first,  nineteen
  hundred  forty-six,  and  for the purposes provided in this article, are
  hereby ratified, confirmed and approved and are hereby validated in  all
  respects.
    2.  To the extent that the provisions of this article are inconsistent
  with the provisions of any other article of this  chapter  or  with  the
  provisions  of  any  general,  special  or  local  law  or  charter, the
  provisions of this article shall be controlling.
    3. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article
  shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be  invalid,
  such  judgment  shall  not  affect,  impair  or invalidate the remainder
  thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
  paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the  controversy
  in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
    4.  Before a city or an authority enters, without public advertisement
  for sealed bids, into a contract which but for the  provisions  of  this
  article would be required by general, special or local law to be made on
  sealed  bids  invited  by  public  advertisement, such city or authority
  shall obtain the approval of the mayor or  deputy  mayor  of  the  city.
  Within  twenty days after the execution of such contract, it shall cause
  to be published in the official publication of the city  a  notice  that
  such contract has been let and the name of the contractor.




   §  220.  Construction.    This chapter shall be construed liberally to
  effectuate the purposes hereof, and the enumeration of  specific  powers
  in this chapter shall not operate to restrict the meaning of any general
  grant  of  power  contained  in  this chapter or to exclude other powers
  comprehended  in  such  general  grant.  In  construing   this   chapter
  consideration shall be given to its purpose and intent, among others, to
  empower  an  authority  to do any and all things necessary to secure the
  financial aid of the United States Housing Authority and  the  state  of
  New York, or any department, agency or instrumentality of the federal or
  state   government,   in   the   undertaking,   planning,  construction,
  maintenance and operation of any project.




   §  221.  Separability  clause.    If  any clause, sentence, paragraph,
  section or part of this chapter  shall  be  adjudged  by  any  court  of
  competent  jurisdiction  to  be invalid, such judgment shall not affect,
  impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its
  operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section  or  part  thereof
  directly  involved  in the controversy in which such judgment shall have
  been rendered.




   § 222. Application of other laws.  For the purposes of the application
  of  the  lien  law,  the  general corporation law, and except as in this
  chapter otherwise provided, for the purposes of the application  of  any
  general,  special  or  local  law  imposing a tax, an authority shall be
  deemed a municipal corporation.  The term "public corporation"  used  in
  the  lien  law shall be deemed to include an authority. The term "public
  improvement" used in  the  lien  law  shall  be  deemed  to  include  an
  improvement  upon  real  property belonging to an authority and the term
  "public contract" in such law shall be deemed to include contracts  made
  by the authority; the secretary of the authority shall, for the purposes
  of  the  lien law be deemed to be the financial officer of the authority
  and the officer of the department,  bureau,  subdivision  or  commission
  having  charge  of  the construction of an improvement and being charged
  with the custody and disbursement of the funds applicable to the  public
  contract  or  public  improvement  under,  upon  or  for  which goods or
  materials are furnished or work was done.




   §  223.  Prohibition against discrimination.   For all the purposes of
  this chapter, no person shall, because of race, creed, color or national
  origin, be subjected to any discrimination.




   §  223-a.  Discrimination  against  persons who have certain household
  pets.  No person who has been adjudged to be legally blind or who  is  a
  severely  physically handicapped person or who is a mute shall be denied
  occupancy in a dwelling in any project or be subjected to eviction  from
  any  such dwelling on the sole ground that such person owns a dog or cat
  which will or does reside with such person therein,  provided,  however,
  that  if  after occupancy a health hazard results on account of such dog
  or cat, the public health officer  having  jurisdiction  may  take  such
  corrective measures as are appropriate.




   §  223-b.  Discrimination  against  a  person  who  is deaf or hard of
  hearing who has a hearing dog. No person who is deaf or hard of  hearing
  shall  be  denied occupancy in a dwelling in any project or be subjected
  to eviction from any such dwelling on the sole ground that  such  person
  owns  a  hearing  dog  as  defined in section forty-seven-b of the civil
  rights law, provided, however, that if after occupancy a  health  hazard
  results  on  account  of  such  dog,  the  public  health officer having
  jurisdiction may take such corrective measures as may be appropriate.




   §  224.  Pending  actions  or  proceedings.   This chapter or anything
  therein contained shall not affect or abate  any  actions,  proceedings,
  civil  or  criminal,  pending  at  the time when this chapter shall take
  effect, brought by, for  or  against  the  state,  the  state  board  of
  housing,   any   municipality,  authority  or  limited-dividend  housing
  corporation, under or  in  pursuance  of  the  provisions  of  the  laws
  repealed  by  this  chapter;  but all such actions or proceedings may be
  continued, prosecuted,  conducted  and  completed  notwithstanding  that
  functions, powers and duties of any agency, officer or party thereto may
  by  this chapter be assigned or transferred to another agency or officer
  and as if such  laws  were  not  repealed  but  continued  to  be  fully
  effective.




   §  225. Saving clause.  The repeal of the laws as specified in section
  two hundred twenty-seven and any other provisions of this chapter, shall
  not affect or impair any contract or remedy, or  any  act  done  or  any
  right   accruing,  accrued  or  acquired,  taxes,  tax  obligations,  or
  exemptions from  taxation,  the  validity  of  or  rights  as  to  taxes
  collected  or  proceeds  thereof  or the validity as to any acts done or
  rights or exemptions accruing, accrued or acquired under any  tax  laws,
  general,  local  or  special,  or  any penalty, forfeiture or punishment
  under or by virtue of the laws so repealed and in existence prior to the
  time when this chapter or any section thereof takes effect, but the same
  may be asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted and for such purposes
  all of the laws specified in section two hundred twenty-seven are hereby
  continued in full force and effect.




   §  226. Transfer of records.  The division of housing in the executive
  department is hereby continued.  Notwithstanding the provisions  of  the
  state  housing  law,  the  term  of  office  of all members of the state
  housing board in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter and of
  officers and employees  of  such  board  shall  expire  on  July  first,
  nineteen  hundred  thirty-nine.  All of the files, papers, documents and
  property of the state housing board in existence prior to the  enactment
  of this chapter shall be transferred to the commissioner.




   §  227.  Laws repealed.  Of the laws enumerated in the schedule hereto
  annexed, that portion specified in the last column is  hereby  repealed,
  except  as provided in sections one hundred ninety-three and two hundred
  twenty-five.
 
  Laws of                    Chapter                Sections
  1926 ....................... 823 .................. All
  1927 .......................  35 .................. All
  1928 ....................... 722 .................. All
  1930 ....................... 872 .................. All
  1931 ....................... 557 .................. All
  1931 ....................... 558 .................. All
  1932 ....................... 507 .................. All
  1933 ....................... 802 .................. All
  1934 .......................   4 .................. All
  1934 ....................... 540 .................. All
  1935 ....................... 310 .................. All
  1937 ....................... 207 .................. All
  1937 ....................... 738 .................. All
  1938 ....................... 218 .................. All
  1938 ....................... 270 .................. All
  1938 ....................... 395 .................. All
  1938 ....................... 461 .................. All
  1938 ....................... 489 .................. All




   §  228.  When  to take effect.  This act shall take effect July first,
  nineteen hundred thirty-nine.




   §  301.  Short title.  This act shall be known and may be cited as the
  "public housing drug elimination act".




   § 302. Legislative findings. The legislature finds that:
    (1)  the  state  has  a duty to provide public housing that is decent,
  safe, and free from illegal drugs;
    (2)  public  housing  projects  in  many  areas  suffer  from  rampant
  drug-related crime;
    (3) drug dealers are increasingly imposing a reign of terror on public
  housing tenants;
    (4)  the  increase  in  drug-related  crime not only leads to murders,
  muggings, and other forms of violence against tenants,  but  also  to  a
  deterioration  of  the  physical  environment  that requires substantial
  government expenditures; and
    (5) local law enforcement authorities often lack the resources to deal
  with the drug problem in public housing particularly  in  light  of  the
  recent reductions in federal aid to cities.




   §  303. Authority to make grants. The commissioner, in accordance with
  the provisions of this  article,  may  make  grants  to  public  housing
  authorities  or  agencies  for  use in eliminating drug-related crime in
  public housing projects.




   §  304.  Eligible activities. A public housing authority or agency may
  use a grant under this article for:
    (1) the employment of security personnel in public housing projects;
    (2) reimbursement of local law  enforcement  agencies  for  additional
  security and protective services for public housing projects;
    (3)  physical  improvements  in  public  housing  projects  which  are
  specifically designed to enhance security;
    (4) the employment of one or more individuals:
    (a) to investigate drug-related crime on or about  the  real  property
  comprising any public housing project; and
    (b)   to   provide   evidence  relating  to  any  such  crime  in  any
  administrative or judicial proceeding;
    (5) the provision of training,  communications  equipment,  and  other
  related  equipment  for  use  by voluntary public housing tenant patrols
  acting in cooperation with local law enforcement officials;
    (6) innovative programs designed to reduce use of drugs in and  around
  public housing projects; and
    (7)  providing funding to nonprofit public housing resident management
  corporations and tenant councils to  develop  security  and  drug  abuse
  prevention programs involving site residents.




   §  305.  Applications.  (1)  To  receive a grant under this article, a
  public housing authority or agency shall submit an  application  to  the
  commissioner  at  such  time,  in  such  manner, and accompanied by such
  additional information as the commissioner may reasonably require.  Such
  application   shall  include  a  plan  for  addressing  the  problem  of
  drug-related  crime  on  the  premises  of   public   housing   projects
  administered by the public authority or agency.
    (2)  The  commissioner  shall  approve applications under this article
  based upon:
    (a) the extent of the crime problem in the facilities  of  the  public
  housing project;
    (b)  the quality of the plan of the public housing authority or agency
  to address crime in public housing projects;
    (c) the capability of the public housing authority or agency to  carry
  out the plan; and
    (d)  the  extent  to  which  the  local government and local community
  support the anti-crime activities of the  public  housing  authority  or
  agency.




   § 306. Definitions.  For purposes of this article, the following terms
  shall have the following meanings:
    (1) "Controlled substance" shall have the same meaning given such term
  in section thirty-three hundred six of the public health law.
    (2)  "Drug-related  crime"  shall  mean the illegal manufacture, sale,
  distribution, use, or  possession  with  intent  to  manufacture,  sell,
  distribute, or use, a controlled substance.




   §  400.  Validation.    The creation and establishment of the New York
  City Housing Authority under the  provisions  of  article  five  of  the
  former state housing law, together with all proceedings, acts and things
  undertaken,  performed  or  done  with  reference  thereto,  are  hereby
  validated, ratified, confirmed,  approved  and  declared  legal  in  all
  respects,  notwithstanding any want of statutory authority or any defect
  or irregularity in such acts or proceedings.




   §  401.  New  York City Housing Authority.   The New York City Housing
  Authority is hereby constituted and declared to be a body corporate  and
  politic with all the powers, rights and duties set forth in article five
  of the former state housing law.




   §  402.  Special  provisions with respect to the New York City Housing
  Authority.  1.  It  is  hereby  found  and  declared,  as  a  result  of
  investigation  and  study,  that enactment of the provisions hereinafter
  set forth is necessary for reorganization of the authority to enable  it
  to  (a)  institute  improved management procedures; (b) bring about more
  efficient methods of maintenance and supervision of projects; (c) foster
  prompt and sound solution of problems relating to occupancy of projects;
  (d) undertake administration of personnel in consonance  with  the  size
  and scope of the authority's functions. It is further found and declared
  that  private  enterprise  should  be  encouraged to the greatest extent
  possible to enter the field  of  housing  in  which  the  authority  now
  operates so that the authority may be able to concentrate its activities
  at the earliest possible moment on providing housing exclusively for the
  lower income families.
    2.  Notwithstanding  any  provisions to the contrary contained in this
  chapter, or any general, special or local law, the  provisions  of  this
  section  shall  govern the number, appointment, removal and compensation
  of the members of the New York City Housing Authority.
    3. The authority shall consist  of  seven  members  appointed  by  the
  mayor,  one  of  whom  shall  be  designated  by  the  mayor as chairman
  removable at his or her pleasure. The term  of  office  of  each  member
  other  than  the  chairman shall be three years, provided, however, that
  the initial appointments of the six  members  other  than  the  chairman
  shall  be  as  follows:  two  shall be appointed for one-year terms, two
  shall be appointed for two-year terms, and two shall  be  appointed  for
  three-year  terms. The mayor shall file with the commissioner of housing
  a certificate of appointment of the chairman and  of  each  member.  Any
  member  other  than the chairman may be removed by the mayor upon filing
  in the office of the commissioner of  citywide  administrative  services
  and  serving upon the member the reasons therefor. Such document setting
  forth the reasons shall be made available to the general  public,  which
  shall  include  but  not be limited to publishing the reasons on the New
  York city housing authority's website. Three of such members shall be  a
  tenant  of  record  or  an authorized member of the tenant household, in
  good standing, residing in one of the federal projects owned or operated
  by the authority, provided, however, that for the  initial  appointments
  of  the  three  such  members,  one shall be among the members initially
  appointed for one-year terms, one shall be among the  members  initially
  appointed  for  two-year  terms,  and  one  shall  be  among the members
  initially appointed for three-year terms. A vacancy in the office  of  a
  member other than the chairman occurring otherwise than by expiration of
  term shall be filled for the unexpired term. Further, any vacancy in the
  office  of a tenant member shall only be filled by the appointment of an
  eligible tenant member, and such appointment shall be made within ninety
  days of such vacancy.
    4. The chairman shall give his or her whole time to his or her  duties
  and  shall not engage in any other occupation, profession or employment.
  The chairman shall receive a salary the amount of which shall  be  fixed
  by local law. The other members of the authority shall receive a stipend
  in  the amount of two hundred fifty dollars for every four hours of work
  performed for the authority, not to exceed  one  thousand  five  hundred
  dollars per month.
    5.  Notwithstanding  any  provisions to the contrary contained in this
  chapter, or any general, special or local law, the New York city housing
  authority shall have the power in its discretion to provide and maintain
  a housing police department and a uniformed housing police  force.  Such
  department and force shall have the power and it shall be their duty, in
  and  about  housing  facilities,  to  preserve the public peace, prevent


 crime,  detect  and  arrest  offenders,   suppress   riots,   mobs   and
  insurrections,   disperse   unlawful   or   dangerous   assemblages  and
  assemblages which obstruct free passage; protect the rights  of  persons
  and property; guard the public health; remove all nuisances; enforce and
  prevent  violation of all laws and ordinances; and for these purposes to
  arrest all persons guilty of violating any law or  ordinance  and  shall
  provide   for   the  performance,  without  unnecessary  delay,  of  all
  recording, fingerprinting, photographing and  other  preliminary  police
  duties.  Appointments  to  such  housing  police  force shall be made in
  accordance with applicable provisions of the civil service law and  only
  persons  who have never been convicted of a felony, and who are citizens
  of the United States shall be appointed housing patrol officers  on  the
  housing  police  force.  Each  member  of  such  force shall be a police
  officer as defined  by  paragraph  (e)  of  subdivision  thirty-four  of
  section  1.20  of  the  criminal procedure law and, while on duty, shall
  possess all the powers of a police officer of a city in the execution of
  criminal process; and criminal process issued by any court or magistrate
  of a city may be directed to and executed by a member of such force.
    The authority may appoint a chief and a deputy chief  of  the  housing
  police  department  who,  in  the  discretion  of  the authority, may be
  selected from the ranks of the housing police force, and  assign  powers
  and  duties  to  them and fix their compensation. The chief shall be the
  head of such department. During the absence or disability of the  chief,
  the deputy chief shall possess all the powers and perform all the duties
  of  the  chief.  The  housing  police  force  shall consist of captains,
  lieutenants, sergeants and patrolmen. The  authority  shall  maintain  a
  division  for  detective  purposes to be known as the detective division
  and may, from time to time, detail to service in said division  as  many
  members  of  the  force  as  it  may deem necessary, and may at any time
  within three years of appointment revoke  any  such  detail  or  a  part
  thereof.  If  the  authority,  in  its discretion, dissolves the housing
  authority police department and the housing authority police force,  the
  division  for  detective purposes shall also be dissolved. Any member of
  the force while so detailed may be granted an increase in  salary  above
  the  grade  established  for  his rank in the uniformed force, but shall
  retain his rank in the force and shall be  eligible  for  promotion  the
  same  as if serving in the uniformed force, and the time during which he
  serves in such division shall count for all purposes as if served in his
  rank or grade in the uniformed force.
    5-a. Receipt of line of duty pay. a. A member of  the  New  York  city
  housing authority police force in the rank of police officer, other than
  an officer who is detailed or designated as a detective or who holds the
  position of sergeant or any position of higher rank in such force, shall
  be  entitled  pursuant  to this section to the full amount of his or her
  regular salary for the period of any incapacity due to illness or injury
  incurred in the performance and discharge of duty as a  police  officer,
  as determined by the authority.
    b. A member of the New York city housing authority police force who is
  detailed  or  designated  as  a  detective  or who holds the position of
  sergeant or any position of higher rank in such force shall be  entitled
  pursuant to this section to the full amount of his or her regular salary
  for  the  period  of any incapacity due to illness or injury incurred in
  the performance and discharge of duty as  a  member  of  the  force,  as
  determined  by  the  authority,  only  in  the  event  that a collective
  bargaining agreement granting such entitlement pursuant to this  section
  has  been  entered  into  by  the  authority  and the certified employee
  organization representing such member. The first entitlement of any such
  member of the New York city housing authority police force to  the  full


 amount  of  regular salary under this section shall commence on the date
  of execution of the collective bargaining agreement providing  for  such
  entitlement with respect to such member.
    c.  Nothing  in  this section shall be construed to affect the rights,
  powers and duties of the authority pursuant to any  other  provision  of
  law,  including,  but  not  limited to, the right to discipline a police
  officer by termination, reduction of salary, or  any  other  appropriate
  measure;  the  power to terminate an appointee who has not completed his
  or her probationary term;  and  the  power  to  apply  for  ordinary  or
  accident disability retirement for a police officer.
    d.  Nothing  in  this section shall be construed to require payment of
  salary to a member of the New York city housing authority  police  force
  who  has been terminated, retired, suspended or otherwise separated from
  service by reason of death, retirement or any other cause.
    e. A decision as to eligibility for benefits pursuant to this  section
  shall  not  be  binding on the medical board or the board of trustees of
  any pension fund in the determination of  eligibility  for  an  accident
  disability or accidental death benefit.
    f.  As  used  in  this  section  the  term "incapacity" shall mean the
  inability to perform full, limited, or restricted duty.
    6. In addition to all other powers granted by this  chapter,  the  New
  York  city  housing  authority shall have the power to act as and be and
  become a "developer", as that term is defined  in  subdivision  nine  of
  section  four  hundred  fifty-two  of  the  education law, of a combined
  occupancy structure, as defined in  subdivision  five  of  section  four
  hundred  fifty-two  of such law, which consists of a project, as defined
  in this chapter, as well as of school accommodations or other facilities
  of the board of education of the city of New York, and to be and  become
  an  "owner", as that term is defined in subdivision fifteen-a of section
  four hundred fifty-two of the education law, of the non-school  portion,
  consisting  of  a  project  as defined in this chapter, of such combined
  occupancy structure; and to do all things  necessary  or  convenient  to
  carry  out  such  powers,  including  (a)  construction of such combined
  occupancy structure as a developer pursuant to the  provisions  of  this
  chapter and article ten of the education law, and conveyance or lease of
  the  school  portion  thereof,  and (b) as an owner, making and entering
  into contracts for acquisition, lease, sublease or other agreements  for
  or  with  respect  to the non-school portion, consisting of a project as
  defined in this chapter, pursuant to the provisions of  article  ten  of
  the  education  law, and acquiring the same by transfer or conveyance to
  it of the fee title, or of possession  under  such  lease,  sublease  or
  other agreement.
    6-a.  a.  The New York city housing authority shall include with every
  lease or renewal lease offered to a prospective  or  current  tenant,  a
  separate,  clear  and  conspicuous  notice,  in  at  least sixteen-point
  boldface type, concerning the tenant's ability to add  additional  legal
  occupants to the lease agreement.
    b.  Upon receipt of a tenant's request for a form to add an additional
  legal occupant to his or  her  lease  agreement,  the  authority  shall,
  within  seven  days, provide the tenant with clear information regarding
  how to apply in person or online, along  with  a  notice  informing  the
  tenant  of  the  right  to grieve the denial of any occupancy permission
  request. Any form required by the authority to  request  such  occupancy
  permission  shall be made available for review and submission in person,
  on  the  authority's  website,  and  through  the   authority's   mobile
  application.
    c.  Upon  receipt  of  a  tenant's  request to add an additional legal
  occupant to his or her lease agreement, the authority shall provide  the


 tenant,  in  writing,  with  confirmation of receipt of the application,
  information regarding how the tenant may inquire as  to  the  status  of
  such  request, and the expected date of the authority's response to such
  request.
    7.  The  authority shall have the power, which shall be in addition to
  its other powers under this chapter,  to  adopt  rules  and  regulations
  relating  to the parking, stopping or standing of a motor vehicle within
  the interior paths, roads, or grounds of its public housing projects.  A
  violation  of  such  rules  and  regulations shall constitute a "traffic
  infraction" as  defined  in  the  vehicle  and  traffic  law,  and  such
  violation  shall  be  heard  and  tried by the parking violations bureau
  established and created under and pursuant to title A of  chapter  forty
  of  the administrative code of the city of New York, as added by chapter
  one thousand seventy-five of the laws of  nineteen  hundred  sixty-nine.
  Such  rules  and  regulations  shall  not  be  effective  until filed as
  required by section fifty-four of this chapter and, in  addition,  until
  filed  with  the clerk of the municipality in which the principal office
  of the authority is located. The authority shall post appropriate  signs
  in  specific  locations within a project as to the rules and regulations
  governing the parking, stopping or standing of motor  vehicles  at  such
  locations.
    8.  All  provisions  of  this  chapter applicable to the New York City
  Housing Authority and not  inconsistent  with  the  provisions  of  this
  section shall continue to apply to such authority.
    9.  The  chairman  shall ensure that at every meeting of the authority
  the public shall be allotted a period of  time,  not  less  than  thirty
  minutes, to speak on any topic on the agenda.
    10.  Notwithstanding  any other provision of law to the contrary, upon
  the vacancy of a dwelling unit in any project operated by the authority,
  such vacant dwelling unit on a lower floor shall first be made available
  for occupancy to a current New York city  housing  authority  household,
  containing  an  authorized member of the household with a disability, as
  defined by subdivision twenty-one of section two hundred  ninety-two  of
  the  executive  law,  that  affects  mobility  and  based  on either the
  tenant's preference to move  to  a  first-or-second-floor  unit  and  to
  remain  within  their project or to transfer elsewhere, and based on the
  tenant's position on  the  authority's  transfer  waiting  list;  or  to
  provide  reasonable  accommodation  to  a  current New York city housing
  authority household, containing an authorized member  of  the  household
  with  a  disability, as defined by subdivision twenty-one of section two
  hundred ninety-two of  the  executive  law,  that  affects  mobility  to
  transfer  to  a  lower  floor  within  their project or to a lower floor
  elsewhere, if the request is supported  by  medical  documentation,  and
  based on the tenant's position on the authority's transfer waiting list.
  The  New  York  city  housing  authority  may  give higher preference to
  individuals requiring an emergency transfer  because  their  units  have
  become uninhabitable.
    11.  Except  where  such exclusion is required pursuant to any federal
  law or rule or regulation, no person shall  be  denied  occupancy  in  a
  dwelling  in  any  project  or  be  subjected  to eviction from any such
  dwelling on the sole ground that such person is a formerly  incarcerated
  individual.






	   §   402-a.  Defense  and  indemnification  in  civil  actions  against
  employees of the New York city housing authority.   1. As used  in  this
  section,  the  term  "employee"  shall  mean  the members, including the
  chairman of the New York city housing authority appointed by  the  mayor
  of  the city of New York, officers, employees, or a former employee, his
  or her estate or judicially appointed personal representative. The  term
  "employee" shall not include an independent contractor.
    2. At the request of the employee, and upon compliance by the employee
  with the provisions of this section, the New York city housing authority
  shall  provide  for  the  defense  of an employee in any civil action or
  proceeding in any state or federal court, arising out of any alleged act
  or omission which the New York city  housing  authority  finds  occurred
  while  the  employee  was  acting  within the scope of his or her public
  employment and in the discharge of his or her public duties and was  not
  in  violation  of  any  rule  or regulation of the New York city housing
  authority at the time the alleged act or omission occurred. This duty to
  provide for a defense and indemnification shall  not  arise  where  such
  civil  action  or  proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the New York
  city housing authority against the employee. A member of  the  New  York
  city housing authority police force, when within the geographical limits
  of  his  or her jurisdiction, although excused from official duty at the
  time, for the purposes of this section, shall be deemed to be acting  in
  the  discharge  of  duty  when  engaged  in  the  immediate  and  actual
  performance of a public  duty  imposed  by  law  and  such  public  duty
  performed  was for the benefit of all the citizens of the community, and
  the New York city housing authority derived no special  benefit  in  its
  corporate capacity.
    3.  The  New  York  city  housing  authority  shall indemnify and save
  harmless its employees in the amount  of  any  civil  judgment  obtained
  against  such  employees in any state or federal court, or in the amount
  of any settlement of a claim approved  by  the  New  York  city  housing
  authority  provided that the act or omission from which such judgment or
  settlement arose occurred while the employee was acting within the scope
  of his or her public employment and in  the  discharge  of  his  or  her
  public  duties and was not in violation of any rule or regulation of the
  New York city housing authority at the time  the  alleged  damages  were
  sustained.
    4.  The duty to indemnify and save harmless prescribed by this section
  shall not arise where the injury or damage resulted from an  intentional
  wrongdoing, or recklessness on the part of the employee.
    5.  Nothing  in this section shall authorize the New York city housing
  authority to indemnify or save harmless  an  employee  with  respect  to
  punitive or exemplary damages, fines or penalties.
    6.  The  duty  to defend and indemnify and save harmless prescribed by
  this section shall be conditioned upon (i) delivery by the  employee  to
  the  chairman,  general  manager or general counsel of the New York city
  housing authority at the office of the New York city  housing  authority
  of  the  original  or  a copy of any summons, complaint, claim, process,
  notice, demand or pleading within ten days after the employee is  served
  with such document, and (ii) the full cooperation of the employee in the
  defense  of  such  action  or proceeding and in defense of any action or
  proceeding against the New York city housing authority  based  upon  the
  same  act  or  omission,  and  in  the  prosecution  of any appeal. Such
  delivery shall be deemed a request by the employee  that  the  New  York
  city  housing  authority provide for his or her defense pursuant to this
  section. In the event that the New York  city  housing  authority  shall
  assume  an  employee's  defense  and  thereafter  the  employee fails or
  refuses to cooperate in the formation or  presentation  of  his  or  her


 defense,  the  court shall permit the New York city housing authority to
  withdraw its representation ten days after giving written notice to  the
  employee of its intention to discontinue such representation.
    7.  In  the  event  that  the  act  or  omission  upon which the court
  proceeding against the employee is based was or is also the basis  of  a
  disciplinary  proceeding  by the New York city housing authority against
  the employee, representation and indemnification by the  New  York  city
  housing  authority,  as  set  forth in this section, may be withheld (i)
  until such disciplinary proceeding has been resolved and (ii) unless the
  resolution of the disciplinary proceeding exonerated the employee as  to
  such act or omission.
    8.  Subject  to the conditions set forth in this section, the employee
  shall be entitled to representation by the general counsel  of  the  New
  York  city  housing authority or by any attorney or attorneys designated
  by the general counsel, provided, however, that the  employee  shall  be
  entitled  to  be  represented by private counsel of his or her choice in
  any civil action or  proceeding  whenever  the  New  York  city  housing
  authority  determines  that  representation  would  be inappropriate, or
  whenever a court, upon appropriate motion  or  otherwise  by  a  special
  proceeding,  determines  that a conflict of interest exists and that the
  employee is entitled  to  be  represented  by  private  counsel  of  the
  employee's  choice.  The  general  counsel  of the New York city housing
  authority shall notify the employee in  writing  of  such  determination
  that  the  employee  is  entitled  to be represented by private counsel.
  Provided, however, that the New York city housing authority may require,
  as  a  condition  to  payment  of  the  fees  and   expenses   of   such
  representation, that appropriate groups of such employees be represented
  by the same counsel.  Reasonable attorneys' fees and litigation expenses
  shall  be  paid  by  the New York city housing authority to such private
  counsel from time to time during the pendency of  the  civil  action  or
  proceeding.
    9. Any dispute with respect to representation of multiple employees by
  a  single counsel or the reasonableness of attorneys' fees or the amount
  of litigation expenses shall be resolved by the court upon motion or  by
  way of a special proceeding.
    10.  The  benefits  of  this  section shall inure only to employees as
  defined herein and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights of any other
  party nor shall any provision of this section be  construed  to  affect,
  alter or repeal any provision of the workers' compensation law.
    11.  The  provisions of this section shall not be construed in any way
  to impair, alter, limit or modify the  rights  and  obligations  of  any
  insurer under any policy of insurance.
    12.  Except  as  otherwise  specifically provided in this section, the
  provisions of this section shall not be construed in any way to  impair,
  alter,  limit, modify, abrogate or restrict any immunity available to or
  conferred upon any unit, entity, member, officer or employee of the  New
  York   city   housing   authority,   or  any  right  to  defense  and/or
  indemnification provided for any member,  officer  or  employee  by,  in
  accordance  with, or by reason of, any other provision of state, federal
  or local law or common law.
    13. Every action or proceeding instituted pursuant to  the  provisions
  of  this  section  shall  be  commenced  pursuant to section one hundred
  fifty-seven of this chapter and within one  year  and  ninety  days.  No
  action  or  proceeding  instituted  pursuant  to  the provisions of this
  section shall be prosecuted or maintained  against  the  New  York  city
  housing  authority,  or an officer or employee thereof, unless notice of
  claim or demand shall have been made and served upon the New  York  city


 housing  authority in compliance with section one hundred fifty-seven of
  this chapter and within ninety days after the claim arises.
    14. If any provision of this section or the application thereof to any
  person  or circumstance be held unconstitutional or invalid, in whole or
  in part by any court, such holding of unconstitutionality or  invalidity
  shall  in no way affect or impair any other provision of this section or
  the  application  of  any  such  provision  to  any  other   person   or
  circumstance.
    15.  The  provisions  of  this  section shall apply to the actions and
  proceedings set forth herein notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions
  of state or local law.




   §  402-b.  Power of authority to enter into mixed-finance transactions
  to continue viability of public housing.  1.  Legislative  findings  and
  declaration.  The  legislature  finds  and declares that the state has a
  vital interest in the continued  viability  of  public  housing.  It  is
  necessary  to  ensure  that public housing continues to serve low-income
  individuals and families who would otherwise  face  homelessness  or  be
  forced  into unsafe or unsanitary housing. Public housing functions as a
  safety net for persons most in  need  of  safe,  decent  and  affordable
  housing.  The  legislature  further finds that the New York city housing
  authority has made, and continues to make, a concerted effort to provide
  public housing to individuals and families  in  need.  Certain  projects
  owned by the New York city housing authority have suffered deterioration
  over  time, and the housing authority does not have sufficient resources
  to address  this  deterioration.  An  infusion  of  private  capital  is
  necessary  to  ensure  the  continued success and long term viability of
  these projects.  The  legislature  further  finds  that  bringing  state
  financed  public housing operated by the New York city housing authority
  within the public housing  subsidized  by  the  federal  government,  by
  utilizing  the  federal  American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009,
  will allow the New York city  housing  authority  to  enter  into  mixed
  finance  transactions,  which will result in receiving new operating and
  capital subsidies from the federal government and preserve the units  as
  public  housing.  The  legislature also finds that tenants living in the
  projects that have been financed by the city of New York, commonly known
  as Marble  Hill  Houses,  St.  Mary's  Park  Houses,  Bay  View  Houses,
  Boulevard  Houses,  Linden Houses and Samuel Houses, located in the city
  of New York, counties of  Bronx,  Kings  and  New  York,  will,  through
  multiple  contracts  and  agreements  among  the  New  York city housing
  authority, investment partners and the federal government,  be  afforded
  the  same  protections  as  tenants  living  in  the  projects listed in
  subdivision two of this section. The  legislature  therefore  finds  and
  declares  that  enactment of this section would enable redevelopment and
  rehabilitation of those  certain  New  York  state  and  New  York  city
  financed  projects owned by the New York city housing authority, and the
  continued operation of said projects for persons  and  families  of  low
  income.
    2.  Upon  approval  by the commissioner of the division of housing and
  community renewal,  the  New  York  city  housing  authority  is  hereby
  authorized  to  sell  or  lease all or part of the residential buildings
  within the projects commonly known as Marlboro Houses,  Chelsea  Houses,
  Castle  Hill  Houses, 344 East 28th Street, Amsterdam Addition, Bushwick
  Houses, Stephen Wise Towers, Arthur H. Murphy Houses, Baychester Houses,
  Jonathan Williams  Plaza,  Drew-Hamilton  Houses,  Independence  Towers,
  Rutgers  Houses,  Stapleton Houses and Manhattanville Houses, located in
  the city of New York, counties of Bronx, Kings, New York  and  Richmond,
  upon  such  terms and conditions and in such manner as the New York city
  housing authority may  deem  appropriate  and  in  compliance  with  the
  provisions  of this section. The commissioner of the division of housing
  and community renewal shall not grant such approval  unless  he  or  she
  makes  a  finding that such sale or lease will enable the projects to be
  redeveloped and operated in such manner as to provide decent,  safe  and
  sanitary  housing  within the financial reach of persons and families of
  low income  and  a  further  finding  that  new  federal  assistance  is
  significantly more likely to be available to the projects listed in this
  section if such approval is granted. There shall be no requirement for a
  finding  by  the  commissioner  of the division of housing and community
  renewal that provisions have  been  made  to  pay  or  otherwise  assure
  payment  or  retirement  of  all  bonds,  notes  and  other  obligations


 heretofore issued to finance the projects or a portion thereof, provided
  that the sale or lease of the projects is part of a  comprehensive  plan
  of  rehabilitation  and/or restructuring which includes the provision of
  housing for persons and families of low income. The sale or lease of all
  or  part  of the residential buildings within the projects enumerated in
  this section shall be made subject to all pertinent  federal  statutory,
  executive  orders,  consent orders and regulatory requirements, as those
  requirements may be  amended  from  time  to  time,  and  contracts  and
  agreements  which shall be recorded against and which shall run with the
  land, including a regulatory and operating agreement and  a  declaration
  of restrictive covenants requiring the operation and maintenance of such
  residential  projects  in  compliance  with  federal  requirements,  and
  amendments to a certain  mixed-finance  amendment  to  the  consolidated
  annual   contributions  contract  between  the  New  York  city  housing
  authority  and  the  United  States  department  of  housing  and  urban
  development    (collectively,    the    "applicable    public    housing
  requirements").
    3. (a)  All  applicable  public  housing  requirements  pertaining  to
  federal  public  housing  projects shall apply to the projects listed in
  subdivision two of this  section,  including  but  not  limited  to  all
  procedural  and  substantive  due  process requirements, restrictions on
  evictions except for just cause, the  right  to  automatic  renewals  of
  leases, and the right to meaningful input in matters concerning tenants;
  Section  8  units shall be subject to the voluntary conversion agreement
  and management plan approved by the United States department of  housing
  and  urban development on September eleventh, two thousand eight, and as
  it may be amended from time to time. The public housing  and  Section  8
  leases of tenants in occupancy of the projects listed in subdivision two
  of  this  section  on  the  date of sale or lease of such projects shall
  remain in effect, except as such leases may be modified or  assigned  to
  reflect  changes in the ownership of project buildings. Each such tenant
  shall enjoy the same rights and obligations as other tenants with public
  housing leases occupying dwelling units in the  housing  projects  owned
  and  operated by the New York city housing authority that are not listed
  in subdivision two of this section, or  pursuant  to  Section  8  leases
  supported  by Section 8 vouchers, except as provided by paragraph (b) of
  this subdivision. Each project owner  and  the  New  York  city  housing
  authority  shall  be  jointly  and  severally  obligated  to provide and
  protect the rights set forth herein.
    (b) All units in projects listed in subdivision two  of  this  section
  where  there  has  been  an allocation of federal low-income housing tax
  credits, during  the  required  federal  regulatory  compliance  periods
  applicable  to  such  federal low-income housing tax credits, shall upon
  vacancy be rented by persons or families whose income  does  not  exceed
  sixty  percent of area median income at a rent, including utilities, not
  to exceed thirty percent of the household's adjusted gross  income.  All
  other  units  shall  upon vacancy be rented by persons or families whose
  income does not exceed eighty percent of area median income at  a  rent,
  including  utilities,  not  to  exceed thirty percent of the household's
  adjusted gross income.  All  income  guidelines  applicable  to  federal
  public  housing  projects  shall apply to projects listed in subdivision
  two of this section. Each such tenant shall enjoy the  same  rights  and
  obligations  as  other  tenants  with  public  housing  leases occupying
  dwelling units in the housing projects owned and  operated  by  the  New
  York  city  housing  authority that are not listed in subdivision two of
  this section, or pursuant to Section 8 leases  supported  by  Section  8
  vouchers, except as provided by this paragraph.


   (c)  All  tenants  who  reside  in  the  housing  projects  listed  in
  subdivision two of this section prior to  the  sale  or  lease  of  such
  project  shall  be  entitled  to  remain  in  their  current apartments,
  provided  that  such  tenant  or  tenants  comply  with  the  terms  and
  conditions  of  their  leases  and  meet  all  applicable federal income
  guidelines. Each such tenant shall enjoy the same rights and obligations
  as other tenants with public housing leases occupying dwelling units  in
  the  housing  projects  owned  and operated by the New York city housing
  authority that are not listed in subdivision two  of  this  section,  or
  pursuant  to Section 8 leases supported by Section 8 vouchers, except as
  provided by paragraph (b) of this subdivision.
    (d) For each project listed in subdivision two of  this  section,  all
  units  occupied  by persons of low income shall be physically integrated
  with all other units in the project. They shall share  common  means  of
  access, services and amenities equally with all other units and shall in
  no  way be physically or otherwise set apart from all other units in the
  project.
    (e) All prospective public housing and  Section  8  tenants  shall  be
  selected  from  a waiting list which shall be maintained by the New York
  city housing authority in compliance with the federal public housing and
  Section 8 laws and all applicable rules and regulations.  The  New  York
  city  housing  authority  and each respective project owner shall screen
  tenants and jointly have final approval over  tenant  selection  all  in
  accordance   with   aforementioned  laws,  rules  and  regulations.  All
  prospective public housing tenants shall be taken from the waiting  list
  in  the  order  in  which  they  applied  for the size appropriate unit,
  subject however to preferences and priorities provided for in the public
  housing law and all applicable rules and regulations.
    (f) The entity that acts as the managing member or general partner  of
  the  respective  owner of each project listed in subdivision two of this
  section following transfer of such project, shall  at  all  times  be  a
  not-for-profit  housing development fund corporation wholly owned by the
  New York city housing authority and shall be established  under  article
  eleven  of  the  private  housing finance law. The board of directors of
  such housing development fund  corporation  shall  be  composed  of  the
  chairperson  of  the  New  York  city  housing  authority  and  the duly
  appointed members of such authority.
    (g) The entity that owns any project or assists in the  management  of
  any project may include an entity exempt from federal income taxes under
  section  501(c)3 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended, or its
  wholly owned subsidiary.
    (h) The provisions of this  section  may  be  enforced  by  any  party
  aggrieved by a violation of such provisions.
    (i)  In  the  case  where there is an allocation of federal low income
  housing tax credits in connection with a sale or lease of  the  project,
  the fee payable to the project developer shall not exceed twelve percent
  of the total development cost, provided however, that the fee payable to
  such  developer  may  be  increased  to the maximum percentage permitted
  under regulations promulgated by the division of housing  and  community
  renewal  if  the  developer  assumes  additional  financial  risk.  Such
  increase shall not be granted (i) for risk the developer is  customarily
  required  to  assume  or  guarantees  which the developer is customarily
  required to  provide  by  industry  practice,  (ii)  for  any  risks  or
  guarantees which parties other than the developer would ultimately bear,
  or  (iii)  if  the  cost  of such risks or guarantees would be paid from
  governmental grants, loans, subsidies or other governmental  funds.  The
  foregoing  limitation  shall not apply to any portion of a developer fee
  paid to the housing authority.


   (j) The provisions of this section shall be applicable to each of  the
  projects delineated in subdivision two of this section commencing on the
  closing  date  of  the  sale  or  lease  of  each  respective project in
  compliance with applicable law and shall be binding on  all  owners  and
  operators of such project.
    4. State subsidies available to the projects listed in subdivision two
  of this section in connection with the bonds, notes or other obligations
  heretofore  issued  to  finance  the cost thereof may, subject to annual
  appropriation and upon compliance with the provisions of  this  section,
  continue  to  be  used  to  pay the debt service on such bonds, notes or
  other  obligations,  subject  to  such  terms  and  conditions  as   the
  commissioner  of  the division of housing and community renewal may deem
  appropriate.
    5. The New York city housing authority shall be  required  to  develop
  and  circulate a notice to all tenants of public housing projects listed
  in subdivisions one and two of this section. The  notice  shall  contain
  information  regarding  the transfer and federalization process, as well
  as notice that tenants'  rights  to  occupancy  and  due  process  shall
  continue as they existed prior to the transfer.
    6. The New York city housing authority, shall provide the commissioner
  of  the  division  of  housing and community renewal, the speaker of the
  assembly, the temporary president of the senate, the minority leader  of
  the  assembly,  the  minority  leader  of  the  senate, the chair of the
  assembly housing  committee,  and  the  chair  of  the  senate  housing,
  construction,  and  community development committee copies of the annual
  project activity report or any substantially similar annual report  that
  it  is required to submit to the United States department of housing and
  urban development that is related to the projects listed in subdivisions
  one and two of this section.




   * §  402-c.  Notice  upon denial of request. The New York city housing
  authority shall provide a tenant, upon the denial of  any  request  that
  would permit a tenant to institute a grievance procedure, with a written
  notice  specifically  articulating its reasons for such denial. Any such
  notice shall also inform a tenant of  the  right  to  grieve  a  request
  denial  and  the  process by which such tenant may institute a grievance
  procedure.
    * NB There are 2 § 402-c's




   §  402-d.  The  governor  may  issue  an  executive order, pursuant to
  article two-B of the executive law and subject to the availability of  a
  state  appropriation, which shall govern the examination and remediation
  of conditions, including the construction or reconstruction  as  may  be
  required,  of  residential  properties  owned  by  the authority and the
  development and execution of a plan to remediate such conditions.




   §  402-e.  Disruption  of  vital  services.  1. (a) In order to ensure
  compliance and enforcement of the New York city housing authority's duty
  to provide heat, water, electricity and elevator service, the  New  York
  city  housing  authority  shall  publish  information regarding reported
  disruptions in such services, the length of  such  disruptions  and  the
  steps  taken  to  restore  services. Starting on May first, two thousand
  twenty,  the  New  York  city  housing  authority  shall  publish   such
  information   on   its  website.  For  six  months  after  the  original
  publication date, the New York city housing authority shall retain  such
  information on its website.
    (b)  When  a  public utility or local, state or federal agency advises
  the New York city housing  authority  that  certain  residents  of  such
  authority  should  avoid  the use of water for drinking or cooking, such
  authority shall provide written notice, in electronic and paper form, of
  such advice to the indicated  residents  and  the  resident  association
  president or other formally recognized resident leader for the indicated
  development  as  soon  as  practical but no later than twenty-four hours
  after such authority has received such advice.
    1-a. The New York city housing authority shall  establish  appropriate
  measures,  procedures, and guidelines, such as contract requirements and
  enforcement mechanisms, to  ensure  that  all  of  its  contractors  and
  subcontractors,  when collecting or examining water samples on behalf of
  such authority, comply with all federal, state, and local  laws,  rules,
  and  regulations applicable to such collection or examination, including
  the provisions of section five hundred two of the public health law.
    2. No later than April first, two thousand twenty, the New  York  city
  housing authority shall meet with representatives of the housing part of
  the  New  York  city  civil  court,  a  representative of public housing
  tenants from each borough in the city of New York, and a  representative
  of a legal services provider with experience representing public housing
  tenants  in  the housing part of the New York city civil court, in order
  to review and comment on the New York city housing authority's  proposed
  additions  to  its  website  as  described  in  subdivision  one of this
  section.
    3. Nothing in this section shall be deemed  to  limit  or  modify  the
  manner in which a tenant may report unscheduled interruption in services
  to  their particular unit when not associated with a broader building or
  development unscheduled  interruption  of  services,  or  to  limit  the
  applicability  of  the warranty of habitability to New York city housing
  authority apartments or to limit the authority  of  the  New  York  city
  council  to  legislate  in  the  area of housing code violations or with
  respect to the New York city  department  of  housing  preservation  and
  development.
    4.  Nothing  in  this  section  shall be deemed to limit or modify the
  obligation of the department of housing preservation and development  to
  inspect  and  verify the existence of conditions of all kinds in the New
  York city housing authority.




   §  402-f.  Searchable ticket database. 1. When residents call and file
  complaints and/or file  a  complaint  online  with  the  authority,  the
  authority  shall  assign  the  complaint  a ticket number. The authority
  shall then make available this complaint and corresponding ticket number
  on their website and over the  phone  in  a  public  database  which  is
  searchable by ticket number. Each searchable ticket number shall provide
  the following information:
    (a) explanation of the complaint;
    (b) current status of the ticket;
    (c) whether or not the ticket is still open or closed;
    (d) any and all action taken on the complaint;
    (e) any and all action taken towards solving the complaint;
    (f) next steps to be taken, if known; and
    (g)  any additional information the authority chooses to provide aside
  from the mandatory information required under this section.
    2. The  database  shall  exclude  all  personal  information  such  as
  apartment  numbers,  names  of  residents,  and  any  other  identifying
  information.




   * §  402-g.  Contracting with minority and women owned enterprises and
  small businesses. Notwithstanding any provision of article eight of this
  chapter or any other provision of law, the authority  is  authorized  to
  establish  and  implement reasonable procedures to secure the meaningful
  participation  of  minority  and  women  owned  enterprises  and   small
  businesses  in its procurement process, and may use the same measures to
  enhance small business participation as are available to the city of New
  York pursuant to section thirteen hundred nine  of  the  New  York  city
  charter,  except  to  the  extent  inconsistent with federal law and any
  funding requirements that preclude the authority from  implementing  the
  provisions  of  this section. Upon written consent of the authority, the
  authority shall be subject  to  the  rules  and  goal  authorized  under
  subdivision  g  of  section  thirteen  hundred nine of such charter with
  respect to a mentoring program established  pursuant  to  this  section,
  provided that after execution of such written consent, the NYCHA CEO, as
  such  term  is  defined  in  subdivision  fifteen of section six hundred
  twenty-seven of this chapter, and the city, acting  by  the  mayor,  may
  enter   into   a  memorandum  of  understanding  relating  to  mentoring
  opportunities authorized under this section.
    * NB Effective February 22, 2024
    * NB Repealed February 22, 2034




   §  403.  Validation.    The  creation and establishment of the Buffalo
  Municipal Housing Authority under the provisions of article five of  the
  former state housing law, together with all proceedings, acts and things
  undertaken,  performed  or  done  with  reference  thereto,  are  hereby
  validated, ratified, confirmed,  approved  and  declared  legal  in  all
  respects,  notwithstanding any want of statutory authority or any defect
  or irregularity in such acts or proceedings.




   §  404.  Buffalo  Municipal Housing Authority.   The Buffalo Municipal
  Housing Authority is hereby  constituted  and  declared  to  be  a  body
  corporate  and  politic with all the powers, rights and duties set forth
  in article five of the former state  housing  law.  Notwithstanding  any
  inconsistent provision of law, any member of such authority appointed or
  reappointed  by the mayor of Buffalo shall be subject to confirmation by
  a majority vote of the common council of such city.




   §  405.  Validation.   The creation and establishment of the municipal
  housing authority of the city of Schenectady  under  the  provisions  of
  article  five  of  the  former  state  housing  law,  together  with all
  proceedings,  acts  and  things  undertaken,  performed  or  done   with
  reference  thereto,  are hereby validated, ratified, confirmed, approved
  and  declared  legal  in  all  respects,  notwithstanding  any  want  of
  statutory  authority  or  any  defect  or  irregularity  in such acts or
  proceedings.




   § 406. Schenectady Municipal Housing Authority.  The municipal housing
  authority  of the city of Schenectady is hereby constituted and declared
  to be a body corporate and politic  with  all  the  powers,  rights  and
  duties as set forth in article five of the former state housing law.




   §  405.  Validation.   The creation and establishment of the municipal
  housing authority of the city of Schenectady  under  the  provisions  of
  article  five  of  the  former  state  housing  law,  together  with all
  proceedings,  acts  and  things  undertaken,  performed  or  done   with
  reference  thereto,  are hereby validated, ratified, confirmed, approved
  and  declared  legal  in  all  respects,  notwithstanding  any  want  of
  statutory  authority  or  any  defect  or  irregularity  in such acts or
  proceedings.




   § 406. Schenectady Municipal Housing Authority.  The municipal housing
  authority  of the city of Schenectady is hereby constituted and declared
  to be a body corporate and politic  with  all  the  powers,  rights  and
  duties as set forth in article five of the former state housing law.




   §  407. New Rochelle Municipal Housing Authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the New Rochelle Municipal Housing  Authority,
  is  hereby  established  for  the  accomplishment  of  any or all of the
  purposes specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state
  of  New  York.  It  shall  constitute  a  body corporate and politic, be
  perpetual in duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the
  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter  conferred  by this chapter upon
  municipal housing authorities. It  shall  be  organized  in  the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.




   §  408. Freeport Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to
  be known as the  Freeport  Housing  Authority,  is  hereby  created  and
  established  for the village of Freeport in the county of Nassau for the
  accomplishment of any or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic and consist of five members.  It
  shall  have  the  powers  and  duties now or hereafter conferred by this
  chapter upon municipal housing authorities. It shall be organized in the
  manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions of this chapter,  and
  the  authority,  its  members, officers and employees and its operations
  and activities shall in all respects be governed by  the  provisions  of
  this  chapter.  Such  authority shall have perpetual duration; provided,
  however, that if on February first, nineteen hundred  fifty-four,  there
  shall  be  outstanding  no  bonds or other obligations of such authority
  theretofore issued for any of the purposes authorized in  this  chapter,
  then   its  corporate  existence  shall  thereupon  terminate  and  such
  authority shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   § 409. Hempstead Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to
  be  known  as  the  Hempstead  Housing  Authority, is hereby created and
  established for the village of Hempstead in the county of Nassau for the
  accomplishment of any or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic and consist of five members.  It
  shall  have  the  powers  and  duties now or hereafter conferred by this
  chapter upon municipal housing authorities. It shall be organized in the
  manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions of this chapter,  and
  the  authority,  its  members, officers and employees and its operations
  and activities shall in all respects be governed by  the  provisions  of
  this  chapter.  Such  authority shall have perpetual duration; provided,
  however, that if on May first, nineteen hundred forty-seven, there shall
  be  outstanding  no  bonds  or  other  obligations  of  such   authority
  theretofore  issued  for any of the purposes authorized in this chapter,
  then  its  corporate  existence  shall  thereupon  terminate  and   such
  authority shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   §  410.  Rockville  Centre  housing  authority.  A  municipal  housing
  authority, to be known as the Rockville  Centre  housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the accomplishment of any or all of
  the purposes specified in article eighteen of the  constitution  of  the
  state  of New York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic and
  consist of five members. It shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter. Such  authority  shall  have
  perpetual  duration;  provided,  however, that if on May first, nineteen
  hundred  seventy,  there  shall  be  outstanding  no  bonds   or   other
  obligations of such authority theretofore issued for any of the purposes
  authorized in this chapter, then its corporate existence shall thereupon
  terminate  and  such authority shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall
  be dissolved.




   §  411.  North  Tonawanda  Housing  Authority.    A  municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the  North  Tonawanda  Housing  Authority,  is
  hereby  created  and  established  in the city of North Tonawanda in the
  county of Niagara for the accomplishment of any or all of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic  and  consist  of
  five  members.  It  shall  have  the  powers and duties now or hereafter
  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.  It  shall
  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions
  of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and  employees
  and  its  operations and activities shall in all respects be governed by
  the provisions of this chapter.  Such  authority  shall  have  perpetual
  duration;  provided,  however, that if, at the expiration of three years
  subsequent to the time this section as hereby added takes effect,  there
  shall  be  outstanding  no  bonds or other obligations of such authority
  theretofore issued for any of the purposes authorized in  this  chapter,
  then   its  corporate  existence  shall  thereupon  terminate  and  such
  authority shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   § 412. Tonawanda Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to
  be  known  as  the  Tonawanda  Housing  Authority  is hereby created and
  established for the city of Tonawanda in the  county  of  Erie  for  the
  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes specified in article
  eighteen of the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and
  consist of five members. It shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   § 413. Elmira Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to be
  known as the Elmira Housing Authority, is hereby created and established
  for  the  city of Elmira in the county of Chemung for the accomplishment
  of any or all of the purposes  specified  in  article  eighteen  of  the
  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It shall constitute a body
  corporate and politic and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the
  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter  conferred  by this chapter upon
  municipal housing authorities. It  shall  be  organized  in  the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.  Such  authority  shall  have  perpetual  duration;   provided,
  however,  that  if,  at  the expiration of three years subsequent to the
  time  this  section  as  hereby  added  takes  effect,  there  shall  be
  outstanding  no bonds or other obligations of such authority theretofore
  issued for any of the purposes authorized  in  this  chapter,  then  its
  corporate  existence  shall thereupon terminate and such authority shall
  thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   § 414. Port Chester Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to  be known as the Port Chester Housing Authority is hereby established
  in the village of Port Chester in the  county  of  Westchester  for  the
  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes specified in article
  eighteen of the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and
  consist of five members. It shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §   415.  Niagara  Falls  Housing  Authority.    A  municipal  housing
  authority, to be known as the Niagara Falls Housing Authority, is hereby
  created and established in the city of Niagara Falls in  the  county  of
  Niagara  for  the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in article eighteen of the constitution of the state  of  New  York.  It
  shall  constitute  a  body  corporate  and  politic  and consist of five
  members. It shall have the powers and duties now or hereafter  conferred
  by  this  chapter  upon  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be
  organized in the manner prescribed by and subject to the  provisions  of
  this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and employees and
  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be governed by the
  provisions  of  this  chapter.  Such  authority  shall  have   perpetual
  duration;  provided,  however, that if, at the expiration of three years
  subsequent to the time this section as hereby added takes effect,  there
  shall  be  outstanding  no  bonds or other obligations of such authority
  theretofore issued for any of the purposes authorized in  this  chapter,
  then   its  corporate  existence  shall  thereupon  terminate  and  such
  authority shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   §  416.  Rotterdam  Municipal Housing Authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Rotterdam Municipal Housing Authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the town of Rotterdam in the county
  of Schenectady, for the accomplishment of any or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration and consist of five members. It shall have the power and duties
  now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this  chapter  upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  417.  North  Hempstead  Housing  Authority.    A  municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the  North  Hempstead  Housing  Authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the accomplishment of any or all of
  the purposes specified in article eighteen of the  constitution  of  the
  state  of New York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic and
  consist of five members who shall be qualified electors of the  town  of
  North  Hempstead.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or hereafter
  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.  It  shall
  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions
  of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and  employees
  and  its  operations and activities shall in all respects be governed by
  the provisions of this chapter. The town board  of  the  town  of  North
  Hempstead  may  appropriate and pay over to the authority out of general
  town funds and as a town charge a sum not to exceed ten thousand dollars
  for purposes of organization,  administration,  investigation,  planning
  and  report.  Such  authority  shall  have perpetual duration; provided,
  however, that if on May first, nineteen hundred fifty-one,  there  shall
  be   outstanding  no  bonds  or  other  obligations  of  such  authority
  theretofore issued for any of the purposes authorized in  this  chapter,
  then   its  corporate  existence  shall  thereupon  terminate  and  such
  authority shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   §  418.  Town  of  Tonawanda  Housing Authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the town of  Tonawanda  Housing  Authority  is
  hereby  created  and established for the town of Tonawanda in the county
  of Erie for the accomplishment of any and all of the purposes  specified
  in  article  eighteen  of  the constitution of the state of New York. It
  shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in  duration
  and  consist  of three members. It shall have all the powers and duties,
  now or hereafter  conferred  by  this  chapter  upon  municipal  housing
  authorities.  It  shall  be organized in the manner prescribed by and be
  subject to the  provisions  of  this  chapter  and  the  authority,  its
  members, officers, and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   § 419. Mount Vernon Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to  be known as the Mount Vernon Housing Authority is hereby created and
  established in the city of Mount Vernon in the county of Westchester for
  the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall  have the power and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  420. Cheektowaga Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to be known as the Cheektowaga Housing Authority, is hereby created  and
  established  for  the  town of Cheektowaga in the county of Erie for the
  accomplishment of any or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist of three members. It shall have all the powers and duties now or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  421.  Troy Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to be
  known as the Troy Housing Authority, is hereby created  and  established
  for  the city of Troy in the county of Rensselaer for the accomplishment
  of any or all of the purposes  specified  in  article  eighteen  of  the
  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It shall constitute a body
  corporate and politic, be perpetual in  duration  and  consist  of  five
  members.  It  shall  have  all  the  powers  and duties now or hereafter
  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.  It  shall
  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions
  of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and  employees
  and  its  operations and activities shall in all respects be governed by
  the provisions of this chapter.




   § 422. White Plains Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to be known as the White Plains Housing Authority, is hereby created and
  established  for  the  city of White Plains in the county of Westchester
  for the accomplishment of any  or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in
  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of five members. It shall have all the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  ix the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   § 423. Oswego Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to be
  known as the Oswego Housing Authority, is hereby created and established
  for the city of Oswego in the county of Oswego for the accomplishment of
  any  or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article  eighteen of the
  constitution of the state of  New  York.  It  shall  constitute  a  body
  corporate  and  politic,  be  perpetual  in duration and consist of five
  members. It shall have the powers and duties now or hereafter  conferred
  by  this  chapter  upon  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be
  organized in the manner prescribed by and subject to the  provisions  of
  this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and employees and
  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be governed by the
  provisions of this chapter.




   §  424. Fort Edward Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to be known as the Fort Edward Housing Authority, is hereby created  and
  established  for the village of Fort Edward in the county of Washington,
  for the accomplishment of any  or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in
  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  425.  Binghamton Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to be known as the Binghamton Housing Authority, is hereby  created  and
  established  for the city of Binghamton in the county of Broome, for the
  accomplishment of any or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of five members. It shall have all the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   § 426. Albany Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to be
  known as the Albany Housing Authority, is hereby created and established
  in  the city of Albany in the county of Albany for the accomplishment of
  any or all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article  eighteen  of  the
  constitution  of  the  state  of  New York.   It shall constitute a body
  corporate and politic and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the
  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter  conferred  by this chapter upon
  municipal housing authorities. It  shall  be  organized  in  the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.  Such  authority  shall  have  perpetual  duration;   provided,
  however,  that  if,  at  the expiration of three years subsequent to the
  time this section  as  hereby  amended  takes  effect,  there  shall  be
  outstanding no bonds or other obligations of such authority, theretofore
  issued  for  any  of  the  purposes authorized in this chapter, then its
  corporate existence shall thereupon terminate and such  authority  shall
  thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   §  427.  Corning Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to
  be known as  the  Corning  Housing  Authority,  is  hereby  created  and
  established  for  the  city  of Corning in the county of Steuben for the
  accomplishment of any or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  428. Amsterdam Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority to
  be known as the Amsterdam  Housing  Authority,  is  hereby  created  and
  established  for  the city of Amsterdam in the county of Montgomery, for
  the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   § 429. Ithaca Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to be
  known as the Ithaca Housing Authority, is hereby created and established
  for the city of Ithaca in the county of Tompkins, for the accomplishment
  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes specified in article eighteen of the
  constitution of the state of  New  York.  It  shall  constitute  a  body
  corporate  and  politic,  be  perpetual  in duration and consist of five
  members. It shall have all  the  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter
  conferred  by  this chapter upon municipal housing authorities. It shall
  be organized in the manner prescribed by and subject to  the  provisions
  of  this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and employees
  and its operations and activities shall in all respects be  governed  by
  the provisions of this chapter.




   § 430. Fulton Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to be
  known as Fulton Housing Authority, is hereby created and established for
  the city of Fulton in the county of Oswego for the accomplishment of any
  or all of the purposes specified in article eighteen of the constitution
  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and
  politic, be perpetual in duration and consist of five members. It  shall
  have  the  powers  and duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter
  upon municipal housing authorities.  It shall be organized in the manner
  prescribed by and subject to the provisions of  this  chapter,  and  the
  authority,  its  members,  officers and employees and its operations and
  activities shall in all respects be governed by the provisions  of  this
  chapter.




 §  431.  Rome Housing Authority.   A municipal housing authority to be
  known as the Rome Housing Authority is hereby created  in  the  city  of
  Rome,  in  the county of Oneida, for the accomplishment of any or all of
  the purposes specified in article eighteen of the  constitution  of  the
  state  of New York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic and
  consist of five members and shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in  the  manner  prescribed  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter. Such  authority  shall  have
  perpetual  duration.  Its members shall be appointed by the mayor of the
  city of Rome.


   §  432.  Long Beach Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to be known as the Long Beach Housing Authority, is hereby  created  and
  established  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It  shall  constitute a body corporate and politic and consist of
  five members who shall be qualified electors of the city of Long  Beach.
  It  shall  have the powers and duties now or hereafter conferred by this
  chapter upon municipal housing authorities. It shall be organized in the
  manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions of this chapter,  and
  the  authority,  its  members, officers and employees and its operations
  and activities shall in all respects be governed by  the  provisions  of
  this chapter. The city council of the city of Long Beach may appropriate
  and  pay  over  to the authority out of general city funds and as a city
  charge a sum  not  to  exceed  ten  thousand  dollars  for  purposes  of
  organization, administration, investigation, planning and report.




   § 433. Johnson City Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to be known as the Johnson City Housing Authority, is hereby created and
  established  for  the incorporated village of Johnson City in the county
  of Broome for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in article eighteen of the constitution of the state  of  New  York.  It
  shall  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration
  and consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  434. Kingston Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to
  be known as the  Kingston  Housing  Authority,  is  hereby  created  and
  established  for  the  city  of Kingston in the county of Ulster for the
  accomplishment of any or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  435.  Massena Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to
  be known as  the  Massena  Housing  Authority,  is  hereby  created  and
  established for the incorporated village of Massena in the county of St.
  Lawrence  for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in article eighteen of the constitution of the state  of  New  York.  It
  shall  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration
  and consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   § 436. Auburn Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to be
  known as the Auburn Housing Authority, is hereby created and established
  in  the city of Auburn in the county of Cayuga for the accomplishment of
  any or all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article  eighteen  of  the
  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It shall constitute a body
  corporate and politic and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the
  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter  conferred  by this chapter upon
  municipal housing authorities. It  shall  be  organized  in  the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.  Such  authority  shall  have  perpetual  duration;   provided,
  however,  that  if,  at  the expiration of three years subsequent to the
  time  this  section  as  hereby  added  takes  effect,  there  shall  be
  outstanding  no bonds or other obligations of such authority theretofore
  issued for any of the purposes authorized  in  this  chapter,  then  its
  corporate  existence  shall thereupon terminate and such authority shall
  thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   § 437. Poughkeepsie Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to be known as the Poughkeepsie Housing Authority, is hereby created and
  established  for  the city of Poughkeepsie in the county of Dutchess for
  the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   § 438. Watertown Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to
  be  known  as  the  Watertown  Housing  Authority, is hereby created and
  established for the city of Watertown in the county of Jefferson for the
  accomplishment of any or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §   439.   Mechanicville  Housing  Authority.    A  municipal  housing
  authority, to be known as the Mechanicville Housing Authority, is hereby
  created and established for the city of Mechanicville in the  county  of
  Saratoga  for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in article eighteen of the constitution of the state  of  New  York.  It
  shall  constitute  a  body  corporate  and  politic  and consist of five
  members. It shall have the powers and duties now or hereafter  conferred
  by  this  chapter  upon  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be
  organized in the manner prescribed by and subject to the  provisions  of
  this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and employees and
  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be governed by the
  provisions  of  this  chapter.  Such  authority  shall  have   perpetual
  duration;  provided,  however,  that  if at the expiration of five years
  subsequent to the time this section as hereby added takes effect,  there
  shall  be  outstanding  no  bonds or other obligations of such authority
  theretofore issued for any of the purposes authorized in  this  chapter,
  then   its  corporate  existence  shall  thereupon  terminate  and  such
  authority shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   §  440.  Ogdensburg Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to be known as the Ogdensburg Housing Authority, is hereby  created  and
  established for the city of Ogdensburg in the county of St. Lawrence for
  the  accomplishment  of  any or all of the purposes specified in article
  eighteen of the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It  shall
  constitute  a body corporate and politic and consist of five members. It
  shall have the powers and duties now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this
  chapter upon municipal housing authorities. It shall be organized in the
  manner  prescribed by and subject to the provisions of this chapter, and
  the authority, its members, officers and employees  and  its  operations
  and  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of
  this chapter. Such authority shall have  perpetual  duration;  provided,
  however, that if at the expiration of three years subsequent to the time
  this section as hereby added takes effect, there shall be outstanding no
  bonds  or other obligations of such authority theretofore issued for any
  of the purposes authorized in this chapter, then its corporate existence
  shall thereupon terminate and such authority shall thereupon  be  deemed
  to be and shall be dissolved.




   §  440.  Ogdensburg Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to be known as the Ogdensburg Housing Authority, is hereby  created  and
  established for the city of Ogdensburg in the county of St. Lawrence for
  the  accomplishment  of  any or all of the purposes specified in article
  eighteen of the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It  shall
  constitute  a body corporate and politic and consist of five members. It
  shall have the powers and duties now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this
  chapter upon municipal housing authorities. It shall be organized in the
  manner  prescribed by and subject to the provisions of this chapter, and
  the authority, its members, officers and employees  and  its  operations
  and  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of
  this chapter. Such authority shall have  perpetual  duration;  provided,
  however, that if at the expiration of three years subsequent to the time
  this section as hereby added takes effect, there shall be outstanding no
  bonds  or other obligations of such authority theretofore issued for any
  of the purposes authorized in this chapter, then its corporate existence
  shall thereupon terminate and such authority shall thereupon  be  deemed
  to be and shall be dissolved.


   § 441. Jamestown Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to
  be  known  as  the  Jamestown  Housing  Authority  is hereby created and
  established for the city of Jamestown in the county of  Chautauqua,  for
  the  accomplishment  of  any or all of the purposes specified in article
  eighteen of the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It  shall
  constitute  a body corporate, be perpetual in duration, and politic, and
  consist of five members. It shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions  of  this  chapter, and the authority, its members, officers,
  and employees and its operations and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  442.  Orangetown Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to be known as the Orangetown Housing Authority, is hereby  created  and
  established  for  the  town of Orangetown in the county of Rockland, for
  the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall be organized in the manner prescribed by and be subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  443.  Herkimer Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority to
  be known as the  Herkimer  Housing  Authority,  is  hereby  created  and
  established  for the village of Herkimer, in the county of Herkimer, New
  York, for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified  in
  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  444. Glen Cove Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority to
  be known as the Glen Cove  Housing  Authority,  is  hereby  created  and
  established  for  the  city  of  Glen Cove, in the county of Nassau, New
  York, for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified  in
  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall be organized in the manner prescribed by and be subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  445. Plattsburgh Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to be known as the Plattsburgh Housing Authority, is hereby created  and
  established for the city of Plattsburgh in the county of Clinton for the
  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes specified in article
  eighteen of the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and
  consist of five members. It shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by and be subject to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.


   § 446. Little Falls Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to be known as the Little Falls Housing Authority, is hereby created and
  established  for the city of Little Falls in the county of Herkimer, New
  York, for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified  in
  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall be organized in the manner prescribed by and be subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  447. Cortland Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to
  be known as the  Cortland  Housing  Authority,  is  hereby  created  and
  established  for the city of Cortland in the county of Cortland, for the
  accomplishment of any or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of five members. It shall have all the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   § 448. Cohoes Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to be
  known as the Cohoes Housing Authority, is hereby created and established
  for the city of Cohoes in the county of Albany for the accomplishment of
  any  or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article  eighteen of the
  constitution of the state of  New  York.  It  shall  constitute  a  body
  corporate  and  politic  and  consist of five members. It shall have the
  powers and duties now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this  chapter  upon
  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized in the manner
  prescribed by and subject to the provisions of  this  chapter,  and  the
  authority,  its  members,  officers and employees and its operations and
  activities shall in all respects be governed by the provisions  of  this
  chapter.   Such  authority  shall  have  perpetual  duration;  provided,
  however, that if at the expiration of five years subsequent to the  time
  this section as hereby added takes effect, there shall be outstanding no
  bonds  or other obligations of such authority theretofore issued for any
  of the purposes authorized in this chapter, then its corporate existence
  shall thereupon terminate and such authority shall thereupon  be  deemed
  to be and shall be dissolved.




   §  449.  Niagara Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to
  be known as  the  Niagara  Housing  Authority,  is  hereby  created  and
  established  for the town of Niagara in the county of Niagara, New York,
  for the accomplishment of any  or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in
  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall be organized in the manner prescribed by and be subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  450.  Saratoga  Springs  Housing  Authority.    A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Saratoga  Springs  Housing  Authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the city of Saratoga Springs in the
  county of Saratoga for the accomplishment of any or all of the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic  and  consist  of
  five  members.  It  shall  have  the  powers and duties now or hereafter
  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.  It  shall
  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions
  of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and  employees
  and  its  operations and activities shall in all respects be governed by
  the provisions of this chapter.  Such  authority  shall  have  perpetual
  duration;  provided,  however,  that  if at the expiration of five years
  subsequent to the time this section as hereby added takes effect,  there
  shall  be  outstanding  no  bonds or other obligations of such authority
  theretofore issued for any of the purposes authorized in  this  chapter,
  then   its  corporate  existence  shall  thereupon  terminate  and  such
  authority shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   § 451. Rensselaer Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority to
  be  known  as  the  Rensselaer  Housing Authority, is hereby created and
  established for the city of Rensselaer in the county of Rensselaer,  for
  the  accomplishment  of  any or all of the purposes specified in article
  eighteen of the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and
  consist of five members. It shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  452.  North  Tarrytown  Housing  Authority.    A  municipal housing
  authority to be known as  the  North  Tarrytown  Housing  Authority,  is
  hereby created and established for the village of North Tarrytown in the
  county  of  Westchester,  for  the  accomplishment  of any or all of the
  purposes specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state
  of  New  York.  It  shall  constitute  a  body corporate and politic, be
  perpetual in duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the
  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter  conferred  by this chapter upon
  municipal housing authorities. It  shall  be  organized  in  the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.




   §  453.  Newburgh Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority to
  be known as the  Newburgh  Housing  Authority,  is  hereby  created  and
  established  for  the  city of Newburgh in the county of Orange, for the
  accomplishment of any or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  454.  Ossining Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority to
  be known as the  Ossining  Housing  Authority,  is  hereby  created  and
  established  for  the  village of Ossining in the county of Westchester,
  for the accomplishment of any  or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in
  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall be organized in the manner prescribed by and be subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  455.  Rye Housing Authority.   A municipal housing authority, to be
  known as the Rye Housing Authority, is hereby  created  and  established
  for the city of Rye in the county of Westchester, for the accomplishment
  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes specified in article eighteen of the
  constitution of the state of  New  York.  It  shall  constitute  a  body
  corporate  and  politic,  be  perpetual  in duration and consist of five
  members. It shall have the powers and duties now or hereafter  conferred
  by  this  chapter  upon  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be
  organized in the manner prescribed by and subject to the  provisions  of
  this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and employees and
  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be governed by the
  provisions of this chapter.




   § 456. Salamanca Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to
  be  known  as  the  Salamanca  Housing  Authority, is hereby created and
  established for the city of Salamanca in the county of  Cattaraugus  for
  the  accomplishment  of  any or all of the purposes specified in article
  eighteen of the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It  shall
  constitute  a body corporate and politic and consist of five members. It
  shall have the powers and duties now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this
  chapter  upon  municipal housing authorities.   It shall be organized in
  the manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions of this  chapter,
  and   the  authority,  its  members,  officers  and  employees  and  its
  operations and activities shall in  all  respects  be  governed  by  the
  provisions   of  this  chapter.  Such  authority  shall  have  perpetual
  duration; provided, however, that if at the  expiration  of  five  years
  subsequent  to the time this section as hereby added takes effect, there
  shall be outstanding no bonds or other  obligations  of  such  authority
  theretofore  issued  for any of the purposes authorized in this chapter,
  then  its  corporate  existence  shall  thereupon  terminate  and   such
  authority shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   § 457. Greenburgh Housing Authority.  --A municipal housing authority,
  to  be  known  as the Greenburgh Housing Authority is hereby created and
  established for the town of Greenburgh in the county of Westchester  for
  the  accomplishment  of  any or all of the purposes specified in article
  eighteen of the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate  and politic and consist of five members.
  Such authority shall  have  the  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter
  conferred  by  this chapter upon municipal housing authorities. It shall
  be organized in the manner prescribed by and subject to  the  provisions
  of  this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and employees
  and its operations and activities shall in all respects be  governed  by
  the  provisions  of  this chapter.   Such authority shall have perpetual
  duration.




   §  458.  Validation.   The creation, establishment and organization of
  the Mount Kisco housing authority under chapter forty  of  the  laws  of
  nineteen  hundred  fifty-four  and  chapter nine hundred thirteen of the
  laws of nineteen hundred fifty-seven, together with all the proceedings,
  acts and things undertaken, performed or done  with  reference  thereto,
  are  hereby  validated, ratified, confirmed, approved and declared legal
  in all  respects,  notwithstanding  any  want  of  statutory  authority,
  expiration of corporate existence, or any defect or irregularity in such
  acts or proceedings.




   §  458-a.  Mount  Kisco  housing  authority.    1. A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Mount Kisco housing  authority  is  hereby
  recreated,  re-established  and  continued  from February twenty-second,
  nineteen hundred fifty-nine for the village of Mount Kisco in the county
  of Westchester for the accomplishment of any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York and is hereby constituted and declared to be a body  corporate  and
  politic,  consisting  of  five  members, with all the powers, rights and
  duties now or  hereafter  conferred  by  the  public  housing  law  upon
  municipal  housing authorities. It shall be subject to the provisions of
  the public housing law, and the authority,  its  members,  officers  and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of the public  housing  law.  Such  authority
  shall  have  perpetual  duration;  provided,  however,  that  if  at the
  expiration of five years subsequent to April thirtieth, nineteen hundred
  sixty-three, there  shall  be  outstanding  no  bonds,  notes  or  other
  obligations of such authority theretofore issued for any of the purposes
  authorized in the public housing law, then its corporate existence shall
  thereupon  terminate  and such authority shall thereupon be deemed to be
  and shall be dissolved.
    2. Notwithstanding any general, special or local law, the  village  of
  Mount  Kisco,  Westchester county, is hereby authorized and empowered to
  transfer and convey to the  Mount  Kisco  housing  authority,  and  such
  authority  is  hereby authorized and empowered to acquire all the right,
  title,  interest  and   assets,   including   contractual   rights   and
  obligations,  held  by  the  village  with  respect  to a public housing
  project in said village, identified and numbered  as  NY-38-1,  and  for
  that  purpose  such  village  and  authority  are  hereby authorized and
  empowered to make, execute and deliver any instrument  and  perform  any
  act  necessary  or  convenient,  and  upon such transfer, conveyance and
  delivery all the rights, duties, liabilities and responsibilities of the
  village relative to such housing project, including  any  contract  with
  the  federal  public  housing  administration,  shall  be assumed by and
  devolve upon the Mount Kisco housing authority.
    3. All proceedings and acts of the Mount Kisco housing  authority  and
  the  village  of  Mount  Kisco,  Westchester  county, and all contracts,
  agreements, obligations and undertaking heretofore entered into by  such
  Mount  Kisco housing authority or village relating to the public housing
  project  in  the  village  identified  and  known  as   Public   Housing
  Administration  Project  number NY-38-1 are hereby legalized, validated,
  ratified and confirmed in all respects, notwithstanding  any  defect  or
  irregularity therein or want of statutory authority.




   §  459.  Watervliet Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to be known as the Watervliet Housing Authority, is hereby  created  and
  established  for  the city of Watervliet in the county of Albany for the
  accomplishment of any or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic and consist of five members.  It
  shall  have  the  powers  and  duties now or hereafter conferred by this
  chapter upon municipal housing authorities.   It shall be  organized  in
  the  manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions of this chapter,
  and  the  authority,  its  members,  officers  and  employees  and   its
  operations  and  activities  shall  in  all  respects be governed by the
  provisions  of  this  chapter.  Such  authority  shall  have   perpetual
  duration;  provided,  however,  that  if at the expiration of five years
  subsequent to the time this section as hereby added takes effect,  there
  shall  be  outstanding  no  bonds or other obligations of such authority
  theretofore issued for any of the purposes authorized in  this  chapter,
  then   its  corporate  existence  shall  thereupon  terminate  and  such
  authority shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   §  460.  Village  of Catskill Housing Authority.   A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the Village of Catskill Housing  Authority,  is
  hereby created and established for the village of Catskill in the county
  of  Greene,  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the  powers  and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities.  It  shall  be organized in the manner prescribed by and be
  subject to the provisions  of  this  chapter,  and  the  authority,  its
  members,  officers and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




    §  461.  Middletown Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to be known as the Middletown Housing Authority, is hereby  created  and
  established  for  the city of Middletown in the county of Orange for the
  accomplishment of any or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  462.  Village  of  Goshen  Housing Authority.   A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the Village of  Goshen  Housing  Authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the village of Goshen in the county
  of Orange, for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized in the manner prescribed  by  and  be
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  463. Rochester Housing Authority.  1. A municipal housing authority
  to be known as the Rochester Housing Authority, is  hereby  created  and
  established  for  the  city of Rochester in the county of Monroe for the
  accomplishment of any or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    2.  Notwithstanding  any  general,  special  or  local law or existing
  contracts between the city of Rochester and the state of New  York,  the
  city  of Rochester is hereby authorized and empowered to sell, grant and
  convey at private sale to  the  Rochester  Housing  Authority  and  such
  housing  authority  is  hereby authorized to acquire all of the real and
  personal property, structures, fixtures, facilities and appurtenances of
  or used in connection with the public housing project  in  the  city  of
  Rochester, known as Hanover Houses and designated as no. NYS-53 together
  with  all  other  assets,  including  but not limited to, cash in banks,
  securities and accounts receivable. Said transfer and  conveyance  shall
  be  subject  to  all  existing  contracts,  leases,  special agreements,
  compensation awards and pending tort claims affecting the project.
    3. Upon transfer, conveyance and delivery as provided  in  subdivision
  two   of   this   title,   all  the  rights,  duties,  liabilities,  and
  responsibilities of the city of Rochester relative to NYS-53,  including
  the  loan  and  subsidy  contract  with  the  state  of  New York, dated
  September seventh, nineteen hundred forty-nine, as  thereafter  amended,
  and  as  prescribed  by this chapter shall succeed to, be assumed by and
  shall devolve upon the Rochester Housing Authority, but  nothing  herein
  shall  be  deemed  to  release  the  city of Rochester from any existing
  liability under such loan and subsidy contract.
    4. The  commissioner  of  housing,  the  city  of  Rochester  and  the
  Rochester Housing and Rehabilitation Authority are hereby authorized and
  empowered to make and execute any and all contracts, deeds, conveyances,
  transfers,  assignments and other instruments and to perform any and all
  acts necessary or convenient to carry out the purpose of the  provisions
  of this title.






	

   § 464. Geneva Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to be
  known as the Geneva Housing Authority, is hereby created and established
  for  the city of Geneva in the county of Ontario, for the accomplishment
  of any or all of the purposes  specified  in  article  eighteen  of  the
  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It shall constitute a body
  corporate and politic, and consist of five members. It  shall  have  the
  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter  conferred  by this chapter upon
  municipal housing authorities.   It shall be  organized  in  the  manner
  prescribed  by and be subject to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.  Such  authority  shall  have  perpetual  duration;   provided,
  however,  that if at the expiration of five years subsequent to the time
  this section as hereby added takes effect, there shall be outstanding no
  bonds or other obligations of such authority theretofore issued for  any
  of the purposes authorized in this chapter, then its corporate existence
  shall  thereupon  terminate and such authority shall thereupon be deemed
  to be and shall be dissolved.




   §  465. Canandaigua Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to be known as the Canandaigua Housing Authority, is hereby created  and
  established  for  the  city of Canandaigua in the county of Ontario, for
  the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, and consist of five members. It
  shall have the powers and duties now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this
  chapter  upon  municipal housing authorities.   It shall be organized in
  the manner prescribed by and  be  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this
  chapter,  and the authority, its members, officers and employees and its
  operations and activities shall in  all  respects  be  governed  by  the
  provisions   of  this  chapter.  Such  authority  shall  have  perpetual
  duration; provided, however, that if at the  expiration  of  five  years
  subsequent  to the time this section as hereby added takes effect, there
  shall be outstanding no bonds or other  obligations  of  such  authority
  theretofore  issued  for any of the purposes authorized in this chapter,
  then  its  corporate  existence  shall  thereupon  terminate  and   such
  authority shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   §  466.  Town  of  Southampton  housing authority. A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the town of Southampton housing  authority  is
  hereby created and established for the town of Southampton in the county
  of  Suffolk,  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It  shall constitute a body corporate and politic, and consist of
  five members. It shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter
  conferred  by  this chapter upon municipal housing authorities. It shall
  be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and  be  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter. Such  authority  shall  have
  perpetual duration; provided, however, that if at the expiration of five
  years  subsequent to the time this section as hereby added takes effect,
  there shall be  outstanding  no  bonds  or  other  obligations  of  such
  authority  theretofore issued for any of the purposes authorized in this
  chapter, then its corporate existence shall thereupon terminate and such
  authority shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   § 467. Mamaroneck housing authority.  A municipal housing authority to
  be  known  as  the  Mamaroneck  housing authority, is hereby created and
  established for the village of Mamaroneck in the county of  Westchester,
  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of the purposes specified in
  article eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and
  consist of five members. It shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   § 467. Mamaroneck housing authority.  A municipal housing authority to
  be  known  as  the  Mamaroneck  housing authority, is hereby created and
  established for the village of Mamaroneck in the county of  Westchester,
  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of the purposes specified in
  article eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and
  consist of five members. It shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  468.  Town  of  Islip  housing  authority.    A  municipal  housing
  authority, to be known as the town of Islip housing authority is  hereby
  created  and established for the town of Islip in the county of Suffolk,
  for the accomplishment of any  or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in
  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, and consist of five members. It
  shall have the powers and duties now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this
  chapter  upon  municipal housing authorities.   It shall be organized in
  the manner prescribed by and  be  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this
  chapter,  and the authority, its members, officers and employees and its
  operations and activities shall in  all  respects  be  governed  by  the
  provisions   of  this  chapter.  Such  authority  shall  have  perpetual
  duration; provided, however, that if at  the  expiration  of  ten  years
  subsequent  to the time this section as hereby added takes effect, there
  shall be outstanding no bonds or other  obligations  of  such  authority
  theretofore  issued  for any of the purposes authorized in this chapter,
  then  its  corporate  existence  shall  thereupon  terminate  and   such
  authority shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   §  469.  Village  of  Nyack  housing  authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of  Nyack  housing  authority,  is
  hereby created and established for the village of Nyack in the county of
  Rockland, for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in  article  eighteen  of  the constitution of the state of New York. It
  shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in  duration
  and  consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  470.  Village of Monticello housing authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Monticello  housing  authority,
  is  hereby  created and established for the village of Monticello in the
  county of Sullivan, for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the  powers  and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by, and
  subject to, the provisions of  this  chapter,  and  the  authority,  its
  members,  officers and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  471.  Town  of  Wilna  housing  authority.  1.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the town of Wilna housing authority is  hereby
  created and established for the town of Wilna in the county of Jefferson
  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of the purposes specified in
  article eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and
  consist of five members. It shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions  of this chapter and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    2.  Notwithstanding  any other provision of law, rule or regulation to
  the contrary, the village of West Carthage  housing  authority,  in  its
  entirety,  shall  be transferred to the town of Wilna housing authority.
  All powers and duties of the village of West Carthage housing  authority
  pursuant  to section thirty-seven of this chapter or any other provision
  relating to municipal housing authorities under article  three  of  this
  chapter shall be transferred to and assumed by the town of Wilna housing
  authority.




   §  472.  Town  of  Huntington housing authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the town of Huntington  housing  authority  is
  hereby  created and established for the town of Huntington in the county
  of Suffolk, for the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, and  consist  of
  five  members.  It  shall  have  the  powers and duties now or hereafter
  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.  It  shall
  be  organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and  be  subject  to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed  by  the  provisions of this chapter. Such authority shall have
  perpetual duration; provided, however, that if at the expiration of five
  years subsequent to the time this section as hereby added takes  effect,
  there  shall  be  outstanding  no  bonds  or  other  obligations of such
  authority theretofore issued for any of the purposes authorized in  this
  chapter, then its corporate existence shall thereupon terminate and such
  authority shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   §  474.  Village  of  Spring  Valley  housing authority.   A municipal
  housing authority, to be known as the village of Spring  Valley  housing
  authority,  is  hereby created and established for the village of Spring
  Valley in the county of Rockland, for the accomplishment of any  or  all
  of the purposes specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the
  state  of New York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be
  perpetual in duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the
  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter  conferred  by this chapter upon
  municipal housing authorities. It  shall  be  organized  in  the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.




   §  475.  Village of Sloatsburg housing authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Sloatsburg  housing  authority,
  is  hereby  created and established for the village of Sloatsburg in the
  county of Rockland, for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the  powers  and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and
  subject to the provisions  of  this  chapter,  and  the  authority,  its
  members,  officers and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   § 476. Gloversville housing authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to  be known as the Gloversville housing authority is hereby created and
  established for the city of Gloversville in the county of Fulton for the
  accomplishment of any or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  477.  City  of  Beacon  housing  authority.    A  municipal housing
  authority to be known as the city of Beacon housing authority, is hereby
  created and established  for  the  city  of  Beacon  in  the  county  of
  Dutchess, for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in  article  eighteen  of the constitution of the state of New York.  It
  shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in  duration
  and  consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   § 479. Hempstead Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to
  be  known  as  the Town of Hempstead housing authority is hereby created
  and established for the town of Hempstead in the county  of  Nassau  for
  the  accomplishment  of  any or all of the purposes specified in article
  eighteen of the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and
  consist of five members. It shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  480.  Town  of  Oyster Bay housing authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the town of Oyster Bay housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created and established for the town of Oyster Bay in the county
  of Nassau for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in article eighteen of the constitution of the state  of  New  York.  It
  shall  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration
  and consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  481.  City  of  Batavia  housing  authority.    A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the city of Batavia housing authority is hereby
  created and established for the city of Batavia in the county of Genesee
  for the accomplishment of any  or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in
  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  482.  Village  of  Ilion  housing  authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of  Ilion  housing  authority,  is
  hereby created and established for the village of Ilion in the county of
  Herkimer, for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in  article  eighteen  of  the constitution of the state of New York. It
  shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in  duration
  and  consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  483.  City  of  Dunkirk  housing  authority.    A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the city of Dunkirk housing authority is hereby
  created and established for  the  city  of  Dunkirk  in  the  county  of
  Chautauqua  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the  powers  and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and
  subject to the provisions  of  this  chapter,  and  the  authority,  its
  members,  officers and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  484.  City  of  Hudson  housing  authority.    A  municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the  city  of  Hudson  housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the city of Hudson in the county of
  Columbia, for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in article eighteen of the constitution of the state  of  New  York.  It
  shall  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration
  and consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  485.  Village  of  Pawling housing authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Pawling housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created and established for the village of Pawling in the county
  of Dutchess, for the accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  486.  City  of  Glens Falls housing authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the city of Glens Falls housing authority,  is
  hereby created and established for the city of Glens Falls in the county
  of  Warren,  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the  powers  and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and
  subject to the provisions  of  this  chapter,  and  the  authority,  its
  members,  officers and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  487.  City  of  Norwich  housing  authority.    A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the city  of  Norwich  housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created and established for the city of Norwich in the county of
  Chenango, for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in article eighteen of the constitution of the state  of  New  York.  It
  shall  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration
  and consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  488.  Village  of Greenport housing authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Greenport housing authority  is
  hereby  created  and  established  for  the  village of Greenport in the
  county of Suffolk for the accomplishment of any or all of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter  and  the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  489.  Town  of  Wallkill  housing  authority.   A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the  town  of  Wallkill  housing  authority  is
  hereby created and established for the town of Wallkill in the county of
  Orange,  for  the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in article eighteen of the constitution of the state  of  New  York.  It
  shall  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration
  and consist of five members. It shall have all the powers and duties now
  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this  chapter   upon   municipal   housing
  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and
  subject to the provisions  of  this  chapter,  and  the  authority,  its
  members,  officers and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  490.  City  of  Hornell  housing  authority.    A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the city of Hornell housing authority is hereby
  created and established for the city of Hornell in the county of Steuben
  for the accomplishment of any  or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in
  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  491.  Village  of Woodridge housing authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Woodridge housing authority  is
  hereby  created  and  established  for  the  village of Woodridge in the
  county of Sullivan for the accomplishment of any or all of the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter  and  the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  492.  Town  of  Fallsburg  housing authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the town of Fallsburg  housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the town of Fallsburg in the county
  of Sullivan, for the accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  493.  Village  of  Malone  Housing Authority.   A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the village  of  Malone  housing  authority  is
  hereby  created  and established for the village of Malone in the county
  of Franklin, for the accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist of five members. It shall have all the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  494.  Village  of Coxsackie housing authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Coxsackie housing authority  is
  hereby  created  and  established  for  the  village of Coxsackie in the
  county of Greene for the accomplishment of any or all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter  and  the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  495. Village of South Nyack housing authority.  A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the village of South Nyack housing authority is
  hereby created and established for the village of  South  Nyack  in  the
  county  of Rockland for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the  powers  and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and
  subject to the provisions  of  this  chapter,  and  the  authority,  its
  members,  officers and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  496.  Town  of Harrietstown Housing Authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Town of Harrietstown Housing Authority, is
  hereby created and established for  the  town  of  Harrietstown  in  the
  county of Franklin, for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




    * § 497. Village of Tupper Lake Housing Authority. A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the village of Tupper Lake housing authority is
  hereby  created  and  established  for the village of Tupper Lake in the
  county of Franklin, for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration and consist of five members. It shall have all the  powers  and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and
  subject to the provisions  of  this  chapter,  and  the  authority,  its
  members,  officers and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    * NB There are 3 § 497's




   * §  497. Village of Gouverneur housing authority. A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the Village of Gouverneur housing authority  is
  hereby  created/and  established  for  the  Village of Gouverneur in the
  County of St. Lawrence for the accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the
  purposes  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the state
  of New York. It shall  constitute  a  body  corporate  and  politic,  be
  perpetual  in  duration  and  consist of five members. It shall have the
  powers and duties now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this  chapter  upon
  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized in the manner
  prescribed by and subject to the provisions of  this  chapter,  and  the
  authority,  its  members,  officers and employees and its operations and
  activities shall in all respects be governed by the provisions  of  this
  chapter.
    * NB Nonexistent May 5, 1987
    * NB There are 3 § 497's




   * §  497. Village of Waddington housing authority. A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the Village of Waddington housing authority  is
  hereby  created/and  established  for  the  Village of Waddington in the
  County of St. Lawrence for the accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the
  purposes  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the state
  of New York. It shall  constitute  a  body  corporate  and  politic,  be
  perpetual  in  duration  and  consist of five members. It shall have the
  powers and duties now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this  chapter  upon
  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized in the manner
  prescribed by and subject to the provisions of  this  chapter,  and  the
  authority,  its  members,  officers and employees and its operations and
  activities shall in all respects be governed by the provisions  of  this
  chapter.
    * NB There are 3 § 497's




   §  498.  Town  of  Albion  housing  authority.    A  municipal housing
  authority to be known as the town of Albion housing authority is  hereby
  created and established for the town of Albion in the county of Orleans,
  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of the purposes specified in
  article eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and
  consist of five members. It shall have all the powers and duties now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  499.  Town  of  Ramapo  housing  authority.    A  municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the  town  of  Ramapo  housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the town of Ramapo in the county of
  Rockland, for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in article eighteen of the constitution of the state  of  New  York.  It
  shall  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration
  and consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  500.  City  of  Oneonta  housing  authority.    A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the city  of  Oneonta  housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created and established for the city of Oneonta in the county of
  Otsego, for the accomplishment  of  only  those  purposes  specified  in
  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist of not less than three nor more than five members. It shall have
  the  powers  and  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon
  municipal housing authorities. It  shall  be  organized  in  the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.




   §  501. Yorktown housing authority.  A municipal housing authority, to
  be known as the  Yorktown  housing  authority,  is  hereby  created  and
  established  for  the  town of Yorktown in the county of Westchester for
  the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes  specified  in  article
  eighteen  of  the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic and consist of five members.  It
  shall  have  the  powers  and  duties now or hereafter conferred by this
  chapter upon municipal housing authorities.   It shall be  organized  in
  the  manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions of this chapter,
  and  the  authority,  its  members,  officers  and  employees  and   its
  operations  and  activities  shall  in  all  respects be governed by the
  provisions  of  this  chapter.  Such  authority  shall  have   perpetual
  duration;  provided,  however,  that  if at the expiration of five years
  subsequent to the time this section as hereby added takes effect,  there
  shall  be  outstanding  no  bonds or other obligations of such authority
  theretofore issued for any of the purposes authorized in  this  chapter,
  then   its  corporate  existence  shall  thereupon  terminate  and  such
  authority shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.






	   §  502.  City  of  Lockport  housing  authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the city of  Lockport  housing  authority,  is
  hereby created and established for the city of Lockport in the county of
  Niagara,  for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in article eighteen of the constitution of the state  of  New  York.  It
  shall  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration
  and consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  503.  Village  of  Liberty housing authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Liberty  housing  authority  is
  hereby  created and established for the village of Liberty in the county
  of Sullivan for the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter  and  the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   § 504. Village of Green Island Housing Authority.  A municipal housing
  authority  to  be known as the village of Green Island housing authority
  is hereby created and established for the village of Green Island in the
  county of Albany, for the accomplishment of any or all of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist of five members. It shall have all the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   * §  505.  Town  of  Greece  Housing  Authority.  A  municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the  Town  of  Greece  Housing  Authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the town of Greece in the county of
  Monroe, for the accomplishment of any or all of the  purposes  specified
  in  article  eighteen  of  the constitution of the state of New York. It
  shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in  duration
  and  consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    * NB Not operative per general election November, 1968
    * NB There are 3 § 505's




   * §  505.  City  of  Oneida  housing  authority.  A  municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the  city  of  Oneida  housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the city of Oneida in the county of
  Madison, for the accomplishment of any or all the purposes specified  in
  article  eighteen of the constitution of the State of New York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist of not less than three nor more than five members. It shall have
  the  powers  and  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon
  municipal housing authorities. It  shall  be  organized  in  the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.
    * NB There are 3 § 505's




   * §  505.  Village  of  Potsdam housing authority. A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the Village of  Potsdam  housing  authority  is
  hereby  created/and established for the Village of Potsdam in the County
  of St. Lawrence for the accomplishment of any or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    * NB There are 3 § 505's




   §  506.  Town  of  Queensbury housing authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Town of Queensbury housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created and established for the town of Queensbury in the county
  of Warren, for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration and consist of five members. It shall have the power and duties
  now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this  chapter  upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




 Sec.  507.  Village of Boonville Housing Authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Boonville Housing Authority, is
  hereby created and established for  the  village  of  Boonville  in  the
  county  of  Oneida  for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration  and  consist  of  five members.   It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities.  It shall be organized in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers, and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  508.  Palmyra Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to
  be known as  the  Palmyra  Housing  Authority,  is  hereby  created  and
  established  for  the  incorporated  village of Palmyra in the county of
  Wayne for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified  in
  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  509.  Village  of Lowville Housing Authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Village of Lowville Housing Authority,  is
  hereby created and established for the village of Lowville in the county
  of  Lewis for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in article eighteen of the constitution of the state  of  New  York.  It
  shall  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration
  and consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  509-a.  Village  of Clayton Housing Authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Village of Clayton Housing  Authority,  is
  hereby  created and established for the village of Clayton in the county
  of Jefferson for the accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   * §  509-d.  Village  of Le Roy Housing Authority. A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Le Roy  Housing  Authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the village of Le Roy in the county
  of Genesee for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 509-d's




   §  509-c.  Village  of  Painted  Post Housing Authority.   A municipal
  housing authority, to be known as the Village of  Painted  Post  Housing
  Authority,  is hereby created and established for the village of Painted
  Post in the county of Steuben for the accomplishment of any  or  all  of
  the  purposes  specified  in article eighteen of the constitution of the
  state of New York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic,  be
  perpetual  in  duration  and consist of five members.  It shall have the
  powers and duties now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this  chapter  upon
  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized in the manner
  prescribed by and subject to the provisions of  this  chapter,  and  the
  authority,  its  members,  officers and employees and its operations and
  activities shall in all respects be governed by the provisions  of  this
  chapter.




   * §  509-d.  Town  of  Erwin  Housing  Authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Town of Erwin Housing Authority, is hereby
  created and established for the town of Erwin in the county  of  Steuben
  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of the purposes specified in
  article eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and
  consist of five members. It shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    * NB Nonexistent June 14, 1988
    * NB There are 2 § 509-d's




   §  510.  Village of Ellenville Housing Authority.  A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the village of Ellenville housing authority  is
  hereby  created  and  established  for  the village of Ellenville in the
  county of Ulster, for the accomplishment of any or all of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist of five members. It shall have all the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  511. Newark housing authority.  A municipal housing authority to be
  known as the Newark housing authority is hereby created and  established
  for  the village of Newark in the county of Wayne for the accomplishment
  of any or all of the purposes  specified  in  article  eighteen  of  the
  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It shall constitute a body
  corporate and politic, be perpetual in  duration  and  consist  of  five
  members.  It shall have the powers and duties now or hereafter conferred
  by  this  chapter  upon  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be
  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions of
  this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and employees and
  its operations and activities shall in all respects be governed  by  the
  provisions of this chapter.




   §  512.  Village  of  Warwick housing authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Warwick  housing  authority  is
  hereby  created and established for the village of Warwick in the county
  of Orange for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in article eighteen of the constitution of the state  of  New  York.  It
  shall  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration
  and consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions  of this chapter and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  513.  Town  of  North Elba housing authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the North Elba  housing  authority  is  hereby
  created  and  established  for  the  town of North Elba in the county of
  Essex for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified  in
  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  514. Village of Lake Placid housing authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Lake Placid housing  authority  is  hereby
  created  and established for the village of Lake Placid in the county of
  Essex for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified  in
  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in  duration  and
  consist  of  five  members.  It  shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  515.  Village  of  St.  Johnsville housing authority.   A municipal
  housing authority to be known as the village of St.  Johnsville  housing
  authority  is  hereby  created  and  established  for the village of St.
  Johnsville in the county of Montgomery, for the accomplishment of any or
  all of the purposes specified in article eighteen of the constitution of
  the state of New York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic,
  be perpetual in duration and consist of five members. It shall have  all
  the  powers  and  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon
  municipal housing authorities. It  shall  be  organized  in  the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.




   §  516.  Village  of  East  Rochester housing authority.   A municipal
  housing authority, to be known as the village of East Rochester  housing
  authority,  is  hereby  created  and established for the village of East
  Rochester, in the county of Monroe, for the accomplishment of any or all
  of the purposes specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the
  state of New York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic,  be
  perpetual  in  duration  and  consist of five members. It shall have the
  powers and duties now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this  chapter  upon
  municipal  housing  authorities.    It  shall be organized in the manner
  prescribed by and subject to the provisions of  this  chapter,  and  the
  authority,  its  members,  officers and employees and its operations and
  activities shall in all respects be governed by the provisions  of  this
  chapter.




   §  517.  Village  of Lynbrook housing authority.   A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the village of Lynbrook  housing  authority  is
  hereby created and established for the village of Lynbrook in the county
  of  Nassau,  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration and consist of five members. It shall have all the  powers  and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and
  subject to the provisions  of  this  chapter,  and  the  authority,  its
  members,  officers and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  518.  Elmira  Heights  housing  authority.    A  municipal  housing
  authority to be known as the Elmira Heights housing authority is  hereby
  created  and established for the village of Elmira Heights in the county
  of Chemung for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  519.  Village  of  Groton  housing authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Groton  housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the village of Groton in the county
  of Tompkins, for the accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  520.  Village  of  Canton  housing authority.   A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the village  of  Canton  housing  authority  is
  hereby  created  and established for the village of Canton in the county
  of St. Lawrence for the accomplishment of any or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities.  It shall be organized in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  521.  Port Jervis housing authority.  A municipal housing authority
  to be known as the Port Jervis housing authority is hereby  created  and
  established for the city of Port Jervis, in the county of Orange for the
  accomplishment  of  any  and  all  of  the purposes specified in article
  eighteen of the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and
  consist of five members. It shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  522.  Village  of  Webster  Housing  Authority. A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Village of Webster Housing  Authority,  is
  hereby  created and established for the Village of Webster in the county
  of Monroe, for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   § 523. City of Olean Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority
  to  be  known  as the City of Olean Housing Authority, is hereby created
  and established for the city of Olean in the county of Cattaraugus,  for
  the  accomplishment  of  any or all of the purposes specified in article
  eighteen of the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and
  consist of five members. It shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  524.  Town  of  Islip  housing  authority.    A  municipal  housing
  authority, to be known as the town of Islip housing authority is  hereby
  created  and established for the town of Islip in the county of Suffolk,
  for the accomplishment of any  or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in
  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It shall
  constitute a body corporate and politic, and consist of five members. It
  shall have the powers and duties now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this
  chapter upon municipal housing authorities. It shall be organized in the
  manner  prescribed  by and be subject to the provisions of this chapter,
  and  the  authority,  its  members,  officers  and  employees  and   its
  operations  and  activities  shall  in  all  respects be governed by the
  provisions  of  this  chapter.  Such  authority  shall  have   perpetual
  duration;  provided,  however,  that  if  at the expiration of ten years
  subsequent to the time this section as hereby added takes  effect  there
  shall  be  outstanding  no  bonds or other obligations of such authority
  theretofore issued for any of the purposes authorized in  this  chapter,
  then   its  corporate  existence  shall  thereupon  terminate  and  such
  authority shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   §  525.  Village  of  Kenmore housing authority.   A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the village of  Kenmore  housing  authority  is
  hereby  created/and established for the village of Kenmore in the county
  of Erie for the accomplishment of any or all of the  purposes  specified
  in  article  eighteen  of  the constitution of the state of New York. It
  shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in  duration
  and  consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  526.  Village  of Heuvelton housing authority.  A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the village of Heuvelton housing  authority  is
  hereby  created  and  established  for  the  village of Heuvelton in the
  county of St. Lawrence for the accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the
  purposes  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the state
  of New York. It shall  constitute  a  body  corporate  and  politic,  be
  perpetual  in  duration  and  consist of five members. It shall have the
  powers and duties now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this  chapter  upon
  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized in the manner
  prescribed by and subject to the provisions of  this  chapter,  and  the
  authority,  its  members,  officers and employees and its operations and
  activities shall in all respects be governed by the provisions  of  this
  chapter.




   §  527.  Village  of  Elizabethtown  housing  authority.   A municipal
  housing authority, to be known as the Elizabethtown  housing  authority,
  is  hereby  created  and established for the village of Elizabethtown in
  the county of Essex for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the  powers  and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and
  subject to the provisions  of  this  chapter,  and  the  authority,  its
  members,  officers and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  528.  Village  of  Rensselaer Falls housing authority.  A municipal
  housing authority to be known as the village of Rensselaer Falls housing
  authority  is  hereby  created  and  established  for  the  village   of
  Rensselaer Falls in the county of St. Lawrence for the accomplishment of
  any  or  all  of  the  purposes  specified  in  article  eighteen of the
  constitution of the state of  New  York.  It  shall  constitute  a  body
  corporate  and  politic,  be  perpetual  in duration and consist of five
  members. It shall have the powers and duties now or hereafter  conferred
  by  this  chapter  upon  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be
  organized in the manner prescribed by and subject to the  provisions  of
  this  chapter, and the authority, its members, officer and employees and
  its operations and activities shall in all respects be governed  by  the
  provisions of this chapter.




   §  530. Village of Island Park housing authority.  A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the village of Island Park housing authority is
  hereby created/and established for the village of  Island  Park  in  the
  county  of  Nassau  for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the  powers  and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and
  subject to the provisions  of  this  chapter,  and  the  authority,  its
  members,  officers and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  531.  Village  of  Montour  Falls  housing authority.   A municipal
  housing authority to be known as the village of  Montour  Falls  housing
  authority  is  hereby created/and established for the village of Montour
  Falls in the county of Schuyler for the accomplishment of any or all  of
  the  purposes  specified  in article eighteen of the constitution of the
  state of New York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic,  be
  perpetual  in  duration  and  consist of five members. It shall have the
  powers and duties now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this  chapter  upon
  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized in the manner
  prescribed by and subject to the provisions of  this  chapter,  and  the
  authority,  its  members,  officers and employees and its operations and
  activities shall in all respects be governed by the provisions  of  this
  chapter.




   * § 532. Village of Chittenango housing authority. A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the village of Chittenango housing authority is
  hereby  created  and  established  for the village of Chittenango in the
  county of Madison for the accomplishment of any or all of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    * NB Nonexistent June 1, 1987
    * NB There are 2 § 532's




   * §  532.  Town  of  Norfolk  housing  authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the  town  of  Norfolk  housing  authority  is
  hereby  created and established for the town of Norfolk in the county of
  St. Lawrence, for the accomplishment of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provision of this chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 532's




   * §  533.  Town  of  Hoosick  housing  authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Town  of  Hoosick  housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created and established for the town of Hoosick in the county of
  Rensselaer, for the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration and consist of five members. It shall have the power and duties
  now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this  chapter  upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 533's




   * §  533.  Town  of  Wheatfield housing authority. A municipal housing
  authority to be known as the town of  Wheatfield  housing  authority  is
  hereby  created and established for the town of Wheatfield in the county
  of Niagara for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 533's




   §  534. Fredonia Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority, to
  be known as the  Fredonia  Housing  Authority,  is  hereby  created  and
  established  for  the  incorporated village of Fredonia in the county of
  Chautauqua for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   * §  535.  Town  of  Warwick  housing  authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the town  of  Warwick  housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created and established for the town of Warwick in the county of
  Orange, for the accomplishment of any or all of the  purposes  specified
  in  article  eighteen  of  the constitution of the state of New York. It
  shall constitute a body  corporate  and  politic,  to  be  perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 535's




   * §  535.  Village  of  North  Syracuse Housing Authority. A municipal
  housing authority, to be known as the Village of North Syracuse  Housing
  Authority,  is  hereby  created  and  established  for  the incorporated
  village  of  North  Syracuse  in  the  county  of   Onondaga   for   the
  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes specified in article
  eighteen of the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and
  consist of five members. It shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 535's




   §  537. Canajoharie Housing Authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to be known as the Canajoharie Housing Authority, is hereby created  and
  established for the incorporated village of Canajoharie in the county of
  Montgomery  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the  powers  and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and
  subject to the provisions  of  this  chapter,  and  the  authority,  its
  members,  officers and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  538.  Town  of  DeKalb  housing  authority.    A  municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the town of DeKalb housing authority is hereby
  created and established for the town of DeKalb, in  the  county  of  St.
  Lawrence, for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in  article  eighteen  of  the constitution of the state of New York. It
  shall constitute a body corporate  and  politic,  and  consist  of  five
  members.  It shall have the powers and duties now or hereafter conferred
  by this chapter  upon  municipal  housing  authorities.    It  shall  be
  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and be subject to the provisions
  of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and  employees
  and  its  operations and activities shall in all respects be governed by
  the provisions of this chapter.  Such  authority  shall  have  perpetual
  duration.




   §   439.   Mechanicville  Housing  Authority.    A  municipal  housing
  authority, to be known as the Mechanicville Housing Authority, is hereby
  created and established for the city of Mechanicville in the  county  of
  Saratoga  for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in article eighteen of the constitution of the state  of  New  York.  It
  shall  constitute  a  body  corporate  and  politic  and consist of five
  members. It shall have the powers and duties now or hereafter  conferred
  by  this  chapter  upon  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be
  organized in the manner prescribed by and subject to the  provisions  of
  this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and employees and
  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be governed by the
  provisions  of  this  chapter.  Such  authority  shall  have   perpetual
  duration;  provided,  however,  that  if at the expiration of five years
  subsequent to the time this section as hereby added takes effect,  there
  shall  be  outstanding  no  bonds or other obligations of such authority
  theretofore issued for any of the purposes authorized in  this  chapter,
  then   its  corporate  existence  shall  thereupon  terminate  and  such
  authority shall thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   §  540.  Village  of  Bath  Housing  Authority.    A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village  of  Bath  Housing  Authority,  is
  hereby  created and established for the village of Bath in the county of
  Steuben for the accomplishment of any or all of the  purposes  specified
  in  article  eighteen  of  the constitution of the state of New York. It
  shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in  duration
  and  consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  541.  Village of Dolgeville Housing Authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Village of Dolgeville  Housing  Authority,
  is  hereby  created  and  established  for  the  incorporated village of
  Dolgeville in the county of Herkimer for the accomplishment  of  any  or
  all of the purposes specified in article eighteen of the constitution of
  the state of New York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic,
  be perpetual in duration and consist of five members.  It shall have the
  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter  conferred  by this chapter upon
  municipal housing authorities. It  shall  be  organized  in  the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter; and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.




   §  542.  Village  of  Oriskany  Falls Housing Authority.   A municipal
  housing authority, to be known as the village of Oriskany Falls  Housing
  Authority, is hereby created and established for the village of Oriskany
  Falls  in  the  county of Oneida for the accomplishment of any or all of
  the purposes specified in article eighteen of the  constitution  of  the
  state  of New York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be
  perpetual in duration and consist of five members.   It shall  have  the
  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter  conferred  by this chapter upon
  municipal housing authorities. It  shall  be  organized  in  the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers, and employees and its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.




   §  543.  Village  of  Alexandria  Bay Housing Authority.   A municipal
  housing authority, to be known as the Village of Alexandria Bay  Housing
  Authority,  is  hereby  created  and  established  for  the  village  of
  Alexandria Bay in the county of Jefferson for the accomplishment of  any
  or all of the purposes specified in article eighteen of the constitution
  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and
  politic, be perpetual in duration and consist of five members. It  shall
  have  the  powers  and duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter
  upon municipal housing authorities. It shall be organized in the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.


   §  543-a.  Village  of  Skaneateles  housing  authority.   A municipal
  housing authority, to be known as the  Village  of  Skaneateles  housing
  authority,  is  hereby  created  and  established  for  the  Village  of
  Skaneateles in the county of Onondaga for the accomplishment of  any  or
  all of the purposes specified in article eighteen of the constitution of
  the state of New York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic,
  be  perpetual in duration and consist of five members. It shall have the
  powers and duties now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this  chapter  upon
  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized in the manner
  prescribed by and subject to the provisions of  this  chapter,  and  the
  authority,  its  members,  officers and employees and its operations and
  activities shall in all respects be governed by the provisions  of  this
  chapter.








   §  544.  Village  of Lancaster housing authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Lancaster housing authority, is
  hereby created and established for  the  village  of  Lancaster  in  the
  county  of  Erie  for  the  accomplishment of any or all of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the  powers  and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and
  subject to the provisions  of  this  chapter,  and  the  authority,  its
  members,  officers and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  545.  Village  of Philmont housing authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Philmont housing authority,  is
  hereby created and established for the village of Philmont in the county
  of  Columbia  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the  powers  and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and
  subject to the provisions  of  this  chapter,  and  the  authority,  its
  members,  officers and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  546.  Town  of Ticonderoga Housing Authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Town of Ticonderoga Housing Authority,  is
  hereby created and established for the town of Ticonderoga in the county
  of  Essex for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in article eighteen of the constitution of the state  of  New  York.  It
  shall  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration
  and consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  547.  Town  of  Lansing  Housing  Authority.  A  municipal  housing
  authority, to be known as the Town  of  Lansing  Housing  Authority,  is
  hereby  created and established for the Town of Lansing in the county of
  Tompkins for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes  specified
  in  article  eighteen  of  the constitution of the state of New York. It
  shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in  duration
  and consist of seven members. It shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   * §  548.  Village  of  East  Syracuse  Housing Authority. A municipal
  housing authority, to be known as the Village of East  Syracuse  Housing
  Authority,  is  hereby  created  and established for the village of East
  Syracuse in the county of Onondaga for the accomplishment of any or  all
  of the purposes specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the
  state  of New York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be
  perpetual in duration and consist of seven members. It  shall  have  the
  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter  conferred  by this chapter upon
  municipal housing authorities. It  shall  be  organized  in  the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 548's




   * §  548.  Village of Canastota housing authority. A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Canastota housing authority, is
  hereby created and established for  the  village  of  Canastota  in  the
  county  of  Madison for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the  powers  and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and
  subject to the provisions  of  this  chapter,  and  the  authority,  its
  members,  officers and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 548's




   §  549. Village of Kiryas Joel Housing Authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Kiryas Joel Housing  Authority,
  is  hereby created and established for the village of Kiryas Joel in the
  county of Orange for the accomplishment of any or all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   * §  550.  Village  of  West  Winfield  housing authority. A municipal
  housing authority, to be known as the village of West  Winfield  housing
  authority,  is  hereby  created  and established for the village of West
  Winfield in the county of Herkimer for the accomplishment of any or  all
  of the purposes specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the
  state  of New York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be
  perpetual in duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the
  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter  conferred  by this chapter upon
  municipal housing authorities. It  shall  be  organized  in  the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 550's




   * §  550.  Town  of  Edwards  Housing  Authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Town  of  Edwards  Housing  Authority,  is
  hereby  created and established for the town of Edwards in the county of
  St. Lawrence for the accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 550's




   §  551.  Village  of  Sackets  Harbor Housing Authority.   A municipal
  housing authority, to be known as the Village of Sackets Harbor  Housing
  Authority,  is hereby created and established for the Village of Sackets
  Harbor in the County of Jefferson for the accomplishment of any  or  all
  of the purposes specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the
  State  of New York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be
  perpetual in duration and consist of seven members. It  shall  have  the
  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter  conferred  by this chapter upon
  municipal housing authorities. It  shall  be  organized  in  the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.




 Sec.  552.    Village  of  Watkins Glen Housing Authority.   A municipal
  housing authority, to be known as the Village of  Watkins  Glen  Housing
  Authority,  is hereby created and established for the Village of Watkins
  Glen in the county of Schuyler for the accomplishment of any or  all  of
  the  purposes  specified  in article eighteen of the constitution of the
  state of New York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be
  perpetual in duration and consist of five members.   It shall  have  the
  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter  conferred  by this chapter upon
  municipal housing authorities.   It shall be  organized  in  the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.




   §  553.  Village of Horseheads housing authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Village of Horseheads  housing  authority,
  is  hereby  created and established for the Village of Horseheads in the
  county of Chemung for the accomplishment of any or all of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   * §  555.  Village  of  Great  Neck  housing authority. 1. A municipal
  housing authority, to be known as the  Village  of  Great  Neck  housing
  authority,  is  hereby  created and established for the Village of Great
  Neck in the county of Nassau for the accomplishment of any or all of the
  purposes specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state
  of  New  York.  It  shall  constitute  a  body corporate and politic, be
  perpetual in duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the
  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter  conferred  by this chapter upon
  municipal housing authorities. It  shall  be  organized  in  the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 555's




   * §  555. Village of New Square housing authority. A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of New Square  housing  authority,
  is  hereby  created and established for the village of New Square in the
  county of Rockland for the accomplishment of any or all of the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 555's






   §  556.  Village  of Frankfort housing authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Frankfort housing authority, is
  hereby created and established for  the  village  of  Frankfort  in  the
  county  of Herkimer for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration and consist of five members.  It  shall  have  the  powers  and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and
  subject to the provisions  of  this  chapter,  and  the  authority,  its
  members,  officers and employees and its operations and activities shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  557.  Village  of  Solvay  housing authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Solvay  housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the village of Solvay in the county
  of Onondaga for the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  558.  Town  of  Fowler  housing  authority.    A  municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the  town  of  Fowler  housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the town of Fowler in the county of
  St.   Lawrence for the accomplishment of any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  seven  members. It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   § 559. Village of Philadelphia housing authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Philadelphia housing authority,
  is hereby created and established for the village of Philadelphia in the
  county of Jefferson for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  560.  City  of  Sherrill  housing  authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the city of  Sherrill  housing  authority,  is
  hereby created and established for the city of Sherrill in the county of
  Oneida  for  the  accomplishment of any or all the purposes specified in
  article eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and
  consist of not less than three nor more than five members. It shall have
  the power and duties now or hereafter conferred  by  this  chapter  upon
  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be  organized in the manner
  prescribed by and subject to the provisions of  this  chapter,  and  the
  authority,  its  members,  officers and employees and its operations and
  activities shall in all respects be governed by the provisions  of  this
  chapter.




 § 561. Town of Marion housing authority.  A municipal housing authority,
  to  be  known as the town of Marion housing authority, is hereby created
  and established for the town of Marion in the county of  Wayne  for  the
  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes specified in article
  eighteen of the  constitution  of  the  state  of  New  York.  It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and
  consist of seven members. It shall have the powers  and  duties  now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  562.  Town  of  Cambria  housing  authority.    A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the town  of  Cambria  housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created and established for the town of Cambria in the county of
  Niagara for the accomplishment of any or all of the  purposes  specified
  in  article  eighteen  of  the constitution of the state of New York. It
  shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in  duration
  and  consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  563.  Town  of East Hampton Housing Authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the East Hampton Housing Authority, is  hereby
  created  and  established  for the Town of East Hampton in the county of
  Suffolk for the accomplishment of any or all of the  purposes  specified
  in  article  eighteen  of  the constitution of the state of New York. It
  shall constitute a body corporate  and  politic,  and  consist  of  five
  members.  It shall have the powers and duties now or hereafter conferred
  by  this  chapter  upon  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be
  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions of
  this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and employees and
  its operations and activities shall in all respects be governed  by  the
  provisions   of  this  chapter.  Such  authority  shall  have  perpetual
  duration, provided, however, that if at  the  expiration  of  ten  years
  subsequent  to  the  time  this  section  takes  effect,  there shall be
  outstanding no bonds or other obligations of such authority  theretofore
  issued  for  any  of  the  purposes authorized in this chapter, then its
  corporate existence shall thereupon terminate and such  authority  shall
  thereupon be deemed to be and shall be dissolved.




   §  564.  Town  of  Camillus  housing  authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the town of  Camillus  housing  authority,  is
  hereby created and established for the town of Camillus in the county of
  Onondaga  for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in article eighteen of the constitution of the state  of  New  York.  It
  shall  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration
  and consist of seven members. It shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall  be  organized  in the manner prescribed by and subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  565.  Town  of  Lisbon  Housing  Authority.    A  municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the  Town  of  Lisbon  Housing  Authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the Town of Lisbon in the county of
  St. Lawrence for the accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  seven  members. It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   §  566.  Town  of  Union  Housing  Authority.    A  municipal  housing
  authority, to be known as the Town of Union Housing Authority, is hereby
  created and established for the Town of Union in the  county  of  Broome
  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of the purposes specified in
  article eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and
  consist of five members. It shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.




   * §  567.  Village  of  Jordan  housing authority. A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Village of Jordan  housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the Village of Jordan in the county
  of Onondaga for the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist  of  five  members.  It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 567's




   * §  567.  Village of Liverpool housing authority. A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Liverpool housing authority, is
  hereby created and established for  the  village  of  Liverpool  in  the
  county  of Onondaga for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic and consist of at
  least  three  nor  more than seven members. It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 567's




   * §  567.  Village of Liverpool housing authority. A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of Liverpool housing authority, is
  hereby created and established for  the  village  of  Liverpool  in  the
  county  of Onondaga for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic and consist of at
  least  three  nor  more than seven members. It shall have the powers and
  duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing
  authorities. It shall be organized  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  and
  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  chapter,  and the authority, its
  members, officers and employees and its operations and activities  shall
  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 567's






   * §  568.  Town  of  Goshen  Housing  Authority.  A  municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the  Town  of  Goshen  Housing  Authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the town of Goshen in the county of
  Orange, for the accomplishment of any or all of the  purposes  specified
  in  article  eighteen  of  the constitution of the state of New York. It
  shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in  duration
  and  consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now or
  hereafter conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing  authorities.
  It  shall be organized in the manner prescribed by and be subject to the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees and its operations and activities shall  in  all  respects  be
  governed  by the provisions of this chapter. For the purposes of article
  fifteen-A of the executive law only, the authority  shall  be  deemed  a
  state agency as that term is used in such article, and its contracts for
  design,  construction,  services  and  materials  shall  be deemed state
  contracts within the meaning of that term as set forth in such article.
    * NB There are 2 § 568's




   * §  568.  Village  of  Kaser  Housing  Authority. A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the village of  Kaser  Housing  Authority,  is
  hereby created and established for the village of Kaser in the county of
  Rockland  for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in article eighteen of the constitution of the state  of  New  York.  It
  shall  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration
  and consist of at least three and not more than seven members. It  shall
  have  the  powers  and duties now or hereafter conferred by this chapter
  upon municipal housing authorities. It shall be organized in the  manner
  prescribed  by  and  subject  to the provisions of this chapter, and the
  authority, its members, officers and employees and  its  operations  and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 568's




   * §  569.  Town  of  Mamaroneck housing authority. A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the town of Mamaroneck housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created and established for the town of Mamaroneck in the county
  of Westchester for the accomplishment of any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration and consist of not less than three nor more than seven members.
  It  shall  have the powers and duties now or hereafter conferred by this
  chapter upon municipal housing authorities. It shall be organized in the
  manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions of this chapter;  and
  the authority, its members, officers and employees and its operation and
  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of this
  chapter. For the purposes of article  fifteen-A  of  the  executive  law
  only,  the authority shall be deemed a state agency as that term is used
  in such article, and its contracts for  design,  construction,  services
  and materials shall be deemed state contracts within the meaning of that
  term as set forth in such article.
    * NB There are 2 § 569's




   * §  569.  Town  of  Tully  Housing  Authority.  A  municipal  housing
  authority, to be known as the Town of Tully Housing Authority, is hereby
  created and established for the town of Tully in the county of  Onondaga
  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of the purposes specified in
  article eighteen of the constitution of the state of New York. It  shall
  constitute  a  body  corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration and
  consist of five members; provided, however, that if, at  the  expiration
  of  three  years subsequent to the time this section takes effect, there
  shall be outstanding no bonds or other  obligations  of  such  authority
  theretofore  issued  for any of the purposes authorized in this chapter,
  then  its  corporate  existence  shall  thereupon  terminate  and   such
  authority  shall  thereupon  be  deemed to be and shall be dissolved. It
  shall have the powers and duties now  or  hereafter  conferred  by  this
  chapter upon municipal housing authorities. It shall be organized in the
  manner  prescribed by and subject to the provisions of this chapter, and
  the authority, its members, officers and employees  and  its  operations
  and  activities  shall  in all respects be governed by the provisions of
  this chapter. For the purposes of article fifteen-A of the executive law
  only, the authority shall be deemed a state agency as that term is  used
  in  such  article,  and its contracts for design, construction, services
  and materials shall be deemed state contracts within the meaning of that
  term as set forth in such article.
    * NB There are 2 § 569's




   §  570.  Village  of  Scotia  housing authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Village of Scotia  housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the Village of Scotia in the county
  of Schenectady for the accomplishment of any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist of at least three members and not more than seven
  members. It shall have the powers and duties now or hereafter  conferred
  by  this  chapter  upon  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be
  organized in the manner prescribed by and subject to the  provisions  of
  this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and employees and
  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be governed by the
  provisions of this chapter. For purposes of  article  fifteen-A  of  the
  executive law only, the authority shall be deemed a state agency as that
  term   is   used   in  such  article,  and  its  contracts  for  design,
  construction, services and materials shall  be  deemed  state  contracts
  within the meaning of that term as set forth is such article.




   §  571.  Town  of  Patterson  housing authority.   A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Town of Patterson  housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the Town of Patterson in the County
  of Putnam for the accomplishment of any or all of the purposes specified
  in article eighteen of the constitution of the state  of  New  York.  It
  shall  constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in duration
  and consist of five members. It shall have the powers and duties now  or
  hereafter  conferred by this chapter upon municipal housing authorities.
  It shall be organized in the manner prescribed by  and  subject  to  the
  provisions of this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and
  employees  and  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be
  governed by the provisions of this chapter.   For  purposes  of  article
  fifteen-A  of  the  executive  law only, the authority shall be deemed a
  state agency as that term is used in such article, and its contracts for
  design, construction, services  and  materials  shall  be  deemed  state
  contracts within the meaning of that term as set forth in such article.




   §  572.  Town  of  Allegany  housing  authority.  A  municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the town of  Allegany  housing  authority,  is
  hereby created and established for the town of Allegany in the county of
  Cattaraugus  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration and consist of at least three members and not more  than  seven
  members.  It shall have the powers and duties now or hereafter conferred
  by  this  chapter  upon  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be
  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions of
  this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and employees and
  its operations and activities shall in all respects be governed  by  the
  provisions  of  this  chapter.  For purposes of article fifteen-A of the
  executive law only, the authority shall be deemed a state agency as that
  term  is  used  in  such  article,  and  its   contracts   for   design,
  construction,  services  and  materials  shall be deemed state contracts
  within the meaning of that term as set forth in such article.




   §  573.  Town  of  Southampton  housing authority. A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the town of Southampton housing authority,  is
  hereby created and established for the town of Southampton in the county
  of  Suffolk  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all  of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It  shall constitute a body corporate and politic, and consist of
  five members. It shall have the  powers  and  duties  now  or  hereafter
  conferred  by  this chapter upon municipal housing authorities. It shall
  be organized in the manner prescribed by and subject to  the  provisions
  of  this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and employees
  and its operations and activities shall in all respects be  governed  by
  the  provisions  of  this  chapter.  Such authority shall have perpetual
  duration, provided, however, that if at  the  expiration  of  ten  years
  subsequent  to  the  time  this  section  takes  effect,  there shall be
  outstanding no bonds or other obligations of such authority  theretofore
  issued  for  any  of  the  purposes authorized in this chapter, then its
  corporate existence shall thereupon terminate and such  authority  shall
  thereupon  be  deemed  to  be  and  shall  be dissolved. For purposes of
  article fifteen-A of the executive law  only,  the  authority  shall  be
  deemed  to  be  a state agency as that term is used in such article, and
  its contracts for design, construction services and materials  shall  be
  deemed  to  be  state  contracts  within the meaning of that term as set
  forth in such article.




   §  574.  Village  of  Elbridge  housing authority. A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Village of Elbridge housing authority,  is
  hereby created and established for the village of Elbridge in the county
  of  Onondaga  for  the  accomplishment  of  any  or  all of the purposes
  specified in article eighteen of the constitution of the  state  of  New
  York.  It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual in
  duration and consist of at least three members and not more  than  seven
  members.  It shall have the powers and duties now or hereafter conferred
  by  this  chapter  upon  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be
  organized  in  the manner prescribed by and subject to the provisions of
  this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and employees and
  its operations and activities shall in all respects be governed  by  the
  provisions  of  this  chapter.  For purposes of article fifteen-A of the
  executive law, the authority shall be deemed a state agency as that term
  is used in such article, and its  contracts  for  design,  construction,
  services  and  materials  shall  be  deemed  state  contracts within the
  meaning of that term as set forth in such article.




   §  575.  Town  of  Glenville  housing  authority.  A municipal housing
  authority, to be known as the Town of Glenville  housing  authority,  is
  hereby  created  and established for the town of Glenville in the county
  of Schenectady for the accomplishment of any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in  article  eighteen of the constitution of the state of New
  York. It shall constitute a body corporate and politic, be perpetual  in
  duration  and  consist of at least three members and not more than seven
  members. It shall have the powers and duties now or hereafter  conferred
  by  this  chapter  upon  municipal  housing  authorities.  It  shall  be
  organized in the manner prescribed by and subject to the  provisions  of
  this chapter, and the authority, its members, officers and employees and
  its  operations  and activities shall in all respects be governed by the
  provisions of this chapter. For purposes of  article  fifteen-A  of  the
  executive law, the authority shall be deemed a state agency as that term
  is  used  in  such  article, and its contracts for design, construction,
  services and materials  shall  be  deemed  state  contracts  within  the
  meaning of that term as set forth in such article.




   §  600.  Obligation  to affirmatively further fair housing. 1. For the
  purposes of this section, the term "covered housing agency"  shall  mean
  any  state  department,  agency  or  office  administering  housing  and
  community development laws or housing and community development programs
  including but not limited to New York state homes and community renewal,
  the division of housing  and  community  renewal,  the  New  York  state
  housing  finance agency, the affordable housing corporation, the housing
  trust fund corporation, the municipal bond bank agency, the state of New
  York mortgage agency, any subsidiary  of  the  foregoing  agencies,  any
  public housing agency, and any localities receiving funds from any state
  department,  agency  or  office  to  administer  programs  or activities
  related to housing and community development.
    2. The commissioner and all covered housing agencies shall  administer
  all  such  programs  and  activities  related  to  housing and community
  development in a manner that affirmatively  furthers  fair  housing  and
  shall cooperate with the commissioner to further such purpose.
    3.  The  commissioner  and  all  covered  housing  agencies shall take
  meaningful actions to:
    (a) identify and overcome  patterns  of  residential  segregation  and
  housing discrimination;
    (b) eradicate racially or ethnically concentrated areas of poverty;
    (c) reduce disparities in access to opportunity;
    (d) eliminate disproportionate housing needs;
    (e) provide the public reasonable and regular opportunities to comment
  on   fair   housing  issues  and  participate  in  the  development  and
  advancement of affirmative fair housing policy; and
    (f) encourage and maintain compliance  with  article  fifteen  of  the
  executive  law  and  any  other  applicable  anti-discrimination or fair
  housing law.
    4. The commissioner and all covered housing  agencies  shall  take  no
  action  that  is  materially  inconsistent  with  the obligation of this
  section.
    5. The commissioner shall:
    (a) on or before February first of two thousand twenty-two,  and  each
  fifth  year  thereafter,  produce  a  draft  report  that  shall be made
  available to the  public.  The  report  shall  include  any  significant
  initiatives,  policies,  or  programs  undertaken in furtherance of fair
  housing and any recommendations for improving the state of fair  housing
  in  New  York. The draft report shall be open to a minimum of twenty-one
  days of public comment. The commissioner shall, on or before March tenth
  of each year that such report is due, submit the final version  of  said
  report  to  the governor, the speaker of the assembly, and the temporary
  president of the senate. The commissioner shall submit  along  with  the
  final  report,  all  comments  received  pursuant  to the public comment
  period; and
    (b) on or before February  first  of  every  second  and  fourth  year
  following the issuance of the full report required pursuant to paragraph
  (a)  of  this  subdivision,  prepare  an  interim  report explaining any
  progress or significant changes to recommendations included in such full
  report and detailing  any  new  significant  initiatives,  policies,  or
  programs  that  have been undertaken in furtherance of fair housing. The
  interim report shall be submitted to the governor, the  speaker  of  the
  assembly, and the temporary president of the senate.




   §  625.  Short  title. This article shall be known and may be cited as
  the "New York city public housing preservation trust act".




   § 626. Legislative findings. The legislature hereby finds and declares
  that  significant  capital  investment  is  required to design, develop,
  construct, reconstruct, improve, modernize, rehabilitate, and repair the
  aging buildings owned or operated by the New York city housing authority
  which  are  deteriorating  due  to  decades   of   diminishing   capital
  investment.   Restrictions   relating  to  the  New  York  city  housing
  authority's  construction  process,  and  its   inability   to   utilize
  innovative project delivery methods, have exacerbated its capital needs.
  A  new  public  entity  with  greater  flexibility  to  leverage capital
  investment and to manage the rehabilitation of these properties must  be
  established. Repairing, modernizing, and improving New York city housing
  authority buildings must begin immediately so that hundreds of thousands
  of  New  Yorkers  can reside in affordable housing that is decent, safe,
  sanitary, and in good repair. Establishing  a  new  public  entity,  and
  transferring a leasehold interest in the buildings owned and operated by
  the  New York city housing authority to this new entity so that they can
  undergo the necessary rehabilitation,  repair  and  modernization,  will
  ensure  that  these  buildings continue to provide affordable housing to
  residents of New York city for many decades into the future. It  is  the
  understanding  and  intention  of  the  legislature  that  any  building
  transferred to this new public entity and operated by the New York  city
  housing  authority  shall  continue  to  be  subject  to the obligations
  imposed by Maribel Baez et al. v. New York City Housing  Authority,  No.
  13-Civ-8916.






	

   § 627. Definitions. As used or referred to in this article:
    1.  "Alternative project delivery contract" means any project delivery
  method authorized by this article, including construction manager build,
  construction manager at risk, and design-build, pursuant to which one or
  more contracts for the provision of design  or  construction  management
  and   construction   services  are  awarded  pursuant  to  an  open  and
  competitive method of procurement, as specified in section  six  hundred
  thirty-four of this article.
    2. "Best value" means the basis for awarding contracts for services to
  a  proposer  that  optimizes  quality,  cost  and  efficiency, price and
  performance criteria, which may include, but is not limited to:
    (a) the quality of the proposer's performance on previous projects;
    (b) the timeliness of the proposer's performance on previous projects;
    (c) the level of customer satisfaction with the proposer's performance
  on previous projects;
    (d) the proposer's record of performing previous  projects  on  budget
  and ability to minimize cost overruns;
    (e) the proposer's ability to limit change orders;
    (f) the proposer's ability to prepare appropriate project plans;
    (g) the proposer's technical capacities;
    (h) the individual qualifications of the proposer's key personnel;
    (i) the proposer's ability to assess and manage risk and minimize risk
  impact;
    (j) the proposer's financial capability;
    (k)  the  proposer's  ability  to comply with applicable requirements,
  including the provisions of articles one hundred forty-five, one hundred
  forty-seven and one hundred forty-eight of the education law;
    (l) the proposer's past record of compliance with federal laws,  state
  and  local  laws,  rules,  licensing requirements, where applicable, and
  executive orders, including, but not limited to, section  three  of  the
  federal   housing   and   urban  development  act  of  nineteen  hundred
  sixty-eight, as amended, or any successor provision,  article  fifteen-A
  of the executive law, any other applicable laws concerning minority- and
  women-owned  business  enterprise  participation, the labor law, and any
  other applicable labor and prevailing wage laws;
    (m) the proposer's record of complying with existing labor  standards,
  maintaining  harmonious  labor  relations, and protecting the health and
  safety of workers and payment of wages above any locally-defined  living
  wage;
    (n)  a  quantitative factor to be used in evaluation of bids or offers
  for awarding of contracts for bidders or offerors that are certified  as
  minority  or  women  owned  business  enterprises  pursuant  to  article
  fifteen-A of the executive law or certified pursuant to section thirteen
  hundred four of the New York city charter as  minority  or  women  owned
  business  enterprises,  or where the bidder is a joint venture including
  at  least  one  such  certified  firm.  Where  the  trust  identifies  a
  quantitative  factor pursuant to this paragraph, the trust shall specify
  that  businesses  certified  as  minority  or   women   owned   business
  enterprises  pursuant  to article fifteen-A of the executive law as well
  as those certified as  minority  or  women  owned  business  enterprises
  pursuant  to section thirteen hundred four of the New York city charter,
  or joint ventures including  at  least  one  such  certified  firm,  are
  eligible  to qualify for such factor. Nothing in this paragraph shall be
  construed to require that such businesses be concurrently  certified  as
  minority or women owned business enterprises under such article and such
  section to qualify for such quantitative factor; and
    (o)  a  quantitative factor to be used in evaluation of bids or offers
  for awarding of contracts for bidders or offerors that provide  economic


 opportunities  for  low  and  very low-income persons in accordance with
  section three of the  federal  housing  and  urban  development  act  of
  nineteen  hundred  sixty-eight,  as  amended,  where  applicable, or any
  successor  provision.  Such  basis  shall  reflect,  wherever  possible,
  objective and quantifiable analysis.
    3. "Board" means the board of trustees of the trust.
    4. "City" means the city of New York.
    5. "Construction manager at risk"  means  a  project  delivery  method
  whereby a construction manager:
    (a)  serves  as  part  of  a team in conjunction with the owner in the
  design phase of the project;
    (b) during the construction phase,  acts  as  general  contractor  for
  agreed  upon  compensation  as  set forth in the construction manager at
  risk agreement; and
    (c) assumes  the  risk  of  construction  costs  exceeding  an  amount
  specified in the construction manager at risk agreement.
    6.  "Construction  manager  build"  means  a  project  delivery method
  whereby a construction manager, following a declaration of a disaster by
  the governor or state of emergency by  the  mayor  pursuant  to  article
  two-B  of  the  executive  law  or  chapter  one  of  title three of the
  administrative code of the city of New York, or following an independent
  cost estimate and a concurrence  by  NYCHA  that  construction  work  is
  required  at  a  housing facility to remedy defects to bring the housing
  facility into decent, safe, and sanitary condition:
    (a) serves as part of a team in conjunction  with  the  owner  in  the
  design phase of the project;
    (b)  under  the  oversight  of  the owner acts as the single source of
  responsibility to bid, select and hold construction contracts on  behalf
  of the owner during the construction phase; and
    (c) manages the construction project on behalf of the owner.
    7.  "Cost  plus"  means  compensating  a  contractor  for  the cost to
  complete a contract by reimbursing actual costs for labor, equipment and
  materials plus an additional amount for overhead and profit.
    8. "Design-build" means a project delivery method for the  design  and
  construction  of  a  project  with  a single entity, which may be a team
  comprised of separate entities.
    9. "Ground lease" means the written instrument pursuant to which NYCHA
  transfers to the trust its leasehold interest in its housing  facilities
  and ancillary personal property.
    10. "Housing facilities" means the land and buildings thereon owned or
  operated  by  NYCHA and the improvements made to such land and buildings
  for  use  in  connection  with  development  or  operation  of  dwelling
  accommodations for low-income families.
    11.  "Low-income  families"  means  low-,  very  low-,  and  extremely
  low-income families as defined in paragraph two  of  subsection  (b)  of
  section  1437a  of  title  forty-two  of  the  United States code or any
  successor provision.
    12. "Mayor" means the mayor of the city of New York.
    13. "NYCHA" means the New York city housing authority.
    14. "NYCHA board" means the members of  NYCHA  appointed  pursuant  to
  subdivision three of section four hundred two of this chapter.
    15.  "NYCHA CEO" means the chief executive officer of NYCHA who serves
  pursuant to NYCHA's by-laws.
    16. "NYCHA CFO" means the chief financial officer of NYCHA who  serves
  pursuant to NYCHA's by-laws.
    17. "Other residents" means residents who are:


   (a)  residents  of a housing facility on the date NYCHA transfers such
  facility to the trust but are not low-income  families,  as  defined  in
  this section, on the date of such transfer;
    (b)  low-income families, as defined in this section, and residents of
  a housing facility on the date NYCHA  transfers  such  facility  to  the
  trust  but who, subsequent to such transfer and during the course of the
  tenancies of  such  residents,  no  longer  satisfy  the  definition  of
  low-income families; or
    (c) low-income families, as defined in this section, upon commencement
  of  their tenancies in a housing facility operated by the trust but who,
  during the course of the tenancies of such residents, do not satisfy the
  definition of low-income families.
    18. "Project labor agreement" shall have the same meaning as described
  in section two hundred twenty-two of the labor law.
    19. "Resident" means a natural person whose lawful  primary  residence
  is a dwelling unit in a housing facility.
    20. "Trust" means the New York city public housing preservation trust.
    21.  "Voting  process" means the process that shall be undertaken at a
  particular housing facility  before  the  trust  may  transfer,  convey,
  assign,  mortgage,  pledge  or  otherwise  encumber  any interest in, or
  permit or suffer any transfer, conveyance, assignment, mortgage,  pledge
  or  other  encumbrance  of  any  interest  in such housing facility. The
  voting process shall be further defined as  set  forth  in  requirements
  promulgated pursuant to section six hundred thirty of this article.




   §  628.  New  York city public housing preservation trust. 1. There is
  hereby established a public benefit corporation to be known as the  "New
  York  city public housing preservation trust". The purpose of such trust
  shall  be  the  design,   development,   construction,   reconstruction,
  improvement,  modernization,  rehabilitation, repairing and operation of
  housing facilities.
    2. The trust shall be governed by and its powers shall be exercised by
  a board of trustees consisting of nine members. The members shall be the
  NYCHA CEO, the NYCHA CFO, the deputy  mayor  for  housing  and  economic
  development  of the city of New York, or another deputy mayor designated
  by the mayor if there is no deputy mayor with  that  designation,  three
  members  appointed  by  the  NYCHA  CEO,  including two housing facility
  resident members and one member at large, provided that one such housing
  facility resident member shall be selected from two candidates nominated
  by the recognized citywide  council  of  presidents,  or  an  equivalent
  successor  body,  and one such housing facility resident member shall be
  selected from two candidates nominated by the resident  advisory  board,
  or  an  equivalent  successor  body,  and three members appointed by the
  mayor, including two housing facility resident  members,  provided  that
  one  such  housing  facility  resident member shall be selected from two
  candidates nominated by the recognized citywide council  of  presidents,
  or  an  equivalent  successor  body,  and one member who shall represent
  employees of NYCHA, as applicable, and be selected from  two  candidates
  nominated by organizations representing employees of NYCHA or the trust,
  as  applicable. The NYCHA CEO shall be the chair of the trust. The board
  of trustees of the trust shall appoint the president of the  trust.  The
  term  of  each  member,  other  than  members serving by virtue of their
  positions, shall be three years, except at initial appointment when  the
  terms  shall  be  staggered  so that no more than two members shall have
  terms that end in any given year, provided that the  term  of  only  one
  member appointed by the mayor shall end in any given year.
    3.  Each  appointed  member shall continue in office until a successor
  has been appointed and qualified unless otherwise removed as follows.  A
  member  may  be  removed  by the NYCHA CEO or mayor, whichever appointed
  such member, upon the filing in the office of the trust and serving upon
  the member the reasons therefor. Such document setting forth the reasons
  shall be made available to the general public which shall  include,  but
  not  be limited to, publishing such reasons on the websites of the trust
  and NYCHA. In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of  an  appointed
  member,  the  vacancy  shall  be  filled  in  the same manner as was the
  original appointment of the member whose office became vacant.
    4. Appointed members  may  engage  in  private  employment,  or  in  a
  profession  or  business,  unless  otherwise  prohibited by law, rule or
  regulation,  provided,  however,  that  notwithstanding  any  applicable
  provision  of  law,  the  members  shall  be  subject to the limitations
  contained in sections two thousand six hundred three, two  thousand  six
  hundred  four,  two  thousand  six  hundred  five,  and two thousand six
  hundred six of the New York city charter. The trust shall be  an  agency
  and  such  members  shall  be  public  servants for the purposes of such
  sections. In addition, such members shall be subject to  the  provisions
  of section one thousand one hundred sixteen of the New York city charter
  and shall for the purposes of such section be considered officers of the
  city.   Further,  such  members,  the  president  and  certain  critical
  employees of the trust as designated by  the  board  or  the  president,
  shall   be   subject   to  the  provisions  of  section  12-110  of  the
  administrative code of the city of New York pertaining to the filing  of
  annual disclosure reports with the city conflicts of interest board, and


 for  such  purpose, the members of the board of trustees shall be deemed
  to be compensated members of the trust.
    5.  The  board  shall provide for the holding of regular meetings, and
  such special meetings, at the call of the chair of the trust, as may  be
  necessary.  A majority of the whole number of members shall constitute a
  quorum for the transaction of business. The powers of the board shall be
  vested in and exercised by a majority of the whole number of the members
  thereof. Any one or more members of  the  board  may  participate  in  a
  meeting  of  the  trust  by  means  of videoconferencing consistent with
  article seven of the public officers law.
    6. Members of the board, other than members serving by virtue of their
  positions, shall receive a stipend in the amount of  two  hundred  fifty
  dollars  for  every  four  hours of work performed for the trust, not to
  exceed one thousand five hundred dollars per month. In addition, members
  shall be reimbursed for the actual and necessary  expenses  incurred  by
  them in the performance of their official duties as members of the board
  of trustees.
    7.  The board shall appoint a president of the trust and determine the
  compensation of the president. The president, who shall not be a  member
  of  the  board,  shall  be  the chief executive officer of the trust and
  shall  be  responsible  for  the  discharge   of   the   executive   and
  administrative functions and powers of the trust, including the exercise
  of  any  powers  delegated  by the board to the president. The president
  shall serve at the pleasure of the board.
    8.  The  trust  and  its  corporate  existence  shall  continue  until
  terminated by law, provided, however, that no such law shall take effect
  so  long  as  the  trust  shall  have bonds, notes and other obligations
  outstanding, unless adequate provision has been  made  for  the  payment
  thereof.  Upon  the  termination  of the existence of the trust, all its
  rights and properties shall pass to and be vested in NYCHA.
    9. Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no officer or
  employee of the state, or of any  civil  division  thereof,  or  of  any
  public   corporation,  as  defined  in  the  general  construction  law,
  including NYCHA, shall be deemed to have forfeited or shall forfeit such
  person's office  or  employment  or  any  benefits  provided  under  the
  retirement and social security law or under any public retirement system
  maintained  by  the  state  or by the civil divisions thereof, or by any
  such public corporation,  by  reason  of  such  person's  acceptance  of
  membership  on  the board of the trust or by virtue of such person being
  an officer or employee of the trust.




   §  629.  Powers  and  duties  of  the  trust. The trust shall have the
  following powers and duties:
    1. to sue and be sued;
    2. to have a seal and alter the same at pleasure;
    3. to make and, as necessary, to amend  and  repeal  by-laws  for  the
  trust  and the management and regulation of its affairs not inconsistent
  with the provisions of this article;
    4. to appoint the president of  the  trust  and  fix  the  president's
  compensation,  pursuant  to  section  six  hundred  twenty-eight of this
  article, and to execute direct oversight  of  the  president  and  other
  management  in  the  effective  and ethical management of the trust, and
  establish policies regarding the payment  of  salary,  compensation  and
  reimbursements  to,  and  establish rules for the time and attendance of
  the president and management;
    5. to engage or  assist  in  the  development,  design,  construction,
  reconstruction,  improvement,  modernization, rehabilitation, repairing,
  and operation of housing facilities  pursuant  to  section  two  hundred
  twenty of the labor law;
    6.  to acquire or transfer real and personal property and improvements
  thereon, or any interest therein, by any method, necessary or convenient
  for the exercise of its functions, powers and duties; provided that such
  transfer shall not be utilized to avoid  the  use  of  a  project  labor
  agreement  or  payment  of the prevailing wage requirements set forth in
  section two hundred twenty of the labor law;
    7. to encumber residential property and buildings held  by  the  trust
  and  limit  use  to  residents who are low-income families as defined in
  subdivision eleven of section six hundred twenty-seven of  this  article
  and  other  residents as defined in subdivision seventeen of section six
  hundred twenty-seven of this article;
    8. to make and execute contracts and all other  instruments  necessary
  or  convenient  for  the  exercise  of its functions, powers and duties,
  including procurement contracts consistent with applicable provisions of
  this article. Notwithstanding any provision  of  law  to  the  contrary,
  including  but  not  limited to article eight of this chapter, the trust
  may enter into contracts, consistent with applicable provisions of  this
  article, with NYCHA or on behalf of and for the benefit of NYCHA;
    9.  to  enter into agreements with the NYCHA or other entities for the
  provision of management, maintenance and other services;
    10. notwithstanding the provisions of section twenty-five hundred four
  of the insurance law or any other provision of law to the  contrary,  to
  procure  or cause to be placed or procured insurance on behalf of itself
  and  others  against  any  loss  in  connection  with  its   activities,
  properties  and  other assets, in such amounts and from such insurers as
  it deems desirable;
    11. to enter into agreements with public agencies and public  entities
  for the receipt of services;
    12.  to  borrow  and  loan  funds  and  issue  bonds,  notes  or other
  obligations consistent with this article;
    13. to form or participate as members or partners of private entities,
  which may include but are not limited to,  not-for-profit  corporations,
  housing  development  fund corporations, limited liability corporations,
  and limited partnerships, to further the purposes and powers  given  and
  granted by this section;
    14.  to  earn  fees  and other proceeds from the activities and powers
  given and granted by this section;
    15. to apply  for  or  accept  from  any  source  any  gifts,  grants,
  donations,  or  conveyances  of  land,  money,  other  real  or personal
  property, or other items of value, or loans  of  funds  or  property  or


 financial  or  other aid or credit assistance in any form, including any
  guaranty, line of credit, or grant, from the federal government  or  any
  agency  or  instrumentality  thereof,  from  the  state or any agency or
  instrumentality  thereof, from the city or any agency or instrumentality
  thereof, or from any other source,  for  any  or  all  of  the  purposes
  specified  in this article, and it may comply, subject to the provisions
  of this article, with the terms and conditions thereof;
    16. prior to the approval of any rule or regulation  affecting  rights
  and  protections afforded to residents of housing facilities, including,
  but not limited to, resident protections and opportunities  pursuant  to
  section  six  hundred  thirty-one  of  this  article,  lease  revisions,
  schedules of special charges for services, repairs  and  utilities,  and
  rules  and  regulations  to be incorporated into the lease by reference,
  the trust shall post a notice containing the proposed rule or regulation
  on the website of the trust and in a prominent location in the  affected
  housing facility. Such notice shall include (a) a statement of the basis
  and  purpose of the proposed rule, (b) the time and place of the meeting
  at which the board will provide residents an opportunity to provide oral
  comment on such proposed  rule,  provided  that  a  meeting  to  provide
  residents  an  opportunity to provide oral comment shall not be required
  if such rule is required by law with only minor,  if  any,  exercise  of
  discretion  by  the  trust, or does not adversely affect the protections
  afforded to  the  residents  of  the  housing  facilities,  and  (c)  an
  opportunity to submit written comments and the final date for receipt of
  written  comments.  The  trust  may  adopt  a  rule  or regulation after
  receiving written comments on the proposed  rule  or  regulation  for  a
  period  of  at  least thirty days. The trust shall consider all comments
  received in such period prior to adopting such rule  or  regulation.  In
  the  event  the  trust determines that immediate adoption of any rule or
  regulation is necessary  for  the  preservation  of  health,  safety  or
  general  welfare  and that compliance with the foregoing requirements of
  this subdivision would be contrary to the public interest, such proposed
  item may be adopted on an  emergency  basis.  The  trust  shall  provide
  written justification for such determination and make such justification
  publicly available including via its website and in a prominent location
  in the affected housing facility. Any such immediate adoption shall only
  remain  in  effect  for sixty days, and during such time the trust shall
  comply with the requirements  of  this  subdivision  in  order  for  the
  adoption of the rule or regulation to become permanent. All notice shall
  be undertaken in compliance with language access requirements in federal
  and state law, as applicable; and
    17.  to do any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out and
  exercise the powers given and granted by this article.




   §  630.  Transfer  of  property.  1.  NYCHA,  acting  by  NYCHA  board
  resolution and in accordance with a disposition or similar plan approved
  by the United States department of  housing  and  urban  development  in
  accordance  with applicable federal law, which shall include a letter of
  approval from the mayor or a designee of the mayor, may transfer to  the
  trust,   with   or   without   consideration  and  without  any  further
  authorization, a leasehold interest in its housing  facilities  and  any
  ancillary  personal property of such facilities. The aggregate number of
  residential units transferred to the  trust  pursuant  to  this  section
  shall not exceed twenty-five thousand. On an annual basis, NYCHA and the
  trust  shall  review  such  limit and, if they determine that such limit
  should be increased, NYCHA and the trust shall make  recommendations  to
  the legislature regarding any such increase.
    2.  Within  sixty  days  of  the effective date of this article, NYCHA
  shall issue a  set  of  proposed  requirements  related  to  the  voting
  process.    There  shall be a comment period for the voting process, and
  the comment period shall include  at  least  one  meeting  open  to  the
  public.  NYCHA  shall consider the comments before issuance of the final
  requirements for the voting process. The comments, and the responses  to
  such  comments,  shall be published publicly, including, but not limited
  to, on NYCHA's website. Within one hundred twenty days of the  effective
  date  of  this  article,  the final requirements for the voting process,
  which may be amended as needed pursuant to the process described in this
  section,  shall  be  posted.  Such  voting  process  requirements  shall
  include:  the  minimum  requirements for voter outreach that shall occur
  prior  to  any  vote,  which  shall,  at  a  minimum,  conform  to   the
  requirements  set  forth  in  subdivision  five  of this section, voting
  eligibility, the form, substance, and timing of the voting process,  the
  voting  requirements  regarding  the  selection  of  any  other proposed
  modernization strategy at a housing  facility  in  connection  with  the
  voting  process,  and the criteria by which an option shall be deemed to
  be accepted or rejected by residents of a  particular  housing  facility
  for  a  modernization  strategy that addresses the capital needs of such
  housing facility. The voting process shall ensure that  all  tenants  of
  record  above  the  age  of  eighteen  are  eligible to vote. The voting
  process shall include options to vote in person, by  mail,  and  online.
  The voting process shall also require a minimum percentage of tenants of
  record at such housing facility to participate in the voting process for
  such  voting process to be valid. The voting process shall also include,
  but shall not be limited to, the ability of residents  at  a  particular
  housing  facility  to  reject  the  options  proposed  for  such housing
  facility submitted as part of the voting process.  If  all  options  are
  rejected  at a particular housing facility, none of the proposed options
  shall be implemented at such housing  facility  until  another  vote  is
  undertaken  at  such housing facility. NYCHA shall comply with a vote to
  accept or reject any such options. The trust shall not transfer, convey,
  assign, mortgage, pledge or  otherwise  encumber  any  interest  in,  or
  permit  or suffer any transfer, conveyance, assignment, mortgage, pledge
  or other encumbrance of any interest in such housing  facility,  or  any
  part  thereof,  prior  to  the posting of the final requirements for the
  voting process, prior to the completed vote  at  such  housing  facility
  approving  such  option,  and  prior  to  the satisfaction of applicable
  federal law and regulations. NYCHA shall not transfer,  convey,  assign,
  mortgage,  or  pledge  to  the  trust, or permit or suffer any transfer,
  conveyance, assignment, mortgage, or pledge to the trust any interest in
  such housing facility, or any part thereof, prior to the posting of  the
  final  requirements  for the voting process, prior to the completed vote


 at such housing  facility  approving  such  option,  and  prior  to  the
  satisfaction of applicable federal law and regulations.
    3.  In  addition  to  the requirements set forth in subdivision two of
  this section, the trust shall not transfer,  convey,  assign,  mortgage,
  pledge  or  otherwise  encumber any interest in, or permit or suffer any
  transfer, conveyance, assignment, mortgage, pledge or other  encumbrance
  of  any  interest in any housing facilities, or any part thereof without
  prior written consent of NYCHA. Such written consent shall include,  but
  not  be  limited  to,  all  protections described in section six hundred
  thirty-one of this article and in subdivision fourteen  of  section  six
  hundred  thirty-seven  of  this  article  and shall include reference to
  section six hundred thirty-three of this article.
    4. The trust shall ensure that any housing facilities  transferred  to
  the  trust  pursuant to this section and any portions thereof are leased
  in accordance  with  United  States  department  of  housing  and  urban
  development eligibility and income-targeting requirements, to the extent
  applicable  to  the units therein. Rents for such units shall not exceed
  applicable  program  requirements  for  the  provision  of  housing  for
  low-income   families   as  established  pursuant  to  federal  law  and
  regulations. Where NYCHA rules, regulations  or  agreements  exceed  the
  resident  protection  standards  set  forth  in  state or federal law or
  regulations, any housing facilities transferred to the trust pursuant to
  this section and any portions thereof shall be leased in accordance with
  the  requirements  set  forth  in  the  NYCHA  rules,  regulations,   or
  agreements, as applicable. To the extent consistent with federal law and
  regulations, any transfer of a housing facility to the trust pursuant to
  this  article  shall ensure the maintenance of all rights conferred on a
  resident at the time of such transfer.
    5. As part of the voting process and prior  to  the  transfer  of  any
  housing  facility, or any part thereof, to the trust, NYCHA shall engage
  in a course of  resident  engagement.  Such  resident  engagement  shall
  include: (a) Notice of proposed options on the website of NYCHA and in a
  prominent  location  of the affected housing facility in compliance with
  language access requirements in federal and state law, as applicable;
    (b) a summary description of the proposed options;
    (c) the time and  place  of  at  least  one  public  meeting  held  in
  accordance  with  applicable  accessibility  requirements at which NYCHA
  shall provide residents of such facility information about the  proposed
  options  and  an  opportunity  to  provide  oral comment on the proposed
  transfer;
    (d) notification  by  mail,  phone,  and  email,  where  such  contact
  information  is  available, at least thirty days prior to a vote, to all
  residents of such housing  facility,  which  shall  include  information
  detailing the proposed options; and
    (e)  an  opportunity  for residents to submit written comments and the
  final date for submission of such comments.  NYCHA  shall  consider  and
  respond  to  all  comments received in such period prior to completing a
  transfer pursuant to this subdivision.




   §  631.  Resident  protections  and  opportunities. 1. The protections
  afforded to a resident of a housing facility shall  be  consistent  with
  those  afforded to a public housing resident, to the extent permitted in
  accordance with federal law, and subject to and with the approval of the
  United  States  department  of  housing  and  urban  development.  These
  protections shall include, but are not limited to:
    (a)  preserving  the  affordable character of such housing facility in
  accordance with section eight  of  the  United  States  housing  act  of
  nineteen  hundred  thirty-seven,  as amended, or any successor provision
  and with  part  five  of  title  twenty-four  of  the  code  of  federal
  regulations or any successor regulation;
    (b)  ensuring  that  any resident required to relocate temporarily for
  purposes of rehabilitation or redevelopment of such housing facility  is
  guaranteed  the ability to return to such housing facility following the
  completion  of  such  rehabilitation  or  redevelopment,  and  that  the
  relocation  expenses  of  such  temporary  relocation be paid for by the
  trust or NYCHA as required by applicable federal law;
    (c) providing a resident of such housing facility the  opportunity  to
  establish  and  operate a council to represent residents in such housing
  facility to address concerns relating  to  such  facility,  pursuant  to
  subpart  b  of  part nine hundred sixty-four of title twenty-four of the
  code of federal regulations or  any  successor  regulation,  and  to  be
  eligible  for  resident  participation funding from the trust consistent
  with funding available  to  residents  of  public  housing  pursuant  to
  section  964.150 of title twenty-four of the code of federal regulations
  or any successor regulation, provided that any resident council that, at
  the time of the  transfer  of  a  housing  facility  to  the  trust,  is
  certified  by  NYCHA  as the resident council shall be recognized by the
  trust as the resident council of such housing facility;
    (d) providing a resident of a housing facility an opportunity  for  an
  informal  hearing to grieve any dispute that such resident may have with
  respect to an action of the trust with regard to such resident's  lease,
  consistent  with  the  obligation of a public housing agency pursuant to
  paragraph eight of subdivision (e) of section 966.4 of title twenty-four
  of the code of federal regulations  or  any  successor  regulations  and
  pursuant   to  subpart  b  of  part  nine  hundred  sixty-six  of  title
  twenty-four  of  the  code  of  federal  regulations  or  any  successor
  regulations;
    (e)  providing  a  resident of a housing facility automatic renewal of
  such resident's leases, except for good cause as specified in the  lease
  between  such  resident  and the trust, consistent with the requirements
  relating to a lease between a public housing agency and a  tenant  of  a
  dwelling   unit  pursuant  to  subparagraph  (i)  of  paragraph  two  of
  subdivision  (a)  and  subdivision  (l)  of  section  966.4   of   title
  twenty-four  of  the  code  of  federal  regulations  or  any  successor
  regulation;
    (f) determining succession to a lease between a resident and the trust
  in accordance with the succession policy  described  in  the  management
  manual, and any amendments to such manual, of NYCHA;
    (g)  permitting  a  resident whose total tenant payment, as defined in
  section 983.3 of title twenty-four of the code of  federal  regulations,
  or  any  successor regulations, would equal or exceed the rent to owner,
  as defined in section 983.3 of title twenty-four of the code of  federal
  regulations  or  any  successor  regulations,  to  remain  in  a housing
  facility and pay rent in an amount to be determined  by  the  trust  and
  NYCHA and as set forth in the lease of such resident;
    (h)  determining  succession to a voucher pursuant to section eight of
  the United States housing  act  of  nineteen  hundred  thirty-seven,  as


 amended,  or  any  successor  provision,  in accordance with the housing
  voucher program administrative plan, and any amendments to such plan, of
  NYCHA; and
    (i)  no  rescreening for eligibility or right-sizing of residents of a
  housing facility as a result of a transfer  of  the  leasehold  interest
  from NYCHA to the trust.
    2.  The  resident  protections  described  in  subdivision one of this
  section shall be enumerated in the ground  lease  or  other  appropriate
  agreement between NYCHA and the trust and shall be further enumerated in
  writing  between  the  trust  and  each  resident of a housing facility.
  Nothing in this section shall preclude the trust or NYCHA from providing
  additional resident protections, which may be  enumerated  in  any  such
  ground lease or agreement.
    3.  The  trust,  to  the greatest extent feasible, and consistent with
  federal, state  and  local  laws  and  regulations,  shall  ensure  that
  employment  and other economic opportunities be directed to residents of
  the housing facilities, consistent with section  three  of  the  federal
  housing  and  urban  development act of nineteen hundred sixty-eight, as
  amended, and part seventy-five of  title  twenty-four  of  the  code  of
  federal  regulations  or  any  successor  law or regulation. All project
  labor agreements shall be consistent with this subdivision.
    4. The trust shall act in accordance with  the  full  requirements  of
  part nine hundred sixty-four of title twenty-four of the code of federal
  regulations  or  any  successor regulation. The trust shall, among other
  requirements, support resident participation in the  operations  of  the
  housing   facilities   and   negotiate,  with  any  resident  management
  corporations, or equivalent that  satisfies  the  requirements  of  such
  part,  for  operation  of  a  housing facility. The trust shall consider
  applications of resident organizations, community organizations or other
  local  organizations  for  grant  funding,  as  available,  to   provide
  training,  technical  assistance,  and education to residents to support
  active resident participation in the planning and implementation of  the
  conversion process.
    5.  The  trust  shall  ensure  residents participate in the process to
  procure the vendors that will perform capital renovation, modernization,
  and construction work, excluding emergency procurements.
    6.  The  trust  shall  create  committees  consisting  of  members  as
  appropriate, which shall include, but not be limited to, trust employees
  and    residents   of   the   housing   facility   where   construction,
  reconstruction, rehabilitation, alteration, renovation, maintenance  and
  repair work is being performed, and such committees shall meet as needed
  to  provide  input,  and  oversight,  along  with  recommendations, with
  respect to the quality of such work performed  by  the  vendors  of  the
  trust.
    7.  The  trust  and  NYCHA  shall,  in accordance with applicable law,
  establish a procedure and eligibility requirements by which a person who
  is not a tenant of record as of thirty days before the execution of  the
  transfer  of  a  leasehold interest in the housing facility to the trust
  may become a tenant of record based on  consideration  of  the  familial
  nexus  of  such  person to the last tenant of record on file with NYCHA,
  such individuals to include, but  not  be  limited  to,  aunts,  uncles,
  nieces,  nephews,  and first cousins, provided that such applications to
  become a tenant of record following the transfer of a leasehold interest
  in the housing facility to the trust shall be made no later than  thirty
  days before such transfer. Any requests received after such date will be
  reviewed in accordance with the policies described in the administrative
  plan, and any amendments to such plan, of NYCHA.




   §  632.  Compliance  with  codes.  1.  The trust shall, in the design,
  development, construction, reconstruction,  improvement,  modernization,
  rehabilitation,  repair,  and  operation  of  or otherwise providing for
  housing facilities, comply and cause all contractors  of  the  trust  to
  comply with applicable sanitary and building laws and regulations.
    2. The trust shall adopt rules or regulations establishing sustainable
  design  guidelines  for  the  development, construction, reconstruction,
  improvement, modernization, rehabilitation, repair, and operation of, or
  otherwise  providing  for,  housing  facilities,  which  shall   include
  criteria  for beneficial electrification and renewable energy production
  in  furtherance  of  the  goals  of  decarbonized  buildings,   use   of
  sustainable materials, and energy and water efficiency.




   § 633. Contracts of the trust. 1. Notwithstanding any provision of law
  to  the  contrary,  including  but  not limited to article eight of this
  chapter, the trust shall establish  and  maintain  procurement  policies
  that shall set forth the methods and procedures by which the trust shall
  procure  contracts  for goods and services, including but not limited to
  services  for   design,   development,   construction,   reconstruction,
  improvement,   modernization,   rehabilitation,  repair  and  operation,
  related to property owned or leased by the trust, in a manner consistent
  with the provisions of this article. Such  policies  shall  specifically
  include:
    (a) a competitive sealed bidding process for the award of contracts in
  which  sealed  bids  are  publicly solicited or solicited from a list of
  prequalified bidders and opened and a contract is awarded to the  lowest
  responsive, responsible bidder;
    (b)  processes  for  awarding  contracts  for goods and services using
  alternatives to competitive  sealed  bidding  where  competitive  sealed
  bidding  is not practicable or not advantageous, in which case the trust
  shall use the most competitive method of procurement that is appropriate
  under the circumstances to select the proposer offering the  best  value
  to the trust;
    (c)  a  process  for  prequalifying  bidders  and  proposers  based on
  criteria, which may include an entity's  experience,  past  performance,
  ability   to   undertake  work,  financial  capability,  responsibility,
  reliability and status as a certified minority or women  owned  business
  enterprise pursuant to article fifteen-A of the executive law or section
  thirteen hundred four of the New York city charter;
    (d)  reasonable  procedures  to secure the meaningful participation of
  minority and women owned business enterprises in the trust's procurement
  process. The trust may use the same measures  to  enhance  minority  and
  women  owned  business  enterprise participation as are available to the
  city  pursuant  to  applicable  law,  including  section  6-129  of  the
  administrative code of the city of New York;
    (e)  processes for awarding alternative project delivery contracts, in
  a manner consistent with the terms of section six hundred thirty-four of
  this article;
    (f) procedures for the  fair  and  equitable  resolution  of  contract
  disputes,    for    appeals   of   responsiveness   and   responsibility
  determinations  by  the  trust,  and  for  appeals  of  prequalification
  determinations;
    (g)  a  process  for making purchases off contracts procured by public
  agencies and public entities, provided that such contract exists between
  a vendor and (1) the United States General Services Administration,  (2)
  the  state of New York or any of its political subdivisions, (3) another
  public authority or public corporation of the state, (4) another  public
  housing  agency  or  public  housing  authority,  or  (5) any purchasing
  cooperative where the lead purchasing entity is any  of  the  foregoing,
  provided that in any case when the trust under this paragraph determines
  that  obtaining  such  item  thereby would be in the public interest and
  provide for greater economy and efficiency and sets  forth  the  reasons
  for such determination. Such rationale shall include, but not be limited
  to,  a  determination of need, a consideration of the procurement method
  by which the contract was awarded,  an  explanation  why  a  competitive
  procurement or the use of a centralized contract let by the commissioner
  of  the  office  of  general services is not in the best interest of the
  trust, and the reasonableness of cost; and
    (h) a mechanism for procurements without a formal competitive  process
  where:


   (1)  the existence of an emergency involving danger to life, safety or
  property requires  immediate  action  and  cannot  await  a  competitive
  process  for  goods  or  services  to  be  purchased, including, but not
  limited to, services for construction,  reconstruction,  rehabilitation,
  alteration,  renovation,  maintenance or repairs, which are essential to
  efficient operation or the adequate provision of service  by  the  trust
  and  as  a  consequence  of unforeseen circumstance such purchase cannot
  await a competitive process;
    (2) a procurement's value does not exceed fifty thousand dollars;
    (3) the trust receives no responsive bids or only a single  responsive
  bid in response to a solicitation for competitive bids or proposals;
    (4)  a  procurement's  value  does  not  exceed  five hundred thousand
  dollars and is made from a business certified as  a  minority  or  women
  owned business enterprise pursuant to article fifteen-A of the executive
  law  and  section  thirteen  hundred  four of the New York city charter.
  Nothing in this paragraph  shall  be  construed  to  require  that  such
  business  be  concurrently certified as minority or women owned business
  enterprises under article fifteen-A of the  executive  law  and  section
  thirteen  hundred four of the New York city charter to be awarded such a
  contract;
    (5) a duly appointed representative of the trust determines in writing
  that, based on a market analysis, only one source for the required goods
  or services, including but not limited to,  services  for  construction,
  reconstruction,  rehabilitation, alteration, renovation, maintenance and
  repairs, are available; or
    (6)  the  contract  is  a  contract  between  the  trust  and  another
  governmental entity, including, but not limited to NYCHA.
    2.  Construction  performed under a contract entered into by the trust
  pursuant to this article shall be deemed a public work to  be  performed
  in  accordance  with  the  provisions of article eight of the labor law,
  including but not limited to the prevailing wage requirements set  forth
  in  section  two  hundred  twenty  of  the  labor law and the reporting,
  monitoring, and enforcement provisions of such article, and for projects
  or public works receiving federal aid, applicable  federal  requirements
  for  prevailing wage. Any contract, the principal purpose of which is to
  provide construction services and that is either entered into through  a
  competitive  sealed  bidding  process or pursuant to section six hundred
  thirty-four of this article, and undertaken pursuant to a project  labor
  agreement,  shall  include  a  clause requiring the selected alternative
  project delivery contractor or the contractor selected on the  basis  of
  its  sealed  bid  to  obligate  every  tier of contractor working on the
  public work to comply with the project  labor  agreement  referenced  in
  section  six  hundred  thirty-four of this article and this section, and
  shall  include  project  labor  agreement  compliance   monitoring   and
  enforcement provisions consistent with any such project labor agreement.
    3. Contracts of the trust shall be subject to sections 6-108 and 6-123
  of  the administrative code of the city of New York, and the trust shall
  constitute a "contracting agency" for the purposes of section  6-123  of
  the administrative code of the city of New York.
    4.  The  provisions  of  section  one  hundred  six-b  of  the general
  municipal law shall apply to the trust.
    5. The provisions of section one hundred fifty-one-a of  this  chapter
  shall apply to the trust.
    6.  Unless  a  federal  requirement  conflicts  with  any  procurement
  procedure set forth in this article, the  trust  shall  be  required  to
  comply with such procedure.




   §  634. Alternative project delivery contracts. 1. Notwithstanding any
  provision of law to the contrary, including but not limited  to  section
  seventy-two hundred ten of the education law, and in conformity with the
  requirements of this article, for any public work undertaken pursuant to
  a project labor agreement the trust may use alternative project delivery
  contracts,  provided  that  the  authority  to  advertise  a request for
  qualification in accordance with this section shall  expire  five  years
  after the effective date of this section.
    (a)  A  contractor  selected by the trust to enter into an alternative
  project delivery contract may be selected through a two-step method,  as
  follows:
    (1)  Step  one.  The  first  step shall be the generation of a list of
  responding entities that have demonstrated  the  general  capability  to
  perform  the  alternative  project  delivery  contract.  Such list shall
  consist of a specified number of responding entities, as  determined  by
  the  trust,  and  shall  be  generated  based upon the trust's review of
  responses to a  publicly  advertised  request  for  qualifications.  The
  trust's  request  for qualifications shall include a general description
  of the public work, the maximum number  of  responding  entities  to  be
  included  on  such  list,  the  selection  criteria  to  be used and the
  relative weight of each criteria in generating such list. Such selection
  criteria shall include the qualifications and experience of  the  entity
  or  team of entities, organization, demonstrated responsibility, ability
  of the entity or team of entities or of  a  member  or  members  of  the
  entity  or  team  of  entities  to  comply with applicable requirements,
  including the provisions of articles one hundred forty-five, one hundred
  forty-seven and one hundred  forty-eight  of  the  education  law,  past
  record  of  compliance with the labor law, and such other qualifications
  the trust deems appropriate, which may include but are  not  limited  to
  project   understanding,   financial   capability  and  record  of  past
  performance. The trust shall evaluate and rate all  responding  entities
  to  the  request  for qualifications. Based upon such ratings, the trust
  shall list the responding entities that  shall  receive  a  request  for
  proposals  in accordance with subparagraph two of this paragraph. To the
  extent consistent with applicable federal law, the trust shall consider,
  when awarding any contract pursuant to this section,  the  participation
  of (i) responding entities that are certified as minority or women owned
  business enterprises pursuant to article fifteen-A of the executive law,
  or  certified  pursuant to local law as minority or women owned business
  enterprises,  (ii)  small  business  concerns  identified  pursuant   to
  subdivision  (b)  of  section  one  hundred  thirty-nine-g  of the state
  finance  law,  and  (iii)  business  concerns  that   provide   economic
  opportunities  for  low  and  very low-income persons in accordance with
  section three of the  federal  housing  and  urban  development  act  of
  nineteen hundred sixty-eight, as amended, or any successor provision. In
  addition,  nothing  in  this  section  shall  be deemed to supersede any
  prequalification policies adopted by the trust pursuant to  section  six
  hundred thirty-three of this article.
    (2)  Step  two. The second step shall be the selection of the proposal
  which is the best value to the trust. The trust shall  issue  a  request
  for proposals to the responding entities listed pursuant to subparagraph
  one of this paragraph. If such a responding entity consists of a team of
  separate  entities,  the entities that comprise such a team shall remain
  unchanged from the responding entity as listed pursuant to  subparagraph
  one  of  this  paragraph  unless  otherwise  approved  by the trust. The
  request for proposals shall set forth the public work's scope  of  work,
  and  other  requirements,  as determined by the trust, which may include
  separate goals for work under the contract to be performed by businesses


 certified as minority or women owned business  enterprises  pursuant  to
  article  fifteen-A  of the executive law, or certified pursuant to local
  law  as  minority  or  women  owned  business  enterprises,   or   goals
  established  pursuant  to section three of the federal housing and urban
  development act of nineteen hundred  sixty-eight,  as  amended,  or  any
  successor provision, if applicable. The request for proposals shall also
  specify  the  criteria  to  be  used  to  evaluate the responses and the
  relative weight of each of such criteria. Such criteria  shall  include:
  the   quality   of  the  proposal's  solution;  the  qualifications  and
  experience of the proposer;  the  proposal's  cost,  which  may  include
  factors that may be considered individually or in the aggregate, such as
  the   proposed   cost  of  design  phase  work,  the  proposed  cost  of
  construction phase work, or cost factors relating to construction  phase
  work,  as  applicable;  and other factors deemed pertinent by the trust,
  which may include, but shall not be limited to,  the  proposal's  manner
  and  schedule  of  project  implementation,  the  proposer's  ability to
  complete the work in a timely and satisfactory manner, maintenance costs
  of the completed public  work,  maintenance  of  traffic  approach,  and
  community  impact.  The  trust  may  engage  in  negotiations  or  other
  discussions with all qualified vendors  that  have  expressed  interest,
  provided  that  the  trust  maintains a written record of the conduct of
  negotiations or discussions and the basis  for  every  determination  to
  continue or suspend negotiations, and further provided that if the trust
  determines  for  a  particular  contract  or  for  a  particular type of
  contract that it is in the trust's best interest to negotiate  or  enter
  into  discussions with fewer proposers, it may make such a determination
  in writing. If the trust enters into such negotiations, the trust  shall
  allow  all  proposers  to  revise  their  proposals  upon  conclusion of
  negotiations, and  the  trust  shall  evaluate  the  proposers'  revised
  proposals  using the criteria included in the request for proposals. Any
  contract awarded  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be  awarded  to  a
  responsive  and  responsible  proposer, which, in consideration of these
  and other specified criteria deemed pertinent, offers the best value  as
  determined  by  the  trust.  The  request  for proposals shall include a
  statement that proposers shall designate in writing  those  portions  of
  the proposal that contain trade secrets or other proprietary information
  that  are  to  remain  confidential,  so that the material designated as
  confidential shall be readily separable from the  proposal.  Nothing  in
  this   subdivision  shall  be  construed  to  prohibit  the  trust  from
  negotiating final contract terms  and  conditions  including  cost.  All
  proposals  submitted shall be scored according to the criteria listed in
  the request for proposals and such final scores shall  be  published  on
  the  trust's  website  after  the  date  upon which such contract may be
  implemented.
    (b) The trust, in awarding an alternative project delivery contract to
  a contractor offering the best value may  use  the  following  types  of
  contracts:
    (1)  a  cost-plus  not  to  exceed  guaranteed  maximum  price form of
  contract in which the trust shall be entitled to monitor and  audit  all
  costs.  In  establishing  the  schedule  and  process  for determining a
  guaranteed maximum  price,  the  contract  between  the  trust  and  the
  contractor shall include terms specifying the price for the design phase
  of  the  work,  the  scope  of the work, and any applicable cost factors
  relating  to  construction  phase  work  that  were  included   in   the
  contractor's  proposal.   A fair and reasonable guaranteed maximum price
  for the construction phase of the work, or portions of the  construction
  phase  of  the  work, may be agreed to as one or more amendments to such
  contract based on developments in the design of the project  that  occur


 after such contract is executed. Each guaranteed maximum price amendment
  shall:  (i)  describe the scope of the portion of the construction phase
  work subject to the amendment, the cost of performing such work, and the
  maximum  costs of any contingencies related to such work, (ii) include a
  detailed line item cost breakdown, (iii) include a list of all drawings,
  specifications and other information on  which  the  guaranteed  maximum
  price  is  based,  (iv)  include  the  dates  of  substantial  and final
  completion  on  which  the  guaranteed  maximum  price  is   based,   as
  applicable,  and  (v) include a schedule of unit prices. The trust shall
  maintain a written record of each guaranteed  maximum  price  amendment,
  which  shall  include  a  summary  of  the  negotiation  process  and  a
  description of the relevant developments in the design of  the  project,
  independent  cost  estimates  prepared  by or on behalf of the trust, as
  required pursuant to a policy established by the trust, the contractor's
  actual cost schedules and unit prices, and any other  factors  that  the
  trust  considered.  If  the trust and the contractor cannot agree upon a
  guaranteed maximum price for one or more portions of construction  phase
  work,  the trust may direct the contractor to assign all or a portion of
  the duties and rights under such alternative project  delivery  contract
  to  another responsive and responsible proposer pursuant to subparagraph
  two of paragraph (a) of this subdivision that offered the best value  of
  the  remaining  proposers and that will agree to accept such assignment.
  This subparagraph shall not  be  deemed  to  prohibit  the  use  of  any
  contract  terms  or  procedures  pursuant to any other provision of law,
  including but not limited to provisions included in this article;
    (2) a lump sum contract in which the contractor agrees to accept a set
  dollar amount for a  contract  which  comprises  a  single  bid  without
  providing  a  cost breakdown for all costs such as for equipment, labor,
  materials, as well as such contractor's profit for completing all  items
  of work comprising the public work;
    (3)  incentive  payments  identified  in  the text of the contract for
  performance objectives; or
    (4) a combination of elements of the contract types listed herein.
    2. All alternative project delivery contracts entered into pursuant to
  this section shall include a  clause  requiring  that  any  professional
  services  regulated  by  articles  one  hundred  forty-five, one hundred
  forty-seven and one hundred forty-eight of the education  law  shall  be
  performed  and  stamped and sealed, where appropriate, by a professional
  licensed in accordance with the appropriate article.
    3. The submission of a proposal or responses or the  execution  of  an
  alternative project delivery contract pursuant to this article shall not
  be  construed  to  be  a  violation of section six thousand five hundred
  twelve of the education law.
    4. Each alternative project delivery  contract  entered  into  by  the
  trust  pursuant  to  this  article  shall comply with the objectives and
  goals relating to the performance of design and construction services by
  minority and women owned business enterprises pursuant to section  6-129
  of  the administrative code of the city of New York, or, for projects or
  public works receiving federal aid, applicable federal requirements  for
  disadvantaged  business enterprises or minority and women owned business
  enterprises  and  section  three  of  the  federal  housing  and   urban
  development  act  of  nineteen  hundred  sixty-eight, as amended, or any
  successor provision, if applicable.
    5. (a) Notwithstanding any provision  of  law  to  the  contrary,  all
  rights  or  benefits,  including terms and conditions of employment, and
  protection of civil service and  collective  bargaining  status  of  all
  employees of NYCHA and the trust solely in connection with the use of an


 alternative  project delivery contract pursuant to this section shall be
  preserved and protected.
    (b) The use of alternative project delivery contracts pursuant to this
  section  shall  not  result  in  the  (1)  displacement of any currently
  employed  worker  of  NYCHA  or  loss  of  position,  including  partial
  displacement  such  as  a  reduction  in the hours of non-overtime work,
  wages or employment benefits, or result in the  impairment  of  existing
  collective  bargaining  agreements  to  which  NYCHA  is a party, or (2)
  transfer of existing duties and functions  related  to  maintenance  and
  operations  currently  performed  by  existing  employees  of NYCHA to a
  contractor.
    (c) Employees of the trust and NYCHA serving  in  positions  in  newly
  created  titles  shall  be  assigned to the appropriate bargaining unit.
  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to affect  (1)  the
  existing rights of employees of NYCHA pursuant to an existing collective
  bargaining  agreement,  (2)  the existing representational relationships
  among employee organizations representing employees of NYCHA, or (3) the
  bargaining relationships between NYCHA and such employee organizations.
    (d)  Without  limiting  contractors'  obligations  under   alternative
  project  delivery contracts to issue their own initial certifications of
  substantial completion and final completion,  public  employees  of  the
  trust   shall  review  and  determine  whether  the  work  performed  by
  contractors is acceptable and has been performed in accordance with  the
  applicable  alternative  project  delivery contracts, and if such public
  employees so determine, such public employees shall accept  contractors'
  substantial  or  final  completion  of  the  public works as applicable.
  Performance by public employees of the trust of any review described  in
  this  subdivision shall not be construed to modify or limit contractors'
  obligations to perform the work in strict accordance with the applicable
  alternative  project  delivery  contract  or  the  contractors'  or  any
  subcontractors' obligations or liabilities under any law.




   §  635.  Additional  authority. The procurement authority conferred by
  this article shall not impact or impair, and shall be  in  addition  to,
  the  authority  conferred  by the NYCHA modernization investment act and
  the New York city public works investment act.




   §  636.  Additional  requirements  for  alternative  project  delivery
  contracts. Construction performed under a contract entered into  by  the
  trust  pursuant  to  this  article shall be deemed a "public work" to be
  performed in accordance with the provisions  of  article  eight  of  the
  labor law, including but not limited to the prevailing wage requirements
  set  forth  in  section  two  hundred  twenty  of  the labor law and the
  reporting, monitoring, and enforcement provisions of  article  eight  of
  such law, as well as subject to sections two hundred, two hundred forty,
  two  hundred  forty-one  and two hundred forty-two of the labor law, and
  for projects or public works receiving federal aid,  applicable  federal
  requirements  for prevailing wage. Any contract entered into pursuant to
  section six hundred thirty-four of this article, and undertaken pursuant
  to a project labor agreement,  shall  include  a  clause  requiring  the
  selected  alternative project delivery contractor to obligate every tier
  of contractor working on the public work  to  comply  with  the  project
  labor  agreement  referenced  in section six hundred thirty-four of this
  article, and shall include project labor agreement compliance monitoring
  and enforcement  provisions  consistent  with  any  such  project  labor
  agreement.




   §  637. Borrowing by the trust and for its benefit; effects of certain
  defaults. 1. For the purposes of this section, the term "project"  means
  the  acquisition,  development,  design,  construction,  reconstruction,
  improvement,  rehabilitation,  repairing  and   operation   of   housing
  facilities.
    2.  The  trust shall have the power and is hereby authorized from time
  to time to issue bonds, notes or other obligations  in  conformity  with
  applicable  provisions of the uniform commercial code, in such principal
  amounts as it may determine to be necessary  to  pay  the  cost  of  any
  project  and  to  fund  reserves  to  secure  such bonds, notes or other
  obligations, including costs  of  issuance  and  any  administrative  or
  incidental expenses in connection therewith, provided that the aggregate
  principal  amount  of  such  bonds, notes or other obligations shall not
  exceed ten billion dollars plus a principal amount of such bonds,  notes
  or other obligations issued (a) to fund any related debt service reserve
  fund,  (b)  to provide capitalized interest, and (c) to provide fees and
  other charges and expenses, including underwriters' discount, related to
  the  issuance  of  such  bonds,  notes  or  other  obligations  and  the
  maintenance  of  such reserves. The trust shall have the power from time
  to time to refund any bonds, notes or other obligations of the trust  by
  the  issuance  of  new  bonds, notes or other obligations, and may issue
  bonds, notes or other obligations partly to refund bonds, notes or other
  obligations of the trust then outstanding and partly to pay the cost  of
  any project. Bonds, notes or other obligations issued by the trust shall
  be  payable  as  may  be designated in the resolution of the trust under
  which the bonds, notes or other obligations shall be  authorized  to  be
  issued, subject to any agreements with the holders of outstanding bonds,
  notes  or  other obligations pledging any particular revenues or moneys.
  No bonds, notes or other obligations of the trust or any entity referred
  to in subdivision thirteen of section six hundred  twenty-nine  of  this
  article  shall  be issued or incurred without the prior written approval
  of the director of management and budget of the city of New York, and no
  such bonds, notes or other obligations shall be issued for  the  purpose
  of  refinancing any bonds, notes or other obligations of NYCHA, provided
  that the proceeds of up to six hundred million  dollars  of  the  bonds,
  notes  or  other  obligations  of the trust or any entity referred to in
  subdivision thirteen of section six hundred twenty-nine of this  article
  may  be  applied to the payment of outstanding debt incurred by NYCHA in
  connection with one or more housing facilities, in  furtherance  of  the
  purposes of this article, including, but not limited to, for the purpose
  of payment of outstanding energy performance contract debt.
    3.  The  trust  shall  be  authorized  to obtain insurance, letters of
  credit and other credit or liquidity facilities related  to  its  bonds,
  notes or other obligations.
    4.  The  board may delegate to the chair or the president of the trust
  the power to set the final terms of bonds, notes or other obligations.
    5. Whenever the trust shall determine that the issuance of its  bonds,
  notes  or  other  obligations  is  appropriate,  the  trust shall make a
  determination as to the arrangements necessary for the issuance and sale
  of such bonds, notes or other obligations, including the underwriting of
  such bonds, notes or other obligations through  the  public  or  private
  sale  of  such bonds, notes or other obligations, and such determination
  shall include compensation for services  rendered  as  the  trust  deems
  appropriate.  Such  determination  shall be set forth in a resolution of
  the trust, which shall authorize issuance of such bonds, notes or  other
  obligations.  The  bonds, notes or other obligations shall bear interest
  at such fixed or variable rates and shall be in such  denominations,  be
  in  such  form,  either  coupon or registered, be sold at such public or


 private sale, be executed in  such  manner,  be  denominated  in  United
  States currency, be payable in such medium of payment, at such place and
  be  subject to such terms of redemption as the trust may provide in such
  resolution.
    6.  Any  resolution  or  resolutions authorizing bonds, notes or other
  obligations or any issue  of  bonds,  notes  or  other  obligations  may
  contain  provisions which may be a part of the contract with the holders
  of the bonds, notes or other obligations thereby authorized as to:
    (a) pledging all or part of its revenues, including, but  not  limited
  to,  project-based  or tenant-based assistance pursuant to section eight
  of the United States housing act of nineteen  hundred  thirty-seven,  as
  amended,  or  any  successor provision, and assistance provided to NYCHA
  pursuant to section nine of the United States housing  act  of  nineteen
  hundred  thirty-seven,  as amended, or any successor provision, together
  with any other moneys, securities or contracts, to secure the payment of
  the bonds, notes or other obligations, subject to such agreements as may
  then exist;
    (b) the setting aside of reserves and the creation  of  sinking  funds
  and the regulation and disposition thereof;
    (c)  limitations on the purpose to which the proceeds from the sale of
  bonds, notes or other obligations may be applied;
    (d) limitations on the issuance of additional bonds,  notes  or  other
  obligations,  the  terms  upon  which  additional  bonds, notes or other
  obligations may be issued and secured and the refunding of bonds,  notes
  or other obligations;
    (e)  the  procedure,  if  any, by which the terms of any contract with
  holders  of  bonds,  notes  or  other  obligations  may  be  amended  or
  abrogated,  including the proportion of holders of bonds, notes or other
  obligations which are needed to consent thereto and the manner in  which
  such consent may be given;
    (f)  vesting  in  a  bond trustee or trustees such properties, rights,
  powers and duties in trust as the trust may determine; and
    (g) defining the acts or  omissions  to  act  that  may  constitute  a
  default  in  the  obligations  and duties of the trust to the holders of
  bonds, notes or other obligations  and  providing  for  the  rights  and
  remedies  of  the  holders  of  bonds, notes or other obligations in the
  event of such default, including as a matter of right the appointment of
  a receiver, provided, however, that such rights and remedies  shall  not
  be  inconsistent with the general laws of the state and other provisions
  of this article.
    7. In addition to the powers herein conferred upon the trust to secure
  its bonds, notes or other obligations, the trust  shall  have  power  in
  connection  with  the  issuance  of bonds, notes or other obligations to
  enter into such agreements for the benefit  of  the  holders  of  bonds,
  notes  or  other obligations as the trust may deem necessary, convenient
  or desirable concerning the use or disposition of its revenues or  other
  moneys,  including  the  entrusting,  pledging  or creation of any other
  security interest in any such revenues, moneys and the doing of any act,
  including refraining from doing any act, which the trust would have  the
  right  to  do  in  the  absence of such agreements. The trust shall have
  power to enter into amendments of any such agreements within the  powers
  granted to the trust by this article and to perform such agreements. The
  provisions  of  any  such  agreements may be made a part of the contract
  with the holders of bonds, notes or other obligations of the trust.
    8. Notwithstanding any provision of the uniform commercial code to the
  contrary, any pledge of or other security interest in revenues,  moneys,
  accounts, contract rights, general intangible or other personal property
  made  or created by the trust shall be valid, binding and perfected from


 the time when such pledge is made or other  security  interest  attaches
  without  any physical delivery of the collateral or further act, and the
  lien of any such pledge or  other  security  interest  shall  be  valid,
  binding  and  perfected against all parties having claims of any kind in
  tort, contract or otherwise against the trust irrespective of whether or
  not such parties have notice thereof. No  instrument  by  which  such  a
  pledge  or security interest is created nor any financing statement need
  be recorded or filed.
    9. Whether or not the bonds, notes or other obligations of  the  trust
  are of such form and character as to be negotiable instruments under the
  terms  of  the  uniform  commercial  code,  the  bonds,  notes  or other
  obligations are hereby made negotiable instruments within the meaning of
  and for all the purposes of the uniform commercial code, subject only to
  the  provisions  of  the  bonds,  notes   or   other   obligations   for
  registration.
    10.  Neither  the  members of the board nor any person executing bonds
  shall be liable  personally  thereon  or  be  subject  to  any  personal
  liability  or  accountability  solely by reason of the issuance thereof.
  The bonds, notes or other obligations of the trust shall not be  a  debt
  of  NYCHA,  the  city, or the state, and neither NYCHA, the city nor the
  state shall be liable thereon, nor shall they  be  payable  out  of  any
  funds  other  than  those  of  the trust, and such bonds, notes or other
  obligations shall contain on  the  face  thereof  a  statement  to  such
  effect.
    11. The trust, subject to such agreements with bondholders as then may
  exist, shall have power to purchase bonds, notes or other obligations of
  the trust out of any moneys available therefor, which shall thereupon be
  cancelled.
    12.  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of article twelve of the private
  housing finance law, section  twenty-nine  hundred  seventy-six  of  the
  public authorities law or any other general, special or local law to the
  contrary,  (a)  the  purposes  of  the New York city housing development
  corporation and its powers granted in  article  twelve  of  the  private
  housing finance law also shall include, subject to the provisions of any
  contract  with  holders  of  its  bonds, notes or other obligations, the
  making of loans to the trust and entities  referred  to  in  subdivision
  thirteen  of  section  six  hundred twenty-nine of this article, and (b)
  bonds,  notes  or  other  obligations  of  the  New  York  city  housing
  development  corporation  issued for, or to refund bonds, notes or other
  obligations issued for, such purpose or the purposes of paying costs  of
  issuance  thereof  or  funding  reserves  to secure such bonds, notes or
  other obligations (i) may be sold without any consultation  or  approval
  otherwise  required by subdivision two of section six hundred fifty-five
  of the private housing finance law, (ii) shall not be  included  in  any
  calculation  of  outstanding  bonds,  notes  or  other  obligations  for
  purposes of section six hundred fifty-six of the private housing finance
  law and shall not be secured by any  capital  reserve  fund  established
  pursuant  thereto, and (iii) shall not be included in any calculation of
  bonds, notes or other obligations issued by the New  York  city  housing
  development  corporation  for  purposes  of  section twenty-nine hundred
  seventy-six of the public authorities law.
    13. In the  event  that  any  default  on  any  bond,  note  or  other
  obligation  that  is secured by an assignment of, mortgage on, pledge of
  or other encumbrance on  any  interest  of  the  trust,  or  any  entity
  referred  to  in subdivision thirteen of section six hundred twenty-nine
  of this  article,  in  any  housing  facilities,  has  occurred  and  is
  continuing  beyond  the  applicable cure period, if any, provided to the
  trust or  such  entity  in  the  instrument  granting  such  assignment,


 mortgage,  pledge or other encumbrance, notwithstanding any provision in
  such instrument, any right of the  beneficiary  of  such  instrument  to
  obtain  such interest in such housing facilities as a remedy to any such
  default  shall,  for  a  period ending thirty days after the end of such
  cure period, be subject to:
    (a) the right of the city of New  York  to  remedy,  or  cause  to  be
  remedied, such default; and
    (b)  the  right  of  the  state  of New York to remedy, or cause to be
  remedied,  such  default;  provided,  however,  that  nothing  in   this
  subdivision  shall  be construed to impose any obligation on the city of
  New York or on the state of New York to remedy, or cause to be remedied,
  such default.
    14. Notwithstanding any default  on  any  obligation  referred  to  in
  subdivision  thirteen  of  this section, and any remedies exercised as a
  result of such default, provisions relating to the restricted use of the
  housing facilities for  the  provision  and  operation  of  housing  for
  low-income families and current residents shall at all times continue to
  be  in  effect  in  perpetuity,  and the housing facilities shall remain
  subject to the provisions of subdivision four  of  section  six  hundred
  thirty  of  this  article  and  section  six  hundred thirty-one of this
  article. The trust shall not pledge the fee  ownership  of  the  housing
  facilities as part of a financing arrangement.
    15.  At  least quarterly, the trust shall provide financial reports to
  the director of management and budget of the city of New York containing
  such information as the director of management and budget of the city of
  New York may request.




   §  638.  Resources  of the trust. 1. Subject to the provisions of this
  article, the  members  of  the  board  shall  receive,  accept,  invest,
  administer,  expend and disburse for its corporate purposes all money of
  the trust from whatever sources derived including (a)  the  proceeds  of
  bonds,  notes  and other obligations, and (b) any other payments, gifts,
  or appropriations to the trust from any other source.
    2. Subject to the provisions of any contract with  holders  of  bonds,
  notes  or other obligations, the money of the trust shall be paid to the
  trust and shall not be commingled with any other money. The money of the
  trust shall be deposited in accounts held in the  trust's  name  in  the
  bank or banks in the state designated by the trust.
    3.  The  moneys  in  such  accounts shall be paid out on checks of the
  trust upon requisition by the chair or such officer or officers  as  the
  trust  may  authorize  to  make such requisitions, or pursuant to a bond
  resolution or trust indenture.
    4. Any moneys on deposit in the accounts of the trust not required for
  immediate expenditure shall  be  invested  in  obligations  in  which  a
  municipality  may  be  authorized  to  invest in accordance with section
  eleven of the general municipal law, provided, however, that such  funds
  shall  not  be  invested  in  instruments  commonly  known as repurchase
  agreements.  The  trust  shall  have  the  power,  notwithstanding   the
  provisions  of  this section, to contract with the holders of any of its
  bonds, notes and  other  obligations  as  to  the  custody,  collection,
  securing,  investment and payment of any money of the trust or any money
  held in trust or otherwise for the payment of  bonds,  notes  and  other
  obligations  or in any way to secure bonds, notes and other obligations,
  and to carry out any such contract.




   §  639.  Legal  investment  and  deposit.  The  bonds,  notes or other
  obligations of the trust are hereby made securities in which all  public
  officers   and   bodies  of  the  state  and  all  public  corporations,
  municipalities and municipal subdivisions, all insurance  companies  and
  associations  and  other  persons carrying on an insurance business, all
  banks, bankers, trust companies, savings banks and savings  associations
  including savings and loan associations, building and loan associations,
  investment  companies  and other persons carrying on a banking business,
  all administrators, conservators,  guardians,  executors,  trustees  and
  other  fiduciaries,  and all other persons whatsoever who are now or may
  hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds or in  other  obligations  of
  the  state, may properly and legally invest funds, including capital, in
  their  control  or  belonging  to  them.  The  bonds,  notes  or   other
  obligations  are also hereby made securities which may be deposited with
  and may be received by all public officers and bodies of the  state  and
  all municipalities and public corporations for any purpose for which the
  deposit  of bonds, notes or other obligations of the state is now or may
  hereafter be authorized.




   §  640.  Tax  exemption and tax contract by the state. 1. It is hereby
  determined that the creation of the trust and the carrying  out  of  its
  corporate  purposes  is in all respects for the benefit of the people of
  the state of New York and is a public purpose.  Accordingly,  the  trust
  shall  be  regarded  as performing an essential governmental function in
  the exercise of the powers conferred upon it by this  article,  and  the
  trust  shall  not be required to pay any fees, taxes, special ad valorem
  levies or assessments of  any  kind,  including,  but  not  limited  to,
  franchise taxes, sales taxes or other taxes, upon or with respect to any
  property  owned by it or under its jurisdiction, control or supervision,
  or upon the uses thereof, or upon or with respect to its  activities  or
  operations  in  furtherance  of  the  powers  conferred  upon it by this
  article, or upon or with respect to any fares,  tolls,  rentals,  rates,
  charges, fees, revenues or other income received by the trust.
    2.  Any  bonds,  notes  or  other  obligations issued pursuant to this
  article together with the income therefrom shall at all times be  exempt
  from taxation.
    3.  The  state  hereby  covenants  with  the  purchasers  and with all
  subsequent holders and transferees of bonds, notes or other  obligations
  issued  by  the  trust pursuant to this article, in consideration of the
  acceptance of and payment for the bonds,  notes  or  other  obligations,
  that  the bonds, notes or other obligations of the trust issued pursuant
  to this article and the income therefrom and all revenues,  monies,  and
  other  property  pledged  to pay or to secure the payment of such bonds,
  notes or other obligations shall at all times be free from taxation.




   §  641. Actions against the trust. 1. Except in an action for wrongful
  death, no action or proceeding shall be prosecuted or maintained against
  the trust for personal injury or damage to  real  or  personal  property
  alleged  to  have been sustained by reason of the negligence or wrongful
  act of the trust or of any  member  of  the  board,  officer,  agent  or
  employee  thereof, unless (a) it shall appear by and as an allegation in
  the complaint or moving papers that a notice of claim  shall  have  been
  made  and served upon the trust, within the time limit prescribed by and
  in compliance with section fifty-e of the general municipal law, (b)  it
  shall  appear  by and as an allegation in the complaint or moving papers
  that at least thirty days have elapsed since the service of such  notice
  and  that  adjustment  or payment thereof has been neglected or refused,
  and (c) the action or proceeding shall be commenced  within  the  period
  provided  under  section fifty-i of the general municipal law. An action
  against the trust for wrongful death shall be  commenced  in  accordance
  with  the notice of claim and time limitation provisions of title eleven
  of article nine of the public authorities law.
    2. Wherever a notice of claim is served upon the trust, it shall  have
  the  right  to  demand  an  examination  of the claimant relative to the
  occurrence and extent of the injuries or  damages  for  which  claim  is
  made,  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  section fifty-h of the
  general municipal law.
    3. The trust may require  any  person  presenting  for  settlement  an
  account  or claim for any cause whatsoever against the trust to be sworn
  before a member of  the  board,  counsel  or  an  attorney,  officer  or
  employee thereof designated for such purpose, concerning such account or
  claim  and  when  so sworn, to answer orally as to any facts relative to
  such account or claim. The trust shall have power to  settle  or  adjust
  any claims in favor of or against the trust.
    4.  The rate of interest to be paid by the trust upon any judgment for
  which it is liable, other than a  judgment  on  bonds,  notes  or  other
  obligations,  shall  not  exceed  the  rate of interest on judgments and
  accrued claims against municipal authorities as provided in the  general
  municipal  law.  Interest  on  payments  of principal or interest on any
  bonds, notes or other obligations in default shall accrue  at  the  rate
  specified   in  the  general  municipal  law  until  paid  or  otherwise
  satisfied.
    5. The venue of every  action,  suit  or  special  proceeding  brought
  against the trust shall be laid in the county of New York.




   §  642. Civil service and pension system membership. 1. The trust, for
  the purpose of administering the civil service law, shall be subject  to
  the  provisions  of  the  civil  service  law  and the rules of the city
  department of citywide administrative services or any  successor  acting
  as  the  municipal  commission  of  the city. The president of the trust
  shall be empowered to act for the  trust  in  all  matters  relating  to
  compliance with this subdivision.
    2.  With respect to persons employed by NYCHA on the effective date of
  this section, the trust and NYCHA shall be deemed to be the same  public
  employer  only  for  purposes  of transfer of employment under the civil
  service law, which may be made only with the approval of the  NYCHA  CEO
  and the president of the trust. No civil service right of an employee of
  NYCHA  employed  on  the  effective  date of this article shall be lost,
  impaired or affected by reason of the enactment  of  this  section  into
  law.
    3.  Any  person  on  an  eligible list for a position with NYCHA shall
  continue to hold such position on such list and shall be entitled to the
  same civil service rights. The trust shall continue to use  any  new  or
  existing  civil  service lists promulgated by the department of citywide
  administrative  services  until  such  time  as  successor  titles   are
  established.  Employees  of  the  trust  shall  have the same rights and
  benefits as employees of NYCHA.
    4. Any officer or employee of NYCHA who is transferred  to  the  trust
  pursuant  to  this  section  and  who at the time of such transfer was a
  member of the New York city employees' retirement system shall  continue
  to  be a member of such system as long as he or she or they continues in
  such service, and shall continue to have all the rights, privileges  and
  obligations  of membership in such system. Employment by the trust shall
  constitute city-service  for  the  purposes  of  chapter  one  of  title
  thirteen of the administrative code of the city of New York.




   §  643.  Collective  negotiation.  1.  The city of New York collective
  bargaining law shall apply to the trust.
    2. For the purpose of article fourteen of the civil  service  law  and
  the  New  York city collective bargaining law, as applicable, the trust,
  acting by and through its president, shall be deemed to  be  the  public
  employer  and  as  such  shall  negotiate  with  and  enter into written
  agreements with employee organizations representing  the  staff  of  the
  trust  that  have  been  certified  or  recognized  in  accordance  with
  applicable law. In carrying on such negotiations, the president  of  the
  trust may consult with and seek assistance from the city office of labor
  relations  and  NYCHA. The president of the trust shall consult with the
  appropriate public employee organization on the  establishment  of,  and
  bargain  all terms and conditions of, any new titles established for the
  trust which have a community of interest with titles already represented
  by the public employee organization which presently  has  representation
  rights  for  those titles for NYCHA or for the city. Any such titles for
  which terms and conditions are bargained pursuant  to  this  subdivision
  shall  be deemed to be successor titles within the meaning of applicable
  law and, so long as the responsibilities of employees  in  these  titles
  are  reasonably  related  to the responsibilities of employees currently
  represented by a public employee organization, shall be accreted to  the
  appropriate  bargaining  certificates  for  which  such  public employee
  organization shall be voluntarily recognized  as  the  bargaining  agent
  under procedures acceptable to the office of collective bargaining.




   §   644.   Application   of   state   and  local  human  rights  laws.
  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, article fifteen of
  the executive law and title eight of the administrative code of the city
  of New York shall apply to the trust.




   §  645.  Limited  liability.  1.  As  used  in  this section, the term
  "employee" shall mean the members of  the  board,  president,  officers,
  employees,  or  a  former  employee,  his  or  her  estate or judicially
  appointed personal representative.
    2. Neither the members of the board nor any officers  or  employee  of
  the  trust  acting  on  behalf thereof, while acting within the scope of
  such person's authority, shall be subject  to  any  liability  resulting
  from carrying out any of the powers expressly given in this article.
    3. At the request of the employee, and upon compliance by the employee
  with  the  provisions  of  this section, the trust shall provide for the
  defense of an employee in any civil action or proceeding in any state or
  federal court, arising out of any alleged  act  or  omission  which  the
  trust  finds  occurred while the employee was acting within the scope of
  his or her public employment and in the discharge of his or  her  public
  duties  and  was not in violation of any rule or regulation of the trust
  at the time the alleged act or omission occurred. This duty  to  provide
  for  a  defense  and  indemnification  shall  not arise where such civil
  action or proceeding is brought by or on behalf of the trust against the
  employee.
    4. The trust shall indemnify and hold harmless its  employees  in  the
  amount  of  any  civil  judgment  obtained against such employees in any
  state or federal court, or in the amount of any settlement  of  a  claim
  approved  by the trust provided that the act or omission from which such
  judgment or settlement arose occurred  while  the  employee  was  acting
  within the scope of his or her public employment and in the discharge of
  his  or  her  public  duties  and  was  not  in violation of any rule or
  regulation of the trust at the time the alleged damages were  sustained.
  The duty to indemnify and hold harmless prescribed by this section shall
  not  arise  where  the  injury  or  damage  resulted from an intentional
  wrongdoing, or recklessness on the part of the employee. Nothing in this
  section shall authorize the trust  to  indemnify  or  hold  harmless  an
  employee  with  respect  to  punitive  or  exemplary  damages,  fines or
  penalties.
    5. The duty to defend and indemnify and hold  harmless  prescribed  by
  this  section  shall be conditioned upon (a) delivery by the employee to
  the president or general counsel of the trust at the office of the trust
  of the original or a copy of any  summons,  complaint,  claim,  process,
  notice,  demand or pleading within ten days after the employee is served
  with such document, and (b) the full cooperation of the employee in  the
  defense  of  such  action  or proceeding and in defense of any action or
  proceeding against the trust based upon the same act or omission, and in
  the prosecution of any appeal. Such delivery shall be deemed  a  request
  by  the  employee that the trust provide for his or her defense pursuant
  to this section. In the event that the trust shall assume an  employee's
  defense and thereafter the employee fails or refuses to cooperate in the
  formation  or presentation of his or her defense, the court shall permit
  the trust to withdraw its representation ten days after  giving  written
  notice   to   the   employee   of  its  intention  to  discontinue  such
  representation.
    6. In the event  that  the  act  or  omission  upon  which  the  court
  proceeding  against  the employee is based was or is also the basis of a
  disciplinary   proceeding   by   the   trust   against   the   employee,
  representation  and  indemnification  by the trust, as set forth in this
  section, may be withheld (a) until such disciplinary proceeding has been
  resolved, and (b) unless the resolution of the  disciplinary  proceeding
  exonerated the employee as to such act or omission.
    7.  Subject to the conditions set forth in this section, such employee
  shall be entitled to representation by the general counsel of the  trust


 or  by  any  attorney  or  attorneys  designated by the general counsel,
  provided, however, that the employee shall be entitled to be represented
  by private counsel  of  his  or  her  choice  in  any  civil  action  or
  proceeding  whenever  the  trust determines that representation would be
  inappropriate, or whenever a court, upon appropriate motion or otherwise
  by a special proceeding, determines that a conflict of  interest  exists
  and  that  the employee is entitled to be represented by private counsel
  of the employee's choice. The general counsel of the trust shall  notify
  the  employee  in  writing  of  such  determination that the employee is
  entitled to be represented by private counsel. Provided,  however,  that
  the  trust  may  require,  as  a  condition  to  payment of the fees and
  expenses  of  such  representation,  that  appropriate  groups  of  such
  employees be represented by the same counsel. Reasonable attorneys' fees
  and  litigation  expenses  shall  be  paid  by the trust to such private
  counsel from time to time during the  pendency  of  a  civil  action  or
  proceeding.
    8. Any dispute with respect to representation of multiple employees by
  a  single counsel or the reasonableness of attorneys' fees or the amount
  of litigation expenses shall be resolved by the court upon motion or  by
  way of a special proceeding.
    9.  The  benefits  of  this  section  shall inure only to employees as
  defined in this section and shall not enlarge or diminish the rights  of
  any  other party nor shall any provision of this section be construed to
  affect, alter or repeal any provision of the workers' compensation law.
    10. The provisions of this section shall not be construed in  any  way
  to  impair,  alter,  limit  or  modify the rights and obligations of any
  insurer under any policy of insurance.
    11. Except as otherwise specifically provided  in  this  section,  the
  provisions  of this section shall not be construed in any way to impair,
  alter, limit, modify, abrogate or restrict any immunity available to  or
  conferred  upon  any  unit,  entity,  member, officer or employee of the
  trust, or any right to  defense  or  indemnification  provided  for  any
  member, officer or employee by, in accordance with, or by reason of, any
  other provision of state, federal or local law or common law.
    12.  Every  action or proceeding instituted pursuant to the provisions
  of this section shall be  commenced  pursuant  to  section  six  hundred
  forty-one  of  this  article, and subject to any condition or limitation
  set forth in such section.
    13. The provisions of this section shall  apply  to  the  actions  and
  proceedings set forth herein notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions
  of state or local law.




   §  646.  Audit  and  annual  reports. The trust shall have an internal
  audit function and shall annually prepare and submit reports as required
  by this section, provided that no report shall be  required  during  the
  earlier  of  the  first year after the trust commences its operations or
  one year and nine months after the effective date of this section.
    1. Within one one hundred twenty days of the end of the city's  fiscal
  year,  the  trust  shall submit to the mayor of the city, the recognized
  citywide council of presidents, or an equivalent successor body, and the
  NYCHA board a report on its  operations  during  such  fiscal  year.  An
  annual audit of the trust shall be conducted by an independent certified
  public  accountant,  and  the  trust's  independently  audited financial
  statements shall be included in  this  report.  The  report  shall  also
  detail the extent of completion of all projects for development, design,
  construction, reconstruction, improvement, rehabilitation, repairing and
  operation  of  housing  facilities,  including,  by  project, identified
  shortfalls in schedule performance and providing  explanation  for  such
  shortfalls. Such report shall detail the extent of completion as existed
  on  the  last  day  of  the  city's  fiscal year. Such report shall also
  include a description of each  alternative  project  delivery  contract,
  information  regarding the procurement process for each such alternative
  project delivery contract including the list of responding entities that
  demonstrated the general capability to perform such alternative  project
  delivery  contract  pursuant  to  paragraph  (a)  of  subdivision one of
  section six hundred thirty-four of this article, the total cost of  each
  alternative  project  delivery contract, an explanation of the estimated
  savings attributable from  the  alternative  project  delivery  contract
  structure  used, and the participation rate of and total dollar value of
  monies paid to minority and women owned business enterprises under  such
  contract. Such report shall also include a description of the employment
  and  other  economic  opportunities directed to residents of the housing
  facilities, such as reporting related to section three  of  the  federal
  housing  and  urban  development act of nineteen hundred sixty-eight, as
  amended, pursuant to subdivision three of section six hundred thirty-one
  of this article. Such report shall also include (i) an assessment of the
  effectiveness of  internal  controls,  (ii)  organization  chart,  (iii)
  salary  information  for  all  employees, (iv) debt issuance information
  (including outstanding debt and any new debt  to  be  issued,  costs  of
  issuance   data,   bonds   redeemed),   (v)  certain  summary  financial
  information, including receipts and disbursements, as well as assets and
  liabilities, (vi) annual procurement report, (vii) investment of  agency
  funds  information,  (viii)  information  regarding  the  disposition of
  tenant complaints, maintenance of apartments and facilities,  and  other
  information  pertaining  to  the  rights  of  tenants to remain in their
  apartment; and (ix) information regarding the level of outreach to,  and
  participation  of,  residents  related  to  the  trust.  The trust shall
  transmit the portion of such  report  relating  to  alternative  project
  delivery  contracts  to  the  governor,  the  temporary president of the
  senate and the speaker of  the  assembly.  Such  report  shall  be  made
  publicly available.
    2.  On  the  last  business day in November of each calendar year, the
  trust shall submit a report describing its strategic planning  framework
  for the upcoming calendar year to the mayor of the city and to the NYCHA
  board.  Such  report  shall  describe  any  capital  improvements  to be
  undertaken and the approximate costs  of  such  improvements  and  shall
  provide  information regarding operations, programs, and services of the
  trust. The trust shall present a draft of this report at  a  meeting  of
  the board scheduled to occur no less than forty-five calendar days prior
  to  the  last  business day in November. The trust shall make such draft


 available for public review no less than fifteen  calendar  days  before
  such meeting. The trust shall offer the public an opportunity to provide
  oral  comment  on  the  report  at  such  meeting  and to submit written
  comments  to the trust until a specified date prior to the date on which
  the report is finalized. The trust shall consider all comments  received
  during  such  period  prior  to  finalizing  the report required by this
  subdivision.




   §  646.  Audit  and  annual  reports. The trust shall have an internal
  audit function and shall annually prepare and submit reports as required
  by this section, provided that no report shall be  required  during  the
  earlier  of  the  first year after the trust commences its operations or
  one year and nine months after the effective date of this section.
    1. Within one one hundred twenty days of the end of the city's  fiscal
  year,  the  trust  shall submit to the mayor of the city, the recognized
  citywide council of presidents, or an equivalent successor body, and the
  NYCHA board a report on its  operations  during  such  fiscal  year.  An
  annual audit of the trust shall be conducted by an independent certified
  public  accountant,  and  the  trust's  independently  audited financial
  statements shall be included in  this  report.  The  report  shall  also
  detail the extent of completion of all projects for development, design,
  construction, reconstruction, improvement, rehabilitation, repairing and
  operation  of  housing  facilities,  including,  by  project, identified
  shortfalls in schedule performance and providing  explanation  for  such
  shortfalls. Such report shall detail the extent of completion as existed
  on  the  last  day  of  the  city's  fiscal year. Such report shall also
  include a description of each  alternative  project  delivery  contract,
  information  regarding the procurement process for each such alternative
  project delivery contract including the list of responding entities that
  demonstrated the general capability to perform such alternative  project
  delivery  contract  pursuant  to  paragraph  (a)  of  subdivision one of
  section six hundred thirty-four of this article, the total cost of  each
  alternative  project  delivery contract, an explanation of the estimated
  savings attributable from  the  alternative  project  delivery  contract
  structure  used, and the participation rate of and total dollar value of
  monies paid to minority and women owned business enterprises under  such
  contract. Such report shall also include a description of the employment
  and  other  economic  opportunities directed to residents of the housing
  facilities, such as reporting related to section three  of  the  federal
  housing  and  urban  development act of nineteen hundred sixty-eight, as
  amended, pursuant to subdivision three of section six hundred thirty-one
  of this article. Such report shall also include (i) an assessment of the
  effectiveness of  internal  controls,  (ii)  organization  chart,  (iii)
  salary  information  for  all  employees, (iv) debt issuance information
  (including outstanding debt and any new debt  to  be  issued,  costs  of
  issuance   data,   bonds   redeemed),   (v)  certain  summary  financial
  information, including receipts and disbursements, as well as assets and
  liabilities, (vi) annual procurement report, (vii) investment of  agency
  funds  information,  (viii)  information  regarding  the  disposition of
  tenant complaints, maintenance of apartments and facilities,  and  other
  information  pertaining  to  the  rights  of  tenants to remain in their
  apartment; and (ix) information regarding the level of outreach to,  and
  participation  of,  residents  related  to  the  trust.  The trust shall
  transmit the portion of such  report  relating  to  alternative  project
  delivery  contracts  to  the  governor,  the  temporary president of the
  senate and the speaker of  the  assembly.  Such  report  shall  be  made
  publicly available.
    2.  On  the  last  business day in November of each calendar year, the
  trust shall submit a report describing its strategic planning  framework
  for the upcoming calendar year to the mayor of the city and to the NYCHA
  board.  Such  report  shall  describe  any  capital  improvements  to be
  undertaken and the approximate costs  of  such  improvements  and  shall
  provide  information regarding operations, programs, and services of the
  trust. The trust shall present a draft of this report at  a  meeting  of
  the board scheduled to occur no less than forty-five calendar days prior
  to  the  last  business day in November. The trust shall make such draft


 available for public review no less than fifteen  calendar  days  before
  such meeting. The trust shall offer the public an opportunity to provide
  oral  comment  on  the  report  at  such  meeting  and to submit written
  comments  to the trust until a specified date prior to the date on which
  the report is finalized. The trust shall consider all comments  received
  during  such  period  prior  to  finalizing  the report required by this
  subdivision.




   §  647.  Jurisdiction  over  trust. 1. The trust shall not be deemed a
  "covered organization" as  defined  in  the  New  York  state  financial
  emergency act for the city of New York.
    2.  The department of investigation of the city shall be authorized to
  conduct  investigations  relating  to  the  trust  pursuant  to  chapter
  thirty-four of the New York city charter.
    3.  The  comptroller  of  the  city,  or his or her legally authorized
  representative, is hereby authorized and empowered from time to time  to
  examine  the  books  and  accounts  of the trust including its receipts,
  disbursements, contracts, reserve funds, sinking funds, investments, and
  any other matters relating to its financial standing.




   § 648. Effect of inconsistent provisions. Insofar as the provisions of
  this  article  are  inconsistent  with  the provisions of any other law,
  general, special or local or of the New York city charter or  any  local
  law,  ordinance or resolution of the city, the provision of this article
  shall be controlling, provided that nothing contained  in  this  section
  shall  be held to supplement or otherwise expand the powers or duties of
  the trust otherwise set forth in this article.




   §  649.  Severability.  If  any  provision  of  this  article  or  its
  application to any person or circumstance is  held  unconstitutional  or
  invalid,   in   whole  or  in  part,  by  any  court,  such  holding  of
  unconstitutionality or invalidity shall in no way affect or  impair  any
  other provision of this article or the application of any such provision
  to  any  other person or circumstance, and to this end the provisions of
  this article are severable.