Section  1.  Short title.   This chapter shall be known as the "Public
  Lands Law."




   § 2. State-owned  real  property inventory and management program.  1.
  Definitions.   As used in this section,  unless  the  context  otherwise
  requires:
    a.   "State  agency"  shall  mean  any  department,  division,  board,
  commission, bureau, office or other agency of the  state  other  than  a
  public  authority  or  public  benefit  corporation, except that for the
  purpose of subdivision two hereof, the term  shall  include  any  public
  authority  or public benefit corporation any member or director of which
  is appointed by the governor and having jurisdiction, custody or control
  of any state-owned real property.
    b. "State-owned real property" shall include all lands and  buildings,
  structures,  facilities,  and  improvements  thereon,  title to which is
  vested in the people of the state of New York.
    2. State-owned real property inventory. The  commissioner  of  general
  services  shall establish, maintain and have the custody of an inventory
  of all state-owned real property, as  an  aid  in  the  utilization  and
  management  of  the  land  resources  of  the state. The inventory shall
  include any state-owned real property under the jurisdiction, custody or
  management of any  state  agency,  whether  acquired  by  appropriation,
  purchase, gift or otherwise. In order to provide an accurate and current
  inventory  for  use  by  the  commissioner  of  general  services, state
  agencies and the legislature, the commissioner may by rule or regulation
  prescribe the elements, extent and  format  of  the  information  to  be
  included   and   the   procedures   for   collection,  presentation  and
  verification of the information to be contained in the inventory.    The
  commissioner  shall  by  rule  or regulation, and upon the advice of the
  comptroller,  prescribe  the  elements,  extent  and   format   of   the
  information   to   be   included  and  the  procedures  for  collection,
  presentation,  and  verification  of  such  information   necessary   to
  establish and maintain a set of general fixed asset accounts that comply
  with  generally  accepted accounting principles. Each state agency shall
  deliver to the commissioner of general services such information at  the
  times  and  in  the  manner as determined by him to be necessary for the
  establishment and maintenance of the  inventory  and  shall  permit  the
  commissioner   and   his  agents  to  make  such  physical  and  records
  inspections as deemed necessary by the commissioner for the purposes  of
  the inventory program.
    3.  State-owned  real property management program. The commissioner of
  general services is authorized  and  directed  to  study,  evaluate  and
  coordinate  state  agency management practices, plans and procedures for
  the  acquisition,  utilization  and  disposition  of  state-owned   real
  property,  and to advise and assist state agencies in the improvement of
  such management practices, plans and procedures.




   § 2-a. Certain  transfers  of  jurisdiction over state-owned lands and
  declarations of abandonment by the commissioner of general services.  1.
  When  the  commissioner  of  general  services  proposes   to   transfer
  jurisdiction  over  state  lands pursuant to subdivision four of section
  three without the application or consent therein provided  or  when  the
  commissioner  proposes to declare real property as abandoned pursuant to
  subdivision two of section thirty-a, he shall  give  written  notice  of
  such  intention to the agency having jurisdiction over such land, and in
  the case of a transfer of jurisdiction pursuant to subdivision  four  of
  section  three, to the state agency to which jurisdiction is proposed to
  be transferred.
    2. Unless within thirty days from the date such notice  is  given,  an
  agency  entitled to notice pursuant to subdivision one hereof objects to
  such proposed action, the commissioner of general  services  may  effect
  such transfer of jurisdiction or declaration of abandonment.
    3.  If  within  thirty  days  of  the giving of such notice, any state
  agency entitled to notice pursuant to subdivision one hereof objects  to
  the  action proposed by the commissioner by filing notice to such effect
  with the commissioner of general services, such proposed action shall be
  reviewed by the director of the budget, and the secretary of state. They
  shall affirm or reverse the proposed action by the commissioner and that
  decision shall be final. If they affirm the proposed action or  fail  to
  render  a  determination  within  six  months  of the date of the notice
  referred to in subdivision one, the commissioner  may  thereupon  effect
  such transfer or declaration of abandonment.




   § 2-b. Transfers  of  certain  funds.   Subject to the approval of the
  director of the budget, any funds which have  been  appropriated  and/or
  allocated  for the operation or maintenance of state-owned real property
  abandoned under section thirty-a shall be transferred to the  office  of
  general  services  for  the  continued operation and maintenance of such
  real property and any funds which have been allocated to or  transferred
  to any state agency for the operation or maintenance of state-owned real
  property  jurisdiction  over  which  has  been  transferred  pursuant to
  subdivision four of section three shall be  transferred  to  the  agency
  receiving  such jurisdiction for the continued operation and maintenance
  of such real property.  As herein used, operation and maintenance  shall
  include,  without  limitation,  fuel,  utilities,  repairs  and  upkeep,
  supervision and security, and any local taxes or assessments.




   § 3. Powers  and  duties;  leases.  1.  The office of general services
  shall have the general care and superintendence of all state lands,  the
  superintendence  whereof  is  not  vested  in some officer or in a state
  department or a division, bureau or agency thereof.
    2. The commissioner of general services may, subject to such rules  as
  he may promulgate with the approval of the state director of the budget,
  from  time  to time, lease for terms not exceeding five years, and until
  disposed of as required by law, all  such  state  lands  which  are  not
  appropriated  to  any  immediate  use.  Such leases shall contain proper
  covenants to guard against trespass and waste. The  use  to  which  such
  leased  property  shall  be  put shall be consistent with local land use
  regulations. The commissioner also may grant  rights  and  easements  in
  perpetuity or otherwise in and to all state lands, including lands under
  water, at a price to be determined by the commissioner, and in case of a
  subsequent  sale  of  such  lands,  the  same may be sold subject to any
  rights and easements previously granted. The commissioner may,  with  or
  without  consideration  as  determined by him, release and relinquish to
  the owner  of  the  fee  title  therein,  any  rights  or  easements  in
  perpetuity  or  otherwise,  as  may  have been previously granted to the
  state. Provided, however, that where the superintendence of state  lands
  is vested in some officer or in a state department or a division, bureau
  or  agency  thereof  or in a public authority created or continued under
  the public authorities  law  the  commissioner  may  grant,  release  or
  relinquish  such  rights  and easements upon the written request of such
  officer or the head of such  department,  division,  bureau,  agency  or
  public  authority  or of an employee thereof designated for such purpose
  by such officer or head of the department, division, bureau,  agency  or
  public authority.
    3. The commissioner of general services may repair, demolish or remove
  the whole or a portion of any structure on such state lands, provided he
  has  filed  in  his  office  a  writing  specifying  the  structure  and
  certifying to the necessity of such repair, demolition or  removal.  The
  expense  of such work may be paid from any contingent funds available to
  the  commissioner,  or  from  moneys  specially  appropriated  for  such
  purposes.  If  such  work  be  done  by  contract,  the commissioner may
  dispense with advertising and bids, or either, or may cause such work to
  be done by direct employment of labor and purchase of  material  in  the
  open  market, or partly by contract and partly by such direct employment
  and purchase.
    4. Notwithstanding any  other  provision  of  this  chapter  or  other
  statute,  the  commissioner of general services, upon the application of
  any state department, or a division, bureau or agency thereof,  or  upon
  the  application  of  any  state  agency,  may  transfer  to  such state
  department,  division,  bureau,  or  agency,  or   state   agency,   the
  jurisdiction  over  any  lands,  including  lands under water, abandoned
  canal lands and salt springs  reservation  land,  upon  such  terms  and
  conditions  as  the  commissioner  may deem just and proper and upon the
  consent of the department, or a division, bureau or agency  thereof,  or
  any  state  agency,  already  having  jurisdiction  over  such lands and
  notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter  or  other  statute,
  authority  to give such consent is hereby conferred upon the head of any
  such state department, or a division, bureau or agency thereof,  or  any
  state  agency;  provided,  however,  that if the commissioner of general
  services determines that any such land under  the  jurisdiction  of  any
  state  department, or a division, bureau or agency thereof, or any state
  agency other than a public authority or public  benefit  corporation  is
  under  utilized or is not being utilized in a manner consistent with the
  best  interests  of  the  state,  such  commissioner  may  on  his   own


 initiative, and without the application or consent referred to above but
  subject  to  the  procedure and review provided in section two-a of this
  article, transfer the jurisdiction over such land  to  any  other  state
  department,  or a division, bureau or agency thereof, or any other state
  agency other than a public  authority  or  public  benefit  corporation.
  Should  such  land  be  under  the  jurisdiction of the office of mental
  health or the office for people  with  developmental  disabilities  upon
  which  a  community  residential facility for the disabled as defined in
  section 41.34 of the mental hygiene  law  exists,  the  commissioner  of
  general services shall, prior to transferring the jurisdiction over such
  land  to  any  other  state  department, or a division, bureau or agency
  thereof, or any other state agency other  than  a  public  authority  or
  public  benefit  corporation  offer such land for sale at public auction
  pursuant to section thirty-three of  this  chapter;  provided,  however,
  that  the  provisions  of section four hundred six of the eminent domain
  procedure law shall apply to such property.
    4-a. Notwithstanding any other provision  of  this  chapter  or  other
  statute,  the  commissioner of general services, upon the application of
  any person or corporation, may lease to the highest  responsible  bidder
  furnishing the required security after advertisement for sealed bids has
  been published in a newspaper or newspapers designated for such purpose,
  for  a term not to exceed ninety-nine years, to such applicant interests
  in real property including but not limited to air  rights,  subterranean
  rights and others, when such are not needed for present public use.
    Such  lease  shall  contain  proper covenants to assure the payment of
  adequate consideration for the interests leased, and to further  protect
  the state as is deemed necessary by said commissioner.
    Where  the  superintendence  of  the interest leased is vested in some
  officer or in a  state  department  or  a  division,  bureau  or  agency
  thereof,  or in a public authority created or continued under the public
  authorities law, the  commissioner  may  grant  such  rights  only  upon
  written  request  and  conconsent  of  such  officer  or  head  of  such
  department, division, bureau or public authority.
    Said lease shall not be effective until approved as  to  form  by  the
  attorney general of the state.
    The  development of any leasehold granted pursuant to this subdivision
  shall be subject  to  the  zoning  regulations  and  ordinances  of  the
  municipality in which said property is located.
    5.  The  commissioner  of general services may, in accordance with the
  provisions of section twenty-seven of this  article,  acquire  any  real
  property  deemed  by  him  to  be  necessary  for  the implementation or
  accomplishment  of  any  statutory  purpose,  function,   operation   or
  responsibility of the commissioner or the office of general services.
    6.  The  commissioner  of  general  services may, subject to the prior
  approval of the attorney general, accept  unconditional  grants,  gifts,
  devises,  bequests  or  conveyances  of  title  to  or  interest in real
  property to the people of the state of New York as he deems  proper  for
  the purposes of the state.
    7. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the facilities
  development corporation may, subject to prior notice to the commissioner
  of  general  services  by  filing  a  copy of the proposed instrument of
  conveyance, convey an easement in or over state-owned  lands  under  the
  jurisdiction  of  the  facilities development corporation for the use of
  the department of mental hygiene for the connecting  of  a  water  main,
  sewer  line  or other public services facility with a facility of any of
  the  offices  of  the  department  of  mental  hygiene,  to  the  public
  corporation  or  the  public  services  corporation  having ownership or


 control of such utility facility, as provided in  subdivision  eight  of
  section five of the facilities development corporation act.




   § 4. Vesting  of crown lands in the people of the state.  The absolute
  property of all messuages, lands, tenements and  hereditaments,  and  of
  all  rents,  royalties,  franchises, prerogatives, privileges, escheats,
  forfeitures, debts,  dues,  duties  and  services  by  whatsoever  names
  respectively the same are called and known in the law, and all right and
  title  to  the  same, which next and immediately before the ninth day of
  July,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  seven  hundred   and
  seventy-six, did vest in, or belong, or was, or were due to the crown of
  Great  Britain  be,  and  the same and each and every of them hereby are
  declared to be, and ever since the said ninth day of July, in  the  year
  of  our  Lord  one thousand seven hundred and seventy-six, to have been,
  and forever after shall be vested in the people of this state,  in  whom
  the  sovereignty  and seigniory thereof, are and were united and vested,
  on and from the said ninth day of July, in the  year  of  our  Lord  one
  thousand seven hundred and seventy-six.




   § 5. Letters  patent,  form and contents; to be recorded in the office
  of the secretary of state.  All letters patent shall be in such form  as
  the  commissioner  of  general  services  directs.  All  letters  patent
  granting unappropriated state lands, as defined by this  chapter,  shall
  contain  an  exception and reservation of all gold and silver mines. All
  letters patent shall be recorded in a book or books to be kept for  that
  purpose in the office of the department of state, and the record thereof
  in  any  such book or a copy of any letters patent duly certified by the
  secretary of state  to  be  a  copy  of  such  record  thereof,  whether
  heretofore  or  hereafter recorded, shall be received in evidence in any
  court in this state with the same force and effect as  the  original  of
  such letters patent.




   § 6. Determination  of  claims  based  on  alleged  failure  of title.
  Whenever a legal claim is made for a refund of purchase-money because of
  the alleged failure of the title of the state to lands sold  or  granted
  under  its authority including any right, title or interest of the state
  in and to lands under water, the commissioner of  general  services,  if
  satisfied  that  such  claim  is  just  and is made by a person entitled
  thereto, may certify such facts to the court of claims,  whereupon  such
  court  is  empowered  to  determine  the amount of compensation, if any,
  which should be awarded on account thereof,  which  in  no  event  shall
  exceed the amount of the purchase price originally paid for such land.




   § 7. Partition  of lands held by the state in joint tenancy or tenancy
  in common.  Whenever the commissioner of general services  directs,  the
  attorney-general  shall  cause partition to be made of any real property
  held in joint tenancy or tenancy in common, in which the people  of  the
  state  are  interested,  and for that purpose he may, in the name of the
  people, do all such acts as any joint tenant  or  tenant  in  common  is
  authorized by law to do.




   § 8. Trespasses  upon  state  lands.    Where,  in the judgment of the
  commissioner  of  general  services,  sufficient  information  has  been
  provided  to  her or him that a possible trespass upon state-owned lands
  has occurred then the commissioner may investigate such  allegations  of
  trespass  upon  state-owned  lands. The commissioner of general services
  may report to the attorney general instances of trespass committed  upon
  Indian  lands, or lands and lands underwater belonging to the state, and
  under the general care and  superintendence  of  the  commissioner.  The
  attorney  general, on receiving such report and whenever directed by the
  commissioner,  shall  commence  and  prosecute  appropriate  actions  or
  proceedings  in  the name of the people of the state, against the person
  or entity committing such trespass.




   § 9. Penalty  for  trespasses.  Every  person  who shall trespass upon
  Indian lands or any lands belonging to the state and under  the  general
  care  and  superintendence  of the commissioner of general services, any
  lands belonging to the state which are under  the  jurisdiction  of  any
  other state agency, department, board, officer, commission, institution,
  public  authority,  public  benefit  corporation, or bi-state agency, by
  cutting, removing,  injuring  or  destroying  trees  growing  thereupon,
  shall,  for  every  such offense, forfeit to the people of the state the
  sum of two hundred fifty dollars per tree or  treble  damages  or  both,
  based  on the stumpage value, as defined in paragraph (c) of subdivision
  six of section 71-0703 of the environmental conservation  law,  of  such
  tree  or  trees,  and  shall be liable for any permanent and substantial
  damage caused to the land or the improvements thereon  as  a  result  of
  such  violation.  Such  reparations  shall  be  of such kind, nature and
  extent as will reasonably restore the lands affected by the violation to
  their condition immediately before the violation  and  may  be  made  by
  physical  restoration of such lands and/or by the assessment of monetary
  payment to make such restoration.




   § 10. Power to investigate before grant.  Before granting any lands or
  any  interest  therein, including lands under water, the commissioner of
  general services may summarily inquire into the  rights  of  the  person
  applying   for  such  grant,  on  such  proof  as,  by  regulation,  the
  commissioner may prescribe.   The commissioner may  take  testimony  and
  proofs  in  any  matter  or  application  before  him,  and  the fees of
  witnesses and the expense of procuring their attendance  shall  be  paid
  from  the  state  treasury  out  of  any  funds  available  therefor  by
  appropriation, on the audit and  warrant  of  the  comptroller,  on  the
  certificate  of  the  commissioner.    The  commissioner shall establish
  reasonable rules to guard against false or fraudulent  applications  and
  for  such  other purposes as he may deem proper.  At any such inquiry or
  hearing, the commissioner may  be  represented  by  a  deputy  or  other
  representative designated by him.




   § 11. Power  to  confirm defective grant.  Whenever a sale is lawfully
  made, or directed to be made by the commissioner of general services, or
  has been made by his predecessor, the board of commissioners of the land
  office, including a sale of land under water, if, at  the  time  of  the
  making  of  the  grant,  the  necessary  jurisdictional facts existed to
  authorize the grant, and by reason of accidental  omission  or  manifest
  error,  the  patent  is  not  acutally issued, or has been issued to the
  applicant deficient or manifestly erroneous in description or otherwise,
  the commissioner may, in his discretion, and on such terms  as  seem  to
  him proper, cause to be issued to such applicant, or to persons deriving
  claim  or  title  from  him  subsequently  to the making of the grant, a
  release or confirmatory grant of such lands or any parts thereof,  which
  release  or  confirmatory  grant shall vest in the grantee therein named
  such right and estate, to the extent of the right or title of the  state
  in such lands, or parts thereof, as is therein named.




   § 12. Certain  patents  and  grants  ratified.    All patents of lands
  issued before July eleventh, eighteen hundred and  eighty-one,  pursuant
  to resolutions of the commissioners of the land office, and sold by them
  at  private  sale  to purchasers in good faith, purporting to convey the
  right, title and interest of the people of this  state  in  and  to  any
  state  lands,  except lands under water in the bay or harbor of New York
  or adjacent thereto, have been ratified and confirmed,  to  as  full  an
  extent  as though the same had been sold at public auction, according to
  law, but not so as to affect any action pending July eleventh,  eighteen
  hundred  and  eighty-one,  or to impair, release or discharge any right,
  claim or interest of any person in and to such lands.   All grants  made
  by  the  commissioners  of  the land office prior to March twenty-fifth,
  eighteen hundred and forty-one, of parts of lots for which payments were
  made and certified in the manner prescribed by law, have been confirmed.




   § 12-a. Certain  patents  ratified  and  confirmed.    Patents of real
  property escheated to the state, granted before  the  sixteenth  day  of
  May,  eighteen  hundred  and  ninety-two, pursuant to resolutions of the
  commissioners of the land office,  adopted  under  or  in  pursuance  of
  chapter two hundred and seventy-nine of the laws of eighteen hundred and
  ninety,  have  been  ratified  and confirmed unto the patentees therein,
  their heirs and assigns.




   § 13. Grants  to  heirs,  devisees or successors in interest. Where an
  application for a grant of land, including land under water, is made  by
  any  person  who  dies before a grant is ordered or issued, the heirs or
  devisees of such person shall be  entitled  to  such  grant  as  if  the
  application   had  been  made  by  such  heirs  or  devisees.  Where  an
  application for a grant of land under water is made by  any  person  who
  conveys  the land adjacent to the land under water applied for, before a
  grant is ordered or issued, the grantee of such adjacent land  shall  be
  entitled  to  such  grant  as  if  the application had been made by such
  grantee.




   § 14. Time  of performing conditions of grant.  1. The commissioner of
  general services may, unless otherwise provided, fix a reasonable  time,
  not  less  than  one  year,  for  the  performance  of conditions by the
  grantees of lands, including lands under water, directed to  be  granted
  on  the performance of conditions.  If such conditions are not performed
  within the time limited, the persons entitled to any benefit under  such
  grant  shall  forfeit  all  right  to  and title in the premises. If the
  commissioner, after having caused an inspection to be made of the  lands
  granted,  determines that the conditions contained in the letters-patent
  have been complied with, he may issue a certificate to that  effect.  If
  complete   compliance  has  not  been  had,  the  commissioner,  in  his
  discretion, may make an order to the effect that compliance had been had
  with the conditions  in  such  definitely  described  portion  of  lands
  granted  as  have been improved. Such order shall be conclusive evidence
  of the performance of the conditions contained in such letters-patent to
  the extent stated in such order and as to lands described therein.  When
  the  time  within  which any condition contained in any grant of land is
  fixed by the terms of the grant, the commissioner may,  for  good  cause
  shown  before  the expiration of such time, extend the time within which
  such condition is to be performed, not exceeding three years.
    2. The commissioner may, in his discretion, upon  application  of  the
  grantee  or  his successor in interest, by order, alter, amend or cancel
  any condition  or  conditions  contained  in  letters-patent  for  land,
  including  lands  under  water,  if  satisfied  by  the  reason or proof
  submitted that such alteration, amendment or cancellation  of  condition
  or  conditions  is  just  and is not detrimental to the interests of the
  state.


   § 15. Prohibitions  as to grants in Lake George.  1. No grant or lease
  of any of the islands in Lake George, or of any land upon  any  of  such
  islands, shall be made by the commissioner of general services.
    2.  No grant or lease of any lands under water in Lake George shall be
  made by the commissioner unless the conservation department of the state
  of New York shall, prior to the issuance of any  such  grant  or  lease,
  advise  the commissioner, in writing, that such grant or lease, if made,
  will not result in a hazard to navigation, impair the scenic  beauty  of
  Lake  George  or  otherwise interfere with the use and enjoyment of Lake
  George and its facilities by the people of  the  state.  To  assist  the
  department in making its determination, the department may hold a public
  hearing  at such time and place as it shall determine for the purpose of
  receiving testimony and evidence.




   § 15-a. Filling  in the state owned bed of Lake George prohibited.  1.
  No person or corporation shall fill in or cause to be filled in any land
  of the state of New York lying below the mean low  water  line  of  Lake
  George  by  dumping  or  placing  rock,  stone,  concrete, dirt or other
  similar material on said land without first obtaining a grant  or  lease
  of the land to be filled in or an easement, license or permit to fill in
  such land from the commissioner of general services.
    2.  This  section  shall  not apply to a person or corporation placing
  wooden or precast concrete timbers, logs or beams or cribs of wooden  or
  precast  concrete  timbers, logs or beams filled with rocks or stones on
  the  bed  of  Lake  George  for  the  sole  purpose   of   constructing,
  reconstructing  or  repairing  the  foundation,  cribs  or supports of a
  private dock or a  private  one-story  boat  house  legally  erected  or
  maintained on the bed of said lake.
    3.  Any person or corporation violating the provisions of this section
  on or after September  first,  nineteen  hundred  sixty-three  shall  be
  guilty  of  a  misdemeanor  punishable  by  a fine of not more than five
  hundred dollars and by an additional fine of not more  than  twenty-five
  dollars  for  each day that such fill is left on land of the state lying
  below the mean low water line of Lake George after a written  notice  to
  remove  the  same  has  been  personally  served  on  the  person who or
  corporation which made said fill or caused said fill to be made  by  the
  commissioner of general services or pursuant to his direction.
    4. For the purposes of this section mean low water line of Lake George
  shall  mean  the  water  level  of  Lake  George  at  one and eighty-one
  hundredths feet on the gage of the United States  Geological  Survey  at
  Rogers Rock on Lake George known as Rogers Rock gage.




   § 16. Reservation  of  Esopus  island.    Esopus  island,  in Dutchess
  county, is reserved from  settlement,  occupancy,  lease  or  sale,  and
  dedicated  and  set apart as a public park.  The commissioner of general
  services shall have the same powers to protect such island from trespass
  as he has over other public lands.




   § 17. Payment  of incumbrances on public lands; adverse claims; costs.
  The commissioner of general services, whenever he deems it for the  best
  interest of the state may cause to be paid off and canceled any charges,
  assessments, or incumbrances, other than the lien of a tax under article
  ten  of  the tax law, existing on any lands belonging to the state or in
  which the  state  has  an  interest,  or  may  acquire  any  outstanding
  undivided  interest  in such lands adverse to the title of the state, to
  perfect in the state a title to  any  such  lands,  or  to  protect  the
  state's  interest therein.   Payments for any such purpose shall be made
  from the state treasury, on the certificate of the commissioner and  the
  audit  and  warrant of the comptroller, out of moneys available therefor
  by appropriation.  Where the claim of title of the  state  to  any  land
  within  the Adirondack or Catskill parks or adjacent thereto is based on
  a tax sale,  the  conservation  department,  with  the  consent  of  the
  commissioner  and  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  governor and the
  attorney-general, may,  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  chapter  five
  hundred  and  sixty-nine of the laws of nineteen hundred and sixteen and
  acts supplemental thereto and amendatory thereof, and chapter sixteen of
  the laws of nineteen hundred twenty-six, whenever there  is  an  adverse
  claim  or  claims  of title to such lands, acquire by purchase a deed or
  conveyance of  such  lands  from  the  person  or  persons  so  claiming
  adversely  on such terms and conditions as such state officials may deem
  for the best interests of the state and to  avoid  litigation.    In  an
  action for partition of or to foreclose a mortgage on such lands wherein
  the  commissioner  is so empowered, the plaintiffs shall not be entitled
  to costs if the people of the state are made a party  defendant,  unless
  the  commissioner  after  a  full presentation of the facts to him shall
  have determined before such action is brought against the state that the
  interests of the state did not warrant  his  making  an  order  for  the
  payment  or  cancellation  of such mortgage, lien or incumbrance, or any
  amount due thereon, or for the acquisition of any outstanding  undivided
  interest  adverse  to  the state, or pursuant to this section, or unless
  the commissioner shall have failed to  make  such  determination  within
  three  months after such full presentation of facts shall have been made
  to  him  by  a  verified  statement  in  writing,  and  filed  with  the
  commissioner at his office in the city of Albany, nor unless a certified
  copy  of  the  designated commissioners' report of partition, and of the
  referee's or sheriff's report of sale, in case of a sale, filed  in  the
  action  shall have been duly served upon the attorney-general; and in no
  such case wherein the people are made a party defendant  because  of  an
  interest  other than the lien of a tax under article ten of the tax law,
  shall any additional  allowance  under  sections  fourteen  hundred  and
  seventy-four  or fourteen hundred and seventy-five of the civil practice
  act be made to the plaintiff.




   § 17-a. Abandonment  of  claims under defective tax sales; recovery of
  taxes paid thereon by state.  Where the claim of title of the  state  to
  any  land  is  based  on  a  tax sale, which title in the opinion of the
  attorney-general would be declared void by the courts, the  commissioner
  of  general  services,  on  the  filing with him of such opinion and the
  evidence upon which such opinion was based, may, by order,  abandon  any
  claim  of title to such land, but, notwithstanding such abandonment, the
  people of the state shall have a lien upon the real property affected by
  the abandonment, prior and superior to all other liens, for  the  amount
  of  all taxes, fees and charges admitted or paid by the people upon such
  real property to the date of the abandonment of  the  state's  claim  of
  title,  together  with  interest  thereon  from  the  dates  of payment.
  Provided such lien remains unpaid after the expiration of one year  from
  the  date of the abandonment, the people of the state may foreclose such
  lien as a mortgage on real property  is  foreclosed;  but  in  any  such
  action  establishment  of  payments  of  taxes  on said land or any part
  thereof by the adjudged or admitted owner of the property during any  of
  the  same  years  in  which payments were also made by the people of the
  state shall reduce the lien of the people by the larger of the  two  tax
  payments  for  each  of the years affected by duplicate payments, and in
  the event that wholly identical areas are not affected by the  duplicate
  payments  the  court shall have power to apportion and adjust the amount
  of the lien as equity may require.   This remedy  for  recovery  of  tax
  payments  shall  be  in  addition  to  any other remedy now or hereafter
  available in law or in equity, and shall be  without  prejudice  to  any
  defense or offset available to an adverse claimant in law or in equity.




   § 18. Expenses  chargeable to special funds.  All expenses of surveys,
  appraisements or other expenses attendant  on  the  sale  of  any  lands
  belonging  to any of the special funds of the state, shall be chargeable
  on and paid out of the funds, respectively, to which such lands belong.




   § 19. Taxes  and  assessments for local improvements on state lands. A
  person, body or board authorized to assess lands for local  improvements
  or  purposes, shall submit to the comptroller of the state an invoice of
  assessment on state lands, showing the purpose for which the  assessment
  is  made,  the  state  lands assessed and the amounts for which they are
  assessed, and referring to the law authorizing the assessment.  No  fee,
  interest,  penalty  or  expense  shall  be  added  to  or  accrue on any
  assessment against state lands, nor shall such lands be  sold  therefor;
  but  such  assessments  shall, if confirmed and uncontested, be paid and
  discharged out of any moneys appropriated therefor. All sales  of  state
  lands for unpaid taxes or assessments for local improvements or purposes
  are void. All taxes and assessments legally made on state lands, and all
  legal  rents or charges thereon, shall be audited by the comptroller and
  paid  out  of  the  treasury.  On  or  before  January   fifteenth   the
  comptroller,  in  consultation  with  the  board  of  real  property tax
  services and other agencies as may be appropriate, shall submit  to  the
  governor   and  the  legislature  an  annual  accounting  of  taxes  and
  assessments paid pursuant to  this  section  during  the  preceding  and
  current  fiscal years. Such accounting shall include, but not be limited
  to the number, type and amount of such payments, as well as an  estimate
  of  payments  to be made during the remainder of the current fiscal year
  and during the following fiscal year. If any provision of  this  section
  conflict  with any provision of any other general, special or local law,
  this section shall prevail; and no other general, special or  local  law
  shall  be  deemed  to  repeal,  alter  or  abridge any provision of this
  section, unless  this  section  or  this  article  or  this  chapter  be
  expressly  and  specifically  referred  to  therein.  This section shall
  extend, in its operation and effect, so as to include  all  actions  and
  proceedings,  whether  judicial  or administrative, heretofore commenced
  under any general, special or local law and now pending.




   § 19-a. State aid; certain state-leased or state-owned lands. 1. State
  aid  shall  be  payable  to any city having a population of seventy-five
  thousand or more inhabitants,  according  to  the  most  recent  federal
  decennial  census,  when  on  any  assessment  roll the taxable assessed
  valuation in such city is  decreased  in  any  year  by  reason  of  the
  acquisition  of lands and improvements thereon by the state or an agency
  of the state for use thereof or for the construction of  facilities  for
  any  purpose  other  than highway purposes, and the sum of the amount of
  such decrease in taxable  assessed  valuation  and  the  amount  of  the
  assessed valuation of other property owned by the state or agency of the
  state,  excluding  any  such  property  owned  or used by a state public
  authority, which is  exempt  from  taxation,  is  equal  to  or  exceeds
  twenty-five  percent  of  the  total  taxable assessed valuation of such
  roll.
    2. The state aid payable to a city pursuant to this section  shall  be
  computed and paid as follows:
    (1)  Commencing  with the first fiscal year of such city subsequent to
  the taxable status date of the assessment roll of  such  city  occurring
  after the acquisition of such land and improvements thereon by the state
  or  agency  of  the state and for each fiscal year thereafter to and not
  including the first fiscal year of such city subsequent to  the  taxable
  status  date  of  such  roll  occurring  after  the  final completion of
  construction of such facilities on such land, an amount  shall  be  paid
  equal  to the amount of taxes levied by or in behalf of the city against
  such lands and the improvements thereon  on  the  last  assessment  roll
  finally completed prior to the acquisition by the state or agency of the
  state;
    (2)  Commencing  with the first fiscal year of such city subsequent to
  the taxable status date of the assessment roll of  such  city  occurring
  after  the  final  completion of the construction of such facilities and
  for each fiscal year thereafter for the period of probable usefulness as
  set forth in  section  sixty-one  of  the  state  finance  law  of  such
  facilities  or  of  such  lands  on which the facilities are constructed
  whichever is longer but in no event to exceed a period of thirty  years,
  an amount equal to one percent of the sum of the actual acquisition cost
  of  the  land  and  the  improvements thereon and the actual cost of the
  construction of facilities thereon, provided, however,  that  the  state
  director  of the budget and the mayor of a city with the approval of the
  legislative body of such city may agree in writing that such  state  aid
  may  be  an amount less than herein provided or that such city shall not
  make application for any such aid under this section; and
    (3) The aggregate amount of state aid paid pursuant to  this  section,
  exclusive  of the amount of state aid paid pursuant to subdivision two-a
  of this section, shall in no event exceed the aggregate amount of  state
  aid provided in paragraph two of this subdivision.
    2-a.  (1)  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  this  section  to  the
  contrary, in addition to state aid otherwise payable  pursuant  to  this
  section, there shall be payable to any city located in a county in which
  there has been constructed a state office building project in accordance
  with  the  provisions  of  chapter  one hundred fifty-two of the laws of
  nineteen hundred sixty-four, as amended, and pursuant  to  an  agreement
  entitled  the "South Mall contract" dated May eleventh, nineteen hundred
  sixty-five, state aid in accordance with the following schedule:
                 State Fiscal Year
                                     Amount
 
                 2000-2001           $4,500,000
                 2001-2002           $4,500,000


                2002-2003           $4,500,000
                 2003-2004           $9,850,000
                 2004-2005           $16,850,000
                 2005-2006           $22,850,000
                 2006-2007           $22,850,000
                 2007-2008           $22,850,000
                 2008-2009           $22,850,000
                 2009-2010           $22,850,000
                 2010-2011           $22,850,000
                 2011-2012           $15,000,000
                 2012-2013           $22,850,000
                 2013-2014           $22,850,000
                 2014-2015           $15,000,000
                 2015-2016           $15,000,000
                 2016-2017           $27,500,000
                 2017-2018           $15,000,000
                 2018-2019           $15,000,000
                 2019-2020           $15,000,000
                 2020-2021           $15,000,000
                 2021-2022           $15,000,000
                 2022-2023           $15,000,000
                 2023-2024           $15,000,000
                 2024-2025           $15,000,000
                 2025-2026           $15,000,000
                 2026-2027           $15,000,000
                 2027-2028           $15,000,000
                 2028-2029           $15,000,000
                 2029-2030           $15,000,000
                 2030-2031           $15,000,000
                 2031-2032           $1,800,000
    (2)  The  state  aid  payable  to  any  such  city  pursuant  to  this
  subdivision shall be the sole and exclusive state aid  payable  pursuant
  to  this  section  to  any such city with respect to the state-leased or
  state-owned lands referenced in this subdivision. Any  such  city  shall
  continue  to  be  eligible  for the payment of state aid pursuant to the
  other  provisions  of  this  section  but  not  with  respect   to   the
  state-leased or state-owned lands referenced in this subdivision.
    (3)  State  aid  otherwise  payable  on  account  of the real property
  described in this subdivision shall no longer be paid if title  to  such
  real  property is conveyed to a person or entity other than the state or
  an agency of the state.
    (4) The state aid payable under  paragraph  one  of  this  subdivision
  shall  be payable upon application to the state comptroller by the chief
  fiscal officer of a city  which  qualifies  for  aid  pursuant  to  this
  subdivision.  The application shall be made on a form prescribed by such
  comptroller and shall contain such information as such comptroller shall
  require.    Upon  approval  of the application and determination by such
  comptroller of the amount of state aid payable under  this  subdivision,
  such  state  aid  shall  be  paid  upon the warrant of such comptroller.
  Annual payment shall be made to a qualified city not later than December
  first in each year commencing with the year two thousand and  ending  in
  the  year  two  thousand  ten.  Thereafter,  payment  shall be made to a
  qualified city in two equal installments, the first occurring no earlier
  than April first and no later than May first, the  second  occurring  no
  earlier  than  October  first  and  no  later  than November first. Such
  payments shall conclude in the year two  thousand  thirty-two.  Provided
  however,  that any such payment shall be reduced by any amount necessary
  to meet eligible obligations of the Albany convention center  authority,


 as  created  by  section twenty-six hundred seventy-five-d of the public
  authorities law and as certified by the chairperson of  said  authority,
  provided  that  such  certification  in such form as the authority deems
  desirable,  but  including  at  a  minimum  the  exact amount of payment
  required to satisfy the  authority's  obligations  pursuant  to  section
  twenty-six  hundred  seventy-five-ii  of  the  public authorities law is
  delivered to the  state  comptroller  no  later  than  March  first  and
  September  first, respectively.   The state comptroller, upon receipt of
  such certificate from the authority, shall withhold from  the  qualified
  city  state  aid payable to such qualified city, to the extent necessary
  to meet the required amount of payments pursuant  to  such  certificate.
  The  state  comptroller  shall  pay  over to the authority the amount so
  withheld  on  or  before  March  fifteenth  and   September   fifteenth,
  respectively,  and  shall remit any remaining amount of such installment
  payment  to  the  qualified  city,  as  otherwise   provided   by   this
  subdivision.
    3.  Such  state  aid  shall  be  payable upon application to the state
  comptroller by the chief fiscal officer of a city  which  qualifies  for
  aid  pursuant  to  this section. The application shall be made on a form
  prescribed by such comptroller and shall  contain  such  information  as
  such   comptroller  shall  require.  The  state  comptroller  is  hereby
  authorized to determine and certify the actual acquisition cost of lands
  and the improvements thereon and the  actual  cost  of  construction  of
  facilities  for  the  purposes of this section. The state comptroller is
  hereby authorized and empowered to adjust from time to time  the  annual
  payments  of state aid made pursuant to paragraph two of subdivision two
  of this section so that to the extent practicable such payments shall be
  in equal annual  amounts  and  so  that  the  limitation  set  forth  in
  paragraph  three  of  subdivision  two  of  this  section  shall  not be
  exceeded. In the event that title to  any  such  land  and  improvements
  thereon or facilities constructed thereon shall cease to be in the state
  or  agency  of the state, no further state aid shall be paid pursuant to
  this section for any fiscal year of the city subsequent  to  the  fiscal
  year  of  the city in which title to such land, improvements thereon and
  facilities constructed thereon shall have ceased to be in the  state  or
  agency  of the state. Upon approval of the application and determination
  of such costs by the state comptroller, such state  aid  shall  be  paid
  upon  his  warrant.  On  or before January fifteenth the comptroller, in
  consultation with the commissioner of taxation  and  finance  and  other
  agencies  as  may  be  appropriate, shall submit to the governor and the
  legislature an annual accounting of state  aid  paid  pursuant  to  this
  section  during  the preceding and current fiscal years. Such accounting
  shall include, but not be limited to the number, type and amount of such
  payments, as well as an estimate of  payments  to  be  paid  during  the
  remainder  of  the  current  fiscal year and during the following fiscal
  year. Provided, however, where title to such land  and  improvements  is
  held  by  the  New  York state teachers' retirement system, the New York
  state and local employees' retirement system, or the New York state  and
  local  police  and  fire  retirement  system,  the  state  shall have no
  liability whatsoever for any amounts payable pursuant to  this  section.
  Upon  approval  of  the  application and determination of such costs, as
  provided herein, such retirement systems shall directly  pay  such  city
  the  amount  which  would have been due as state aid hereunder had title
  been held by the state.
    4. State aid payable pursuant to this section, exclusive of the  state
  aid paid pursuant to subdivision two-a of this section, shall apply only
  to  such  lands and improvements thereon acquired by the state or agency
  of the state subsequent to  the  effective  date  of  this  act  and  to


 facilities  owned  by  the  state  or  agency  of  the  state which were
  constructed on such lands subsequent to the effective date of this act.
    5.  The  taxable  assessed  valuation of land acquired by the state or
  agency of the state for any purpose other than highway purposes shall be
  determined  from  the  second  assessment  roll  preceding   the   first
  assessment  roll  affected  by  the  acquisition  and  shall include the
  assessed valuation of any improvement  on  such  land  at  the  time  of
  acquisition.  The  assessed  valuation of property owned by the state or
  agency of the state exempt from taxation shall be  determined  from  the
  assessment  roll  immediately preceding the last assessment roll finally
  completed prior to the effective date of this act.
    6. In making computations and determinations, other  than  those  made
  pursuant  to subdivision two-a of this section, pursuant to this section
  there shall be taken into account changes in  levels  of  assessment  as
  defined in paragraph g of subdivision one of section fifty-four-b of the
  state  finance  law  as  determined  by the commissioner of taxation and
  finance and certified to the state comptroller.
    7. The term "facilities" shall have the same meaning as the term "real
  property" as defined in subdivision twelve of section one hundred two of
  the real property tax law except it shall not include the land on  which
  such facilities are located.
    8.  The  term  "agency  of  the  state" shall include but shall not be
  limited to state public authorities.
    9.  The  term  "state  public  authority"  means  a   public   benefit
  corporation,  either declared to be such under the law by which the same
  was created or as defined in subdivision four of section  three  of  the
  general  corporation law, whose membership is required by law to consist
  entirely of members who are appointed by the  governor  or  other  state
  officer or who serve as members as ex officio state officers.
    10. The term "legislative body" shall have the same meaning as defined
  in section two of the municipal home rule law.


   § 19-b. State  aid; certain state-owned or reacquired lands.  1. State
  aid shall be payable to any municipal corporation or special district as
  such terms are defined by section one hundred two of the  real  property
  tax  law  and  hereinafter  collectively  referred to in this section as
  "taxing authority", when on any assessment  roll  the  taxable  assessed
  valuation in such taxing authority is decreased in any year by reason of
  the  transfer  of title or possession of land or improvements thereon to
  the state or an agency of the state located at West Valley,  Cattaraugus
  county  and  theretofore  utilized  by the corporation known as "Nuclear
  Fuel Services, Inc.".
    2. The state aid payable  to  a  taxing  authority  pursuant  to  this
  section  shall  be computed and paid during the first fiscal year of any
  such taxing authority commencing on or  after  January  first,  nineteen
  hundred  eighty-one,  and during each fiscal year thereafter. Such state
  aid shall in each year be equal to the amount of taxes levied  or  which
  would  have  been levied by or in behalf of the taxing authority against
  such lands and the improvements thereon  on  the  last  assessment  roll
  finally completed in nineteen hundred eighty.
    3.  Such  state  aid  shall  be  payable upon application to the state
  comptroller by the chief fiscal officer of the  taxing  authority  which
  qualifies  for  aid  pursuant  to this section. The application shall be
  made on a form prescribed by such comptroller  and  shall  contain  such
  information  as  such  comptroller  shall  require. On or before January
  fifteenth the comptroller,  in  consultation  with  the  board  of  real
  property services and other agencies as may be appropriate, shall submit
  to  the  governor  and the legislature an annual accounting of state aid
  paid pursuant to this section during the preceding  and  current  fiscal
  years.  Such accounting shall include, but not be limited to the number,
  type and amount of such payments, as well as an estimate of payments  to
  be  made  during the remainder of the current fiscal year and during the
  following fiscal year.




   § 20. Grants  of lands in Onondaga salt springs reservation designated
  on certain map.  All grants of lands made by the people of this state of
  any lands in the  Onondaga  salt  springs  reservation  prior  to  March
  twenty-eight,  in the year eighteen hundred forty-three, shall be deemed
  and considered as having been granted according to the designations upon
  the map of said reservation made by John  Randel,  junior,  formerly  on
  file in the office of the state engineer and surveyor and now on file in
  the  office  of  the department of transportation, and not as designated
  upon the map of said reservation made by said Randel, formerly  on  file
  in the office of the secretary of state and now on file in the office of
  his department.




   § 21. Conveyance  of strips of abandoned canal lands and Onondaga salt
  springs reservation land.  a. The commissioner of  general  services  is
  authorized,  in  his discretion, to sell and convey at public or private
  sale, upon such terms and conditions as he  may  deem  proper,  all  the
  right,  title  and  interest  of  the  state in and to certain strips of
  abandoned canal lands or Onondaga salt springs reservation  land,  which
  strips  adjoin  the  old  beds  of  the  Erie canal and Oswego canal and
  side-cut canals, which beds were heretofore conveyed by  the  people  of
  the  state  of New York and in which said strips of land there remains a
  right, title or interest in the people of the state  of  New  York.  Any
  such  private  sale,  if made, shall be to the state's grantee or to the
  successor to the title or interest of the beds so previously granted  by
  the  state  and shall be for a consideration not less than the appraised
  value of the said right, title or interest.
    b.  The  commissioner  of  general  services  is  authorized,  in  his
  discretion,  to  sell  and  convey  at private sale, upon such terms and
  conditions as he may deem proper, all the right, title and  interest  of
  the  state  in  and  to  any parcel of land of the Onondaga salt springs
  reservation to the person or persons having a deed  of  record  of  such
  land,  or  their successors in interest, since the first day of January,
  eighteen hundred ninety-nine, or to any person or persons who have  been
  in continuous, open, notorious and adverse possession of such land since
  the first day of January, eighteen hundred ninety-nine.




   § 22. Management  of sand and gravel resources. 1. The commissioner of
  general services is authorized  to  manage,  license  and  regulate  the
  removal  of sand, gravel or other material by dredging or otherwise from
  state owned  land  now  or  formerly  under  water,  except  such  lands
  specified  in  subdivision  two  of  this section, and to collect rents,
  royalties or other fees in connection  therewith.  The  commissioner  is
  also  authorized  to manage the use of such lands under water, including
  but not limited to the filling in thereof, in any  way  and  to  collect
  rents and fees in connection therewith, subject to applicable regulatory
  statutes.
    2.  There  are  excluded  from  the  commissioner's  authorization  by
  subdivision one of this section the following functions and actions:
    a. The taking of sand, gravel or other materials  from  lands  of  the
  state  under  the  waters of Lake Erie bordering upon Chautauqua county,
  except that the commissioner may license  and  regulate  the  taking  of
  sand,  gravel  and  other  materials  from  lands of the state under the
  waters of Lake Erie at the mouths of  Walnut  creek,  Silver  creek  and
  Cattaraugus  creek,  in  the town of Hanover, Chautauqua county, and may
  prescribe the terms and conditions under which the same  may  be  taken,
  including the amount of license fees.
    b. The taking of sand, gravel or other materials from the lands in, on
  or  bordering  upon  Long Island, except that when in the opinion of the
  United States government, as evidenced  by  the  recommendation  of  the
  corps  of  engineers  of  the  United  States army and authorized by the
  secretary of the army, removal of such sand, gravel or  other  materials
  becomes  necessary  for  the improvement of navigation, the commissioner
  may license and regulate the removal of such materials upon  such  terms
  and conditions as he may deem advisable, including the amount of license
  fees therefor.
    c.  The  management and use of any such lands under water appropriated
  to any department or agency except upon written consent of the  head  of
  that department or agency.
    3.  License fees shall not be discriminatory, but this provision shall
  not require the fixing of a uniform license fee  throughout  the  state.
  After  the  adoption  of  regulations  by  the commissioner, it shall be
  unlawful to take or remove from lands of the state under water any sand,
  gravel or  other  material  without  license  issued  pursuant  to  this
  section.
    4.  The  commissioner  may,  in his discretion and upon such terms and
  conditions, including consideration, as  to  him  shall  seem  just  and
  proper,  authorize  the taking of soil from state land under water where
  such soil is to be taken by an upland  owner  bordering  on  state  land
  under water for the improvement or the protection of his upland from the
  action of the water, or for the restoration, in whole or in part, of his
  upland where there has been sudden washing away and loss of soil thereof
  by  violent  storm  and  consequent avulsion, but where the title to his
  land has not been lost,  the  boundary  line  remaining  the  same.  The
  preceding   provisions  of  this  section,  respecting  the  management,
  regulation, licensing or taking of sand, gravel or other  material  from
  state  land  under  water,  are  not  affected  by the provisions hereof
  respecting the taking of soil by the upland owner.




   § 23. Disposition  of moneys received from sale of certain state lands
  and sand and gravel thereon.  All moneys received by the commissioner of
  general services from the sale of sand and gravel on, or from  the  sale
  of,  any  land  of  the  state, or from the grant of rights or easements
  therein or thereover, not including  land  under  water  provision  with
  respect  to  which  is made in section seventy-five of this chapter, and
  not including abandoned canal lands provision with respect to  which  is
  made  under  article  four  of  this  chapter  and not including certain
  detached  parcels  of  forest  preserve  lands  with  respect  to  which
  provision is made in section twenty-four of this chapter, shall be paid,
  less  any  refunds  made pursuant to section twenty-six of this law, and
  less any sum required to be deposited to the credit of the environmental
  protection fund provision with respect to which is made by  chapter  six
  hundred ten of the laws of nineteen hundred ninety-three, into the state
  treasury  through  the  office  of general services to the credit of the
  capital construction fund established by  section  ninety-three  of  the
  state  finance  law.  All  such moneys received during a month, less any
  refunds, shall be so  paid  on  or  before  the  fifteenth  day  of  the
  succeeding month.




   § 24. Sale  or exchange of certain detached parcels of forest preserve
  lands.  Any state department or agency, at the time having  jurisdiction
  over  any  of  the lands hereinafter specified, may consent to a sale or
  exchange by the commissioner of general services of  any  lands  of  the
  state,   now  owned  or  hereafter  acquired,  constituting  the  forest
  preserve, but outside of the Adirondack and Catskill parks as now  fixed
  by  law and not acquired or dedicated for the practice of forest or wild
  life conservation, and consisting in any  case  of  not  more  than  one
  hundred  contiguous  acres  entirely separated from any other portion of
  the  forest  preserve.    Upon  such  consent  being  filed   with   the
  commissioner in writing, accompanied by a description of such lands, the
  commissioner may in his discretion sell or exchange any of such lands in
  accordance with the consent.
    All  sales  shall  be  subject  to  and  governed by the provisions of
  sections  thirty-three,   thirty-five,   thirty-seven,   thirty-seven-a,
  thirty-eight,  thirty-eight-a  and  thirty-nine  of  this chapter, being
  general provisions governing the sale  of  unappropriated  state  lands.
  All  moneys  derived  by the commissioner from such sales, not including
  any refunds made pursuant to section twenty-six of this  law,  shall  be
  paid  first  to  repay  any  expenditures  made by the office of general
  services with relation to forest preserve lands from moneys appropriated
  to said office in the first instance for the administration, management,
  utilization and disposition of real property of the state and any rights
  or interests therein, and any balance of  such  moneys  remaining  after
  repayment  of  the first instance expenditures shall be paid through the
  office of general services into a special fund of  the  state  treasury,
  provided  for  that  purpose  by  the state finance law and known as the
  forest preserve expansion fund, and shall be expended only  as  provided
  in  that law.   All of such moneys received during any month shall be so
  paid on or before the fifteenth day of the succeeding month.
    All exchanges shall be  only  for  additional  lands  for  the  forest
  preserve  within  either the Adirondack or Catskill park as now fixed by
  law and shall be subject to approval by  the  attorney  general  of  the
  title to the lands thus to be acquired by the state.




   § 25. Sale or exchange of real property owned by the state and devoted
  to  the  use  of  the  organized  militia.    Upon  the  filing with the
  commissioner  of  general  services  by  the  adjutant  general  of  his
  certificate  in  writing of his determination that certain real property
  owned by the state and devoted to the use of the  organized  militia  of
  the  state  is  no  longer needed or adapted for such use and consenting
  that the same be sold or exchanged by the commissioner pursuant  to  the
  provisions  of  this  section,  the  commission, if such certificate and
  consent be approved by the director of the budget and be accompanied by,
  annexed to, or endorsed upon an accurate map  and  description  of  such
  real  property,  may  sell  or exchange such real property in accordance
  with and subject to the terms, if any, of such consent.   All  sales  of
  any such property shall be in accordance with the procedure specified in
  article  three  of  this  chapter  for  the sale of unappropriated state
  lands.  Upon compliance by the purchaser with the terms of sale, or,  in
  the  case  of  an  exchange of lands, with the terms of the order of the
  commissioner authorizing such exchange, the sale or  exchange  shall  be
  consummated  by  the issuance of letters patent granting the state-owned
  real property.   All  moneys  constituting  the  proceeds  of  any  such
  disposition  of  such  state-owned real property shall be paid, less any
  refunds made pursuant to the provisions of section  twenty-six  of  this
  law,  first  to  repay  any  expenditures  made by the office of general
  services from moneys appropriated to said office in the  first  instance
  for  the administration, management, utilization and disposition of real
  property of the state and any  rights  or  interests  therein,  and  any
  balance  of  such moneys remaining after repayment of the first instance
  expenditures shall be paid  into the state treasury through  the  office
  of  general  services  to  the  credit  of  the  capital  projects  fund
  established by section ninety-three of the state finance law.




   § 26. Refunds  when  sales  cannot  be completed.   Within three years
  after the receipt thereof, moneys heretofore received by the division of
  the land office in the department of state and transferred to the office
  of general services or heretofore or hereafter received by the office of
  general services on account of  sales  of  interests  in  real  property
  ordered  by the office of general services or its predecessor, the board
  of commissioners of the land office, may be refunded to  the  person  or
  party  for  whose  account  same  were received, upon satisfactory proof
  being submitted to the commissioner of general services that the sale or
  sales so ordered cannot be completed by the issuance of  letters  patent
  or an instrument of conveyance.
    Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of section one hundred twenty-one of
  the state  finance  law,  such  refunds  shall,  upon  approval  by  the
  commissioner  of general services and after audit by the comptroller, be
  paid from any moneys in the custody of the office of general services or
  heretofore transferred or received from the division of the land  office
  as  proceeds  of  sale of real property, except that moneys derived from
  the sale of detached parcels of forest preserve  lands  as  provided  in
  section  twenty-four  of  the public lands law shall not be used to make
  refunds with respect to inability  to  complete  sales  affecting  other
  lands  and such moneys shall be the sole fund from which to make refunds
  in cases of inability on the part of the state  to  complete  sales,  as
  aforesaid, of such detached parcels of forest preserve lands.




   §  27.  Acquisition  of real property by purchase or appropriation. 1.
  The commissioner of general services  when  moneys  therefor  have  been
  appropriated  by the legislature or are otherwise available, may acquire
  any real property which he deems necessary  for  the  implementation  or
  accomplishment   of   any  statutory  purpose,  function,  operation  or
  responsibility of the commissioner of general services or the office  of
  general  services,  by  purchase  or  as  provided in the eminent domain
  procedure law. Title to such real property shall be taken in the name of
  and be vested in the people of the state of New York. No  real  property
  shall be so acquired by purchase unless the title thereto is approved by
  the attorney general. The terms "property" or "real property" as used in
  this  section  shall  mean  "real  property"  as  defined by section one
  hundred three of the eminent domain procedure law.
    2. Whenever real property  is  to  be  so  acquired  pursuant  to  the
  provisions  of  the  eminent  domain  procedure  law the commissioner of
  general services shall cause to be made an accurate acquisition  map  as
  so provided in said law.
    3.  On  the  approval  of  such  map  by  the  commissioner of general
  services, the original tracing of the map shall, pursuant to the eminent
  domain procedure law, be filed in the  main  office  of  the  office  of
  general services.
    4.  If  the commissioner of general services shall determine, prior to
  the filing of a copy of such acquisition map in the office of the county
  clerk, that changes, alterations or modifications of such map  as  filed
  in the main offices of the office of general services should be made, he
  or  she  shall,  subject to the provisions of article two of the eminent
  domain procedure law,  if  applicable,  direct  the  preparation  of  an
  amended map. On the approval of such amended map by the commissioner, it
  shall  be  filed  in  his  or  her  office  and  he or she shall cause a
  certified copy of such amended map to be filed in the office in the same
  manner as the original map was filed and the amended map shall thereupon
  in all respects and for all purposes supersede the map previously filed.
    5. If the commissioner of general services shall determine,  prior  to
  the  filing  of a copy of an acquisition map in the office of the county
  clerk, as provided in section four hundred two  of  the  eminent  domain
  procedure law, that such map should be withdrawn, he or she shall file a
  certificate  of  withdrawal  in  the  offices  of  the office of general
  services and  of  the  department  of  law.  Upon  the  filing  of  such
  certificate of withdrawal, the map to which it refers shall be cancelled
  and all rights thereunder shall cease and terminate.
    6.  The commissioner of general services shall deliver to the attorney
  general a copy of such acquisition map, whereupon it shall be  the  duty
  of  the  attorney  general to advise and certify to the commissioner the
  names of  the  owners  of  the  real  property  described  in  the  said
  acquisition  map,  including  the owners of any right, title or interest
  therein, pursuant to the requirements of section four hundred  three  of
  the eminent domain procedure law.
    7. If, at or after the vesting of title to such property in the people
  of  the  state  of  New  York  in the manner provided for in the eminent
  domain procedure law, the commissioner of general services shall deem it
  necessary to cause the removal of an owner or other occupant  from  such
  property, he may cause such owner or occupant to be removed therefrom by
  proceeding in accordance with section four hundred five of such law. The
  proceeding  shall be brought in the name of the commissioner as agent of
  the state and the attorney general shall represent the petitioner in the
  proceedings. No execution shall issue for costs, if any, awarded against
  the state or the commissioner, but they shall be part of  the  costs  of
  the  acquisition  of  the  real  property  and  be  paid in like manner.


 Proceedings may be brought separately against one or more of the  owners
  or  occupants  of  any  such  property, or one proceeding may be brought
  against all or several of the owners or occupants of  any  or  all  such
  property  within the territorial jurisdiction of the same court, justice
  or judge; judgment shall be  given  for  immediate  removal  of  persons
  defaulting  in appearance or in answering, or withdrawing their answers,
  if any, without awaiting the trial  or  decision  of  issues  raised  by
  contestants, if any.
    8.  Upon  making  any  agreement provided for in section three hundred
  four of the eminent domain procedure law, the  commissioner  of  general
  services   shall  deliver  to  the  comptroller  such  agreement  and  a
  certificate stating the amount due such owner or  owners  thereunder  on
  account of such appropriation of his or their property and the amount so
  fixed  shall  be  paid  out  of  the  state  treasury after audit by the
  comptroller from moneys appropriated for the acquisition  of  such  real
  property, but not until there shall have been filed with the comptroller
  a  certificate  of  the  attorney  general showing the person or persons
  claiming the amount so agreed upon to be legally entitled thereto.
    9. Application for reimbursement as provided in section seven  hundred
  two   of  the  eminent  domain  procedure  law  shall  be  made  to  the
  commissioner of general services upon forms prescribed by him and  shall
  be  accompanied by such information and evidence as the commissioner may
  require. Upon approval  of  such  application,  the  commissioner  shall
  deliver  a  copy  thereof to the comptroller together with a certificate
  stating the amount due thereof, and the amounts so fixed shall  be  paid
  out  of  the  state  treasury after audit by the comptroller from moneys
  appropriated for the acquisition of property under this section.
    10. The commissioner of general services, with  the  approval  of  the
  director  of the budget, shall establish and may from time to time amend
  rules and regulations authorizing the payment of actual  reasonable  and
  necessary  moving expenses of occupants of property acquired pursuant to
  this section; of actual direct losses of tangible personal property as a
  result of moving or discontinuing a business or farm operation, but  not
  exceeding  an  amount  equal  to the reasonable expenses that would have
  been  required  to  relocate  such  property,  as  determined   by   the
  commissioner;   of   actual  reasonable  expenses  in  searching  for  a
  replacement  business  or  farm;  and  of  actual  reasonable   expenses
  necessary  to  reestablish a displaced farm, not-for-profit organization
  or small business at its new  site,  but  not  to  exceed  ten  thousand
  dollars,  or  in hardship cases for the advance payment of such expenses
  and losses. In lieu of  such  actual  reasonable  and  necessary  moving
  expenses, any such displaced owner or tenant of residential property may
  elect   to  accept  a  moving  expense  allowance,  plus  a  dislocation
  allowance, determined in accordance with  a  schedule  prepared  by  the
  commissioner  and  made a part of such rules and regulations. In lieu of
  such  actual  reasonable  and  necessary  moving  expenses  and   actual
  reasonable  reestablishment expenses, any such displaced owner or tenant
  of commercial property who meets eligibility criteria and  relocates  or
  discontinues  his business or farm operation may elect to accept a fixed
  relocation payment in an amount equal to the average annual net earnings
  of the business or farm operation, except that such payment shall be not
  less than one thousand dollars nor more than twenty thousand dollars.  A
  displaced  not-for-profit organization may choose a fixed payment of one
  thousand to twenty thousand dollars in lieu of the  payment  for  actual
  moving  and  related  expenses  and  actual  reasonable  reestablishment
  expenses if eligibility criteria are met. Application for payment  under
  this subdivision shall be made to the commissioner upon forms prescribed
  by  him and shall be accompanied by such information and evidence as the


 commissioner  may  require.  Upon  approval  of  such  application,  the
  commissioner  shall  deliver  a copy thereof to the comptroller together
  with a certificate stating the amount due thereunder, and the amount  so
  fixed  shall  be  paid  out  of  the  state  treasury after audit by the
  comptroller from moneys appropriated for  the  acquisition  of  property
  under  this  section.  As  used in this subdivision the term "commercial
  property"  shall  include  property  owned  by  an  individual,  family,
  partnership,  corporation,  association or a not-for-profit organization
  and includes a farm operation. As used  in  this  subdivision  the  term
  "business" means any lawful activity, except a farm operation, conducted
  primarily  for the purchase, sale, lease and rental of personal and real
  property, and for the manufacture, processing, or marketing of products,
  commodities, or any other personal property; for the sale of services to
  the public;  or  by  a  not-for-profit  organization.  The  term  "small
  business"  means  a business having not more than five hundred employees
  working at the site being acquired or permanently displaced. As used  in
  this  subdivision the term "farm operation" means any activity conducted
  solely or primarily for the  production  of  one  or  more  agricultural
  products  or  commodities  including  timber  for  sale or home use, and
  customarily  producing  such  products  or  commodities  in   sufficient
  quantities  to  be  capable of contributing materially to the operator's
  support.
    11. The commissioner of general services  pursuant  to  section  three
  hundred five of the eminent domain procedure law, may make agreements on
  such  terms,  conditions and consideration as he deems beneficial to the
  state with respect to any property  heretofore  or  hereafter  acquired,
  whereby  such  property  may  be  used and occupied by the former owner,
  tenant or by any other party from a date specified  in  said  agreement,
  until  such  time  as  the  state  requires  and obtains actual physical
  possession. The agreements for the use and occupancy  of  such  property
  may  be  managed,  supervised  and enforced (a) by the staff, forces and
  equipment of the office of general services; or (b) by the  commissioner
  of  general  services  contracting  for  the management, supervision and
  enforcement thereof with any person, firm or corporation; or  (c)  by  a
  combination of such methods.
    The  use  and  occupancy of such property under the provisions of this
  section and the right of the state  or  its  duly  authorized  agent  to
  recover possession thereof shall not be subject to the emergency housing
  rent control law.
    Expenses  which  are  determined  by  the  commissioner  to  have been
  incurred in connection with the use and occupancy of such  property  may
  be  paid  out  of the state treasury after audit by the comptroller from
  moneys appropriated for  the  duly  authorized  project  for  which  the
  property  was acquired. However, such expenses incurred under a contract
  for management and supervision of such property may be paid out  of  the
  gross  revenue  therefrom.  All  moneys received by the commissioner for
  such use or occupancy shall be paid into the treasury of  the  state  to
  the credit of the capital projects fund.
    12.  Authorization  is  hereby  given  to  the commissioner of general
  services to make supplemental relocation payments,  separately  computed
  and  stated,  to  displaced  owners  and tenants of residential property
  acquired  pursuant  to  this  section  who  are  entitled  thereto,   as
  determined  by  him. The commissioner, with the approval of the director
  of the budget, may establish and from  time  to  time  amend  rules  and
  regulations  providing  for  such  supplemental  relocation  payments or
  replacement housing. Such rules and regulations may further  define  the
  terms  used  in  this  subdivision.  In  the  case  of property acquired
  pursuant to this section which is improved by a dwelling actually  owned


 and occupied by the displaced owner for not less than one hundred eighty
  days immediately prior to initiation of negotiations for the acquisition
  of such property, such payment to such owner shall not exceed twenty-two
  thousand five hundred dollars. Such payment shall be the amount, if any,
  which,  when  added to the acquisition payment equals the average price,
  established by the commissioner on a class, group or  individual  basis,
  required  to  obtain  a  comparable replacement dwelling that is decent,
  safe  and  sanitary  to  accommodate  the  displaced  owner,  reasonably
  accessible  to public services and places of employment and available on
  the private market, but in  no  event  shall  such  payment  exceed  the
  difference  between acquisition payment and the actual purchase price of
  a replacement dwelling which is decent, safe and sanitary. Such  payment
  shall  include  an amount which will compensate such displaced owner for
  any increased interest costs which such person is required  to  pay  for
  financing  the  acquisition of any such comparable replacement dwelling.
  Such amount shall be paid only if the dwelling acquired pursuant to this
  section was encumbered by a bona fide mortgage which was a valid lien on
  such dwelling for not less than one hundred eighty  days  prior  to  the
  initiation  of  negotiations  for  the acquisition of such dwelling. Any
  such mortgage interest differential payment shall,  notwithstanding  the
  provisions  of  section twenty-six-b of the general construction law, be
  in lieu of and in full satisfaction of the requirements of such section.
  Such  payment  shall  include  reasonable  expenses  incurred  by   such
  displaced  owner for evidence of title, recording fees and other closing
  costs incident to the purchase of  the  replacement  dwelling,  but  not
  including  prepaid  expenses.  Such  payment  shall  be  made  only to a
  displaced owner who purchases and occupies a replacement dwelling  which
  is  decent,  safe and sanitary within one year subsequent to the date on
  which he is required to move from the dwelling acquired pursuant to this
  section or the date  the  commissioner  identifies,  for  the  displaced
  owner,  replacement  housing actually available within the limits of the
  offer extended for replacement housing, whichever occurs  later,  except
  advance  payment  of  such  amount may be made in hardship cases. In the
  case of property  acquired  pursuant  to  this  section  from  which  an
  individual  or  family,  not  otherwise  eligible  to  receive a payment
  pursuant to the above provisions of this subdivision, is displaced  from
  any  dwelling  thereon  which has been actually and lawfully occupied by
  such individual or family for not  less  than  ninety  days  immediately
  prior  to  the  initiation  of  negotiations for the acquisition of such
  property, such payment to such individual or  family  shall  not  exceed
  five  thousand  two  hundred  fifty  dollars.  Such payment shall be the
  amount which is necessary to enable such individual or family  to  lease
  or rent for a period not to exceed forty-two months, a decent, safe, and
  sanitary  dwelling  of standards adequate to accommodate such individual
  or family in areas not generally less  desirable  in  regard  to  public
  utilities and public and commercial facilities and reasonably accessible
  to  his place of employment. Such payment may be used as a down payment,
  including reasonable expenses incurred by such individual or family  for
  evidence  of  title, recording fees, and other closing costs incident to
  the purchase of the replacement  dwelling,  but  not  including  prepaid
  expenses,  on  the  purchase  of a decent, safe and sanitary dwelling of
  standards adequate to accommodate such individual or family in areas not
  generally less desirable in regard to public utilities  and  public  and
  commercial  facilities.  Such  payments  may  be made in installments as
  determined by the commissioner. However, notwithstanding the  provisions
  of  this  subdivision,  if  it  is  determined  by the commissioner that
  replacement housing cannot be obtained for the  supplemental  relocation
  payments  specified  herein,  he  may,  subject  to  the approval of the


 director of the budget, take such action as is necessary or  appropriate
  to  provide last resort housing with the use of funds authorized for the
  project. Application for payment under this subdivision shall be made to
  the  commissioner  upon forms prescribed by him and shall be accompanied
  by such information and evidence as the commissioner may  require.  Upon
  approval  of  such  application,  the  commissioner shall deliver a copy
  thereof to the comptroller, together  with  a  certificate  stating  the
  amount  due thereunder, and the amount so fixed shall be paid out of the
  state treasury after audit by the comptroller from  moneys  appropriated
  for the acquisition of property under this section.
    13.  Any  owner of real property acquired pursuant to this section may
  present to the court of claims, pursuant to section five  hundred  three
  of  the  eminent  domain  procedure  law,  a claim for the value of such
  property appropriated and for legal damages, as provided by law for  the
  filing  of  claims with the court of claims. Awards and judgments of the
  court of claims shall be paid in the same manner as awards and judgments
  of that court for the acquisition of lands generally and shall  be  paid
  out  of  the  state  treasury after audit by the comptroller from moneys
  appropriated for the acquisition of such real property.
    14. Expenses  incurred  in  the  acquisition  of  the  real  property,
  including  the  cost  of  making surveys, and preparing descriptions and
  maps of property  to  be  acquired,  and  of  administrative  duties  in
  connection  therewith, serving notices, making appraisals and agreements
  and of searches ordered and examinations and readings of title  made  by
  the  attorney  general,  and  expenses  incurred  by the commissioner of
  general services or attorney  general  in  proceedings  for  removal  of
  owners  and  occupants,  shall  be  deemed to be part of the cost of the
  acquisition of such real property.
    15. If the commissioner of general services shall determine subsequent
  to the acquisition of a temporary easement in any real property that the
  purposes  for  which  such  easement  right  was  acquired   have   been
  accomplished  and  that  the  exercise  of  such  easement  is no longer
  necessary, he shall make his  certificate  that  the  exercise  of  such
  easement  is  no  longer  necessary  and  that  such  easement  right is
  therefore terminated, released and extinguished. The commissioner  shall
  cause  such  certificate  to be filed in the office of the department of
  state and upon such filing all rights acquired by the state in such real
  property shall cease and  determine.  The  commissioner  shall  cause  a
  certified  copy  of  such  certificate  as so filed in the office of the
  department of state to be mailed to the owner of the property  affected,
  as  certified by the attorney general, if the place of residence of such
  owner is known or can be ascertained by  a  reasonable  effort  and  the
  commissioner shall cause a further certified copy of such certificate to
  be  filed in the office of the recording officer of each county in which
  the property affected or any part thereof is situated. On the filing  of
  such  certified copy of such certificate with such recording officer, it
  shall be his duty to record the same in his office in the books used for
  recording deeds and to index the same against the name of the people  of
  the state of New York as grantor.
    16. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, or part of this section or the
  application  thereof  to  any  person,  firm  or corporation, project or
  circumstance shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
  be invalid, such judgment shall not affect,  impair  or  invalidate  the
  remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
  sentence,  paragraph,  or part of the application thereof to the person,
  firm or corporation, project or circumstance directly  involved  in  the
  controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.




   §  28.  Transfer of state lands or watershed conservation easements to
  the city of  New  York  for  water  supply  protection  purposes.    The
  commissioner  of general services may, with the concurrence of the mayor
  of the city of New York, transfer and convey to the city of New York, in
  consideration of one dollar to be paid to the state of New York and upon
  such other terms and conditions as agreed upon by such commissioner  and
  the  mayor  of  the  city  of  New  York,  parcels  of land or watershed
  conservation easements  owned  by  the  state  and  located  within  the
  counties of Dutchess, Putnam, or Westchester and within the watershed of
  the water supply of the city of New York, whether or not such parcels or
  watershed conservation easements are unappropriated state lands, for the
  purpose  of  protecting  the  water supply of the city of New York.  The
  city of New York may, with the prior agreement of  the  commissioner  of
  the  department  of health, transfer and convey any such parcels for the
  sole purpose of purchasing lands in areas of higher priority  for  water
  supply  protection  purposes,  provided  that the city of New York shall
  either  (1)  transfer  and  convey  to  the  state  of  New   York,   in
  consideration  of  one  dollar  paid  to  the city of New York, any such
  parcels provided that the  city  of  New  York  continues  to  pay  real
  property  taxes  on  any  such  parcels  and  upon  such other terms and
  conditions as agreed upon by the commissioner of  general  services  and
  the  mayor  of  the city of New York; or (2) sell any such parcels to an
  entity other than the state of New York and provide to the state of  New
  York  monies  equal  to the original purchase price paid by the state of
  New York for such parcels.   For purposes  of  this  section,  the  term
  "watershed conservation easement" shall have the same meaning as defined
  in section five hundred eighty-three of the real property tax law.




   §  29.  Watershed  conservation  easements  and watershed agricultural
  easements. Restriction on alienation. A watershed conservation  easement
  or  watershed  agricultural  easement held by the city of New York shall
  not be transferred or conveyed by  the  city  of  New  York  unless  the
  written  consent  of  the  record owner of the real property burdened by
  such easement is affixed to the  instrument  transferring  or  conveying
  such  easement.  For  purposes  of  this  section,  the terms "watershed
  conservation easement" and "watershed agricultural easement" shall  have
  the same meanings as defined in section five hundred eighty-three of the
  real property tax law.




   § 30. Unappropriated  state  lands defined.   The term "unappropriated
  state lands," as used in this chapter, includes all escheated lands; all
  lands conveyed to the state for the benefit of the canal  fund  and  not
  devoted in pursuance of law to any public use; all lands purchased by or
  for  the  state  on the foreclosure of any mortgage given on the loan of
  any United States deposit funds or on any loan of money for  the  state;
  all  state  lands  lying  within  the  limits of any city or village not
  devoted to any public use; and all other lands belonging to  this  state
  which  are not directed by law to be kept for or applied to any specific
  purpose, except lands under water the disposition of which  is  governed
  by  article  six of this chapter and except the lands the disposition of
  which is governed by the salt springs law  and  except  abandoned  canal
  lands  the  disposition  of  which  is  governed by article four of this
  chapter, and chapters eight hundred and ninety-three and  eight  hundred
  and ninety-four of the laws of nineteen hundred and eleven.




   § 30-a. Abandonment  of  state  real  property.  1. Except as to lands
  under water, salt springs lands and abandoned canal lands, the  head  of
  any  state  agency  having  custody or jurisdiction over any state-owned
  lands may determine that such lands are no longer necessary or useful to
  the purposes of such agency, and he  or  she  is  hereby  authorized  to
  declare  the  same  abandoned.  Upon  the  filing  of  a  declaration of
  abandonment of such lands with an approval thereof by  the  commissioner
  of  general  services such lands shall become unappropriated state lands
  provided, however, that no state lands, the sale or transfer of which is
  prohibited by the constitution, shall be thus  affected.  Within  thirty
  days  of approving the abandonment, the commissioner of general services
  shall publish a notice of the approval in the  state  register  and  the
  environmental  notice  bulletin,  and  send  such  a notice to the chief
  elected official of each county  and  municipality  where  the  affected
  lands are located.
    2. The commissioner of general services is authorized and empowered to
  determine  that  any state-owned real property under the jurisdiction of
  any state agency other than any real property  owned  by  or  under  the
  jurisdiction  of  any public authority or public benefit corporation, is
  under-utilized or not being utilized in a  manner  consistent  with  the
  best  interests of the state and thereupon, subject to the procedure and
  review  provided  in  section  two-a,  to  declare  such  real  property
  abandoned.
    3. Upon the filing of a declaration of abandonment by the commissioner
  of  the office of mental health or by the commissioner of the office for
  people with developmental disabilities of state-owned lands upon which a
  community residential facility for the disabled as  defined  in  section
  41.34  of the mental hygiene law exists, and with an approval thereof by
  the  commissioner  of  general  services,  such   lands   shall   become
  unappropriated  state  lands;  and  prior  to  being  transferred to the
  jurisdiction of another state agency shall be offered for sale at public
  auction pursuant to section  thirty-three  of  this  article;  provided,
  however,  that the provisions of section four hundred six of the eminent
  domain procedure law shall apply to such property.
    4. Should state-owned real property  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
  office  of  mental  health  or  the office for people with developmental
  disabilities and upon which a community  residential  facility  for  the
  disabled  as  defined in section 41.34 of the mental hygiene law exists,
  be declared abandoned by the commissioner of general  services  pursuant
  to  subdivision  two  of  this  section, such real property shall become
  unappropriated state lands;  and  prior  to  being  transferred  to  the
  jurisdiction  of  another  state  agency,  shall  be offered for sale at
  public  auction  pursuant  to  section  thirty-three  of  this  article;
  provided,  however,  that  the provisions of section four hundred six of
  the eminent domain procedure law shall apply to such property.
    5. As used in this section, the term "state agency" shall include  any
  department,  division, board, commission, bureau, office or other agency
  of the state.




   § 31. Surveys  by  commissioner of general services.  The commissioner
  of general services may, whenever he deems it  necessary,  cause  actual
  surveys to be made of any state lands.




   § 32. Maps.   The commissioner of general services shall make or cause
  to be made a map of each tract so  surveyed,  distinguishing  upon  such
  maps  the  towns  and county in which the lots are situated, and deposit
  the same in his office. Such maps shall be open  to  the  inspection  of
  every  person,  during  the  office  hours  of business, until the lands
  described thereupon be sold.




   § 33. Sale  of  unappropriated state lands; notice and place of public
  sales. 1. The commissioner of general services may, from time  to  time,
  sell  unappropriated  state lands at public auction or by sealed bids in
  such parcels as he deems for the best interests of the  state.  Previous
  to  every  sale,  he  shall  fix the lowest sum at which each lot may be
  sold, and shall designate at least one newspaper in the county where the
  lands to be sold are situated, in which  the  commissioner  shall  cause
  notice  of  the  time, place and description of sale to be published, at
  least once a week for four weeks, successively, before  the  sale.  Such
  notice  need  not  be  published  in  any other paper or papers, and any
  statute requiring additional publication of notices or advertisements by
  state officers or a department, board, bureau or commission of the state
  shall not apply  to  such  notice.  The  commissioner  may  designate  a
  representative  of his office to conduct such sale. All such sales shall
  be held at the county seat of the county where the property is situated,
  unless otherwise directed by the commissioner.
    Upon such sales of unappropriated state land to a  purchaser  procured
  by any licensed real estate broker and the payment of the purchase price
  in  the  amount  offered  by such broker in behalf of the purchaser, the
  commissioner of general services is authorized to pay, subject  to  such
  terms  and conditions as the commissioner may prescribe, a commission to
  such  broker  out  of  monies  available  therefor.  Uniform  rates   of
  commission  shall,  from  time to time, be fixed by the commissioner but
  shall not exceed six percentum of  the  purchase  price.  No  commission
  shall be paid for the procuring of any sale unless (1) written authority
  of  the  broker  to  make  such  offer  on  a  form  acceptable  to  the
  commissioner, signed by the person for whom he is acting, shall be filed
  with the commissioner before the day of the  sale  and  unless  (2)  the
  broker  shall  furnish  to  the  commissioner  evidence in such form and
  extent as he may require establishing that the purchaser was procured as
  the result of the broker's services. In no event shall a broker  who  is
  paid  a  commission  by  the  commissioner as herein provided accept any
  other commission or fee from any person or source for brokerage services
  relating to the sale of such unappropriated state land.
    2. (a) Whenever a street  or  highway,  including  any  adjacent  land
  acquired or held by the state in connection with such street or highway,
  the  title  to the bed of which is in the state, shall have been legally
  abandoned or closed, in whole or in part, the  commissioner  of  general
  services  may sell and convey at public auction or by sealed bids at not
  less than the appraised value, in such parcels as he  directs,  all  the
  right,  title  and  interest  of  the  state in such abandoned or closed
  street or highway, or the part  so  abandoned  or  closed,  and  in  any
  adjacent  land  acquired  or  held  by the state in connection with such
  street or highway; and where, in the judgment of  such  commissioner,  a
  public  auction  is  not  for  the  best  interests  of  the  state  the
  commissioner, in his discretion, may sell and  convey  such  parcels  of
  said  lands  at private sale to the owners of adjacent lands for a price
  not less than the appraised value and on such terms  and  conditions  as
  the commissioner may impose.
    (b)  The  commissioner of general services may sell and convey parcels
  of unappropriated state land which (i) do not constitute legal  building
  lots  in  the  municipality  in  which they are located and (ii) have an
  appraised value of less than fifty thousand dollars each at private sale
  to any owner of adjacent lands. Consideration for such  sales  shall  be
  for  a price not less than the appraised value and such additional terms
  and conditions as the commissioner may deem necessary.
    3.  The  commissioner  of  general  services  is  authorized  in   his
  discretion  to  sell  and  convey  at  private  sale upon such terms and


 conditions as he may deem proper, and to remise and  quitclaim  all  the
  right,  title  and  interest  of  the state in and to any unappropriated
  state lands acquired by or through tax sale where it shall  appear  that
  such  lands  are  and  have been privately occupied under color of title
  continuously for ten years or where the applicant has, in good faith,  a
  continuous  chain  of title going back more than ten years from the date
  of application. Any such sale, if  made,  shall  be  to  the  person  or
  persons claiming title because of such occupation or under such chain of
  title,  and  shall  be for a consideration not less than the fair market
  value of the state's interest as determined by the commissioner.
    4. Where a petition is presented to a surrogate's court of this  state
  for an order directing the sale of a decedent's real property for any of
  the  purposes  provided  for in section one thousand nine hundred two of
  the surrogate's court procedure act or otherwise, and there is reason to
  believe that such real property may have escheated to the people of  the
  state  of  New York, and a final judgment in an action by reason of such
  escheat, as provided for in section two hundred and one of the abandoned
  property law, has not been entered, the commissioner of general services
  may, if it is deemed to be in the best interests of the state, authorize
  the attorney general to consent to such order for the sale of such  real
  property,  either at public auction or by sealed bids or private sale. A
  deed  thereupon  executed  and  delivered  pursuant  to  the  terms  and
  provisions  of  such  order,  upon such consent of the attorney general,
  shall be deemed a bar to any claim of title of the people of  the  state
  of  New  York,  by  virtue of such escheat, in the property so sold, but
  shall not be deemed to affect any rights that the people of the state of
  New York may have in or to the proceeds of such sale. Consent,  however,
  to  such an order shall not be given in the event the price offered on a
  proposed private sale of such real property is less than  the  appraised
  value thereof as determined by the commissioner of general services.
    5.  (a)  The  commissioner  of  general  services  may sell and convey
  improved, unappropriated state  lands  by  competitive  solicitation  of
  offers through a request for proposals or similar method where in his or
  her  judgment,  a  public  auction  is  not in the best interests of the
  state. Such solicitation shall  document  the  minimum  qualitative  and
  quantitative factors in addition to sale price to be used as criteria in
  the  evaluation of offers and the general manner in which the evaluation
  process and selection of the most responsive and responsible offeror  is
  to be conducted. Clarifications may be sought from offerors for purposes
  of  assuring  a full understanding of responsiveness to the solicitation
  requirements. Where provided for in the solicitation, revisions  may  be
  permitted  from  all  offerors  determined  to  be  eligible  for award.
  Disclosure of the content of competing offers,  other  than  statistical
  tabulations  of  offers  received  or of any clarifications or revisions
  thereto, shall be prohibited prior to award.  All  offers  or  separable
  parts thereof may be rejected.
    (b)  Establishment  of  the  minimum  sale  price  for the competitive
  solicitation shall be based upon  a  certified  appraisal  or  certified
  appraisal report as defined in article six-E of the executive law.
    (c)  The commissioner of general services shall designate at least one
  newspaper in the county where the lands to be offered  are  situate,  in
  which he or she shall cause a notice of the solicitation to be published
  at  least  once  a  week for four weeks successively before the date set
  forth for receipt of offers.




   § 34. Transfer  of  unappropriated  state  lands  for  mental  health,
  developmental disabilities, park, recreation, playground, reforestation,
  street or highway purposes. 1. Such  commissioner  of  general  services
  may,  from  time  to  time,  transfer and convey to a city, incorporated
  village, town or county, in consideration of one dollar to  be  paid  to
  the  state  of  New  York,  and  on  such  terms  and conditions as such
  commissioner may impose, a part or all  of  any  parcel  or  parcels  of
  unappropriated  state  lands  upon  certification  that  such  parcel or
  parcels are useful for local  mental  health  facilities,  developmental
  disabilities  facilities,  park,  recreation, playground, reforestation,
  street or highway purposes, and that they will be properly improved  and
  maintained  for  one  or  more  of  such purposes and provided that this
  disposition of such parcel  or  parcels  is  not  otherwise  prohibited.
  Certification  shall  be evidenced by a formal request from the board of
  estimate, common council, village board, town board or county  board  of
  supervisors,  setting  forth  in  detail  the  parcel  or  parcels to be
  released, transferred and conveyed and the availability  and  usefulness
  of  such parcel or parcels for one or more of such purposes. In the city
  of New York however,  certification  shall  be  evidenced  by  a  formal
  request  from  the  mayor. In the event that lands transferred under the
  provisions of this section are not properly improved and maintained  for
  one  or  more  of the purposes contemplated by this section by the city,
  village, town or county  to  which  they  were  transferred,  the  title
  thereto  shall  revert  to  the people of the state of New York, and the
  attorney-general may institute an action in  the  supreme  court  for  a
  judgment  declaring  a  revesting  of  such  title  in  the  state. Such
  commissioner may also transfer any unappropriated  state  lands  to  the
  office  of parks, recreation and historic preservation or the department
  of environmental conservation, upon the application of the  commissioner
  thereof indicating that such unappropriated state lands are required for
  state  park  purposes  within the area of jurisdiction of such office or
  department.
    2. The commissioner of general services may, in his or her discretion,
  and upon such terms and conditions as such commissioner may impose, upon
  application of the mayor of the city of New York, grant to the  city  of
  New  York,  for public streets, parks, parkways, playgrounds, recreation
  and conservation purposes, all of the right, title and interest  of  the
  people  of the state of New York, of, in and to any portion of the lands
  and lands under water  in  Jamaica  bay  and  Rockaway  inlets  and  the
  tributaries thereto.




   § 34-a. Leasing  and  granting  of  unappropriated  state lands to the
  United States or any  instrumentality  thereof.    The  commissioner  of
  general  services  may  grant  and  convey  in  fee title or such lesser
  interest than fee title or, notwithstanding any other provision  of  law
  to  the  contrary, lease without bid, for such periods of time as he may
  deem appropriate to the  United  States  of  America,  its  departments,
  agencies and other instrumentalities, including the United States Postal
  Service,  authorized by law to take such fee title, lesser interest than
  fee title or leasehold interest in real property, upon application by an
  authorized  officer  or  employee  thereof,  and  upon  such  terms  and
  conditions  as  the  commissioner deems proper, any parcel or parcels of
  unappropriated state land which are needed to carry out the functions of
  such department, agency or instrumentality.  The  use  of  any  property
  conveyed  under  this  section  shall  be  subject  to  local  land  use
  regulation.




   §  34-b.  Acquisition  of  air space and air and subsurface rights. 1.
  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  law  to  the  contrary,  the
  governing  board  of  a  municipal corporation as defined in the general
  municipal law in  which  land  or  real  property  had  previously  been
  acquired  by  the  state  or any of its duly constituted agencies for an
  appropriate public use may apply to the commissioner of general services
  in the executive department for conveyance to it of  a  grant,  release,
  quitclaim  or  other  appropriate instrument of all the right, title and
  interest of the state of New York in and to the air space  and  air  and
  subsurface  rights,  easements  therein and lands adjacent thereto which
  had been appropriated or otherwise acquired by  the  state  within  such
  municipality.  The  granting  of  any  such  application shall be in the
  discretion of the commissioner and the head of the department or  agency
  having jurisdiction over the property and subject to their determination
  that  such  conveyance would be compatible with the existing state needs
  and  uses  of  the  property  in  question  and  upon  such   reasonable
  consideration,  terms  and conditions as the commissioner may determine.
  No such conveyance shall be leased or utilized for private or  municipal
  utility  services.  No  conveyance  shall  be  permitted with respect to
  existing or proposed state parkways.
    2. The commissioner of general services shall include  as  a  part  of
  such  conveyance  such terms and conditions as he may reasonably deem to
  be appropriate with respect to the form,  manner  and  provisions  under
  which  the  municipality  may  dispose  of  said  air  space and air and
  subsurface rights and adjacent areas in conformity  with  provisions  of
  the general municipal law.
    3. The development of any property interest by the lessee or developer
  of  said air space and air and subsurface rights and adjacent areas from
  the municipality shall be subject to the zoning regulations,  ordinances
  and  planning requirements of the municipality in which said property is
  located and to the support,  protection  or  relocation  of  any  public
  utility  facilities  within the right of way of any highways within said
  property at the sole cost of the municipality, lessee or  developer.  No
  such  development  shall  deprive  an abutting landowner of his right of
  access.
    4. The terms of the conveyance to the municipal corporation  shall  be
  determined  by the commissioner of general services with the approval of
  the director of the budget as  to  the  adequacy  of  the  consideration
  therefor and shall be submitted to the commissioner of the agency having
  jurisdiction  over  the  property  involved  for  his  consideration and
  approval. Each such instrument of conveyance shall be  prepared  by  the
  commissioner  of general services and prior to delivery of possession of
  the subject property rights in the air, air  space,  subsurface  rights,
  easements  therein  and  lands adjacent thereto shall be approved by the
  attorney general as to form and manner of execution.
    5. The commissioner of general services  shall  promulgate  reasonable
  rules  and  regulations  after  consultation  with  the  commissioner of
  transportation and the commissioners or  heads  of  any  other  affected
  state  agencies strictly consistent with the purposes of and designed to
  carry out the provisions of this section.




   § 35. Terms  of  sale.    The  commissioner  of general services shall
  prescribe the terms and conditions of all sales.




   § 36. Issue  of  patents.    On  the production to the commissioner of
  general services by the purchaser, his representative or assignee of any
  certificate heretofore issued  by  the  state  engineer  and  a  receipt
  showing  payment  to  the  state of the whole of the purchase-money, the
  purchaser's bond on such sale shall be cancelled by the state department
  having custody of such bond and such commissioner shall deliver  letters
  patent  for  the  lands  sold  to the person entitled thereto.   If such
  certificate be lost or wrongfully withheld by any person from the  owner
  thereof, such commissioner may receive evidence of such loss or wrongful
  detention,  and issue a patent to the person who, on satisfactory proof,
  appears to him to be entitled thereto.




   § 37. Collection, forfeiture and cancellation of purchase-money bonds.
  The  commissioner  of general services may direct the comptroller to sue
  upon any bond heretofore received by the office of general  services  or
  its  predecessors  including  the  state  engineer,  the commissioner of
  transportation or the secretary of state on the sale  of  unappropriated
  state lands, if any payment stipulated in such bond shall remain due one
  year,  or  the  commissioner  may  direct  the  sale of the land for the
  payment of which such bond was given, and in  case  of  such  sale,  all
  previous payments made on account of such land shall be forfeited to the
  people  of the state, and the bonds may be delivered up and cancelled on
  the surrender of the certificates of sale.




   § 37-a. Resale  of  lands.    The  commissioner  of  general services,
  whenever he resells any such lot, shall include in the amount for  which
  such  lot  is  offered for sale, the sum unpaid at the time of such sale
  for principal and interest on the purchase-moneys  thereof,  the  amount
  due  on the books in the comptroller's office for taxes and the interest
  and charges thereon and the costs of such sale. If the total  amount  of
  such  charges  be  not  bid therefor, he shall purchase the same for the
  state at such amount. If on any such sale, the commissioner becomes  the
  purchaser  in behalf of the state, in case such lands are not within the
  forest  preserve,  the  commissioner  shall  direct,  whether  the  land
  purchased  be  offered  for  sale  by  him at the price for which it was
  purchased, or a new appraisement made thereof under  his  direction.  He
  may  sell such lots to any person applying to purchase the same, for the
  amount at which the same was purchased for the state, on the like  terms
  and  conditions  as  he  is  authorized to sell the unappropriated state
  lands. If the commissioner directs a new appraisal of  such  lands,  the
  commissioner  may  sell  the  same as prescribed in this section for the
  prices at which the lots are respectively appraised.




   § 38. Payment  on  resale.    The  purchaser  shall complete the sale,
  immediately, by paying into the treasury the amount due on the land  and
  receiving  a  patent,  or by executing a proper bond and receiving a new
  certificate of the sale.




   § 38-a. Removal of occupants of land resold.  When a resale of land is
  directed,  the commissioner of general services shall cause notice to be
  given to every occupant of such land to remove therefrom, and if he does
  not comply with such notice, he shall direct the  district  attorney  of
  the  county  in which such lands may be situated to commence proceedings
  for his removal before the county judge of such county. On proof, by the
  production of a certificate from the commissioner that a resale of  such
  land  has  been  duly  ordered  for default of payment, such judge shall
  issue his warrant to the sheriff of the county,  commanding  him  within
  ten  days  after  the receipt thereof, to remove such occupant from such
  lands; and the sheriff shall remove such person within such  time,  and,
  for  that  purpose, shall possess the same powers as in the execution of
  criminal process. The sheriff shall retain such warrant  in  his  hands,
  and  if  any person so removed shall return to occupy such lands without
  the consent of the commissioner, he shall be forthwith  removed  by  the
  sheriff  pursuant to such warrant.  The sheriff, for executing a warrant
  under this section, shall be allowed such compensation, to be  paid  out
  of the treasury, as the comptroller shall certify to be reasonable.




   § 39. Application  for  grant  under special law.  The commissioner of
  general services shall not grant any of the unappropriated  state  lands
  to  any person applying therefor by virtue of a special law, unless such
  application be made within one year  after  the  passage  of  such  law,
  unless  otherwise  provided  therein, but such land shall be sold in the
  manner directed for the sale of unappropriated state lands.




   § 40. Exchange  of  unappropriated  state lands.   The commissioner of
  general services may, from time to time, exchange a part or all  of  any
  parcel  or  parcels  of  unappropriated  state  lands  for real property
  required by or of benefit to the state of New York and in which title is
  held by the United States of America or a  city,  incorporated  village,
  town  or  county  when  the  combined value of such unappropriated state
  lands and required real property does not exceed five  hundred  thousand
  dollars.  An  appraisal of the value of the real property to be acquired
  by the state and of the property to be conveyed by the  state  shall  be
  completed  by  a  qualified  professional  real estate appraiser. If the
  value of either property is in excess of one hundred  thousand  dollars,
  two appraisals of that property shall be required prior to the exchange.
  The  terms  and  conditions  of  such  exchange,  including any monetary
  consideration to  be  paid  to  equalize  the  value  of  such  exchange
  properties,  shall  be  subject  to  the  prior  approval  of  the state
  comptroller. The attorney general shall approve the title to  the  lands
  to be thus acquired by the state.




   § 50. Sale  of  abandoned  canal  lands.   The commissioner of general
  services may sell and convey at public or private sale the right,  title
  and  interest  of  the  state  in and to any real property, acquired for
  canal purposes, which the commissioner of transportation  may  determine
  to have been abandoned for such purposes, or as to which a determination
  of  abandonment  shall  have  been heretofore made pursuant to law.  The
  commissioner of general services may  sell  and  convey  such  abandoned
  lands in the same manner and with the same discretion as he may sell and
  convey  unappropriated  state  land  pursuant  to  article three of this
  chapter. The commissioner may sell such abandoned canal  lands  for  not
  less  than  the  appraised  value thereof to occupants of such abandoned
  canal lands or owners of adjacent land who have used  or  improved  such
  abandoned  canal  lands either under a permit issued pursuant to section
  one hundred of the canal law or in good  faith  without  knowledge  that
  such  canal  lands were owned by the state; provided that such appraised
  value shall be exclusive of  the  value  of  improvements  made  on  the
  property by the purchaser.




   § 51. Maintenance  and  repair of highway crossings on abandoned canal
  lands.  The maintenance and repair of highways on  any  parcel  of  such
  canal  lands  which  have  heretofore been abandoned pursuant to law and
  which have been converted into crossings at grade or which may hereafter
  be  abandoned  pursuant  to  law  and  so   converted   shall   be   the
  responsibility of the municipality within which such parcel of abandoned
  canal  lands  is situated.  The provisions of this subdivision shall not
  supersede any of the provisions of the highway law.




   § 59-a. Disposition of proceeds.  The proceeds from a sale or grant of
  such  lands shall be applied first to repay any expenditures made by the
  office of general services from moneys appropriated to  said  office  in
  the  first  instance for the administration, management, utilization and
  disposal of real property of the  state  and  any  rights  or  interests
  therein  and any balance of such moneys remaining after repayment of the
  first instance  expenditures  shall  be  applied  to  the  cost  of  the
  improvement  which  renders  such  lands  no  longer  necessary, and the
  expenses incurred by the attorney general for searches  and  examination
  of  the  title  to  such  lands  shall  be deemed an item of the cost of
  improvement.  Any surplus from the sale of  abandoned  lands  above  the
  cost  of the entire improvement shall be applied to the sinking fund for
  the payment of the improvement bonds.




   § 75. Grants  of  land  under  water.  This section authorizes grants,
  leases, easements, and lesser interests, including permits, for the  use
  of  state-owned  land underwater and the cession of jurisdiction thereof
  consistent with the public interest in  the  use  of  state-owned  lands
  underwater  for  purposes of navigation, commerce, fishing, bathing, and
  recreation; environmental protection; and access to the navigable waters
  of the state; with due regard for the need of affected owners of private
  property to safeguard their property.
    1. Of navigable rivers and lakes.
    2. Of the Hudson river adjacent to the state of New Jersey.
    3. Of the former bed of Onondaga  creek  in  Onondaga  county  and  of
  Tibbetts  brook  in  Bronx  county,  whether or not now under water, and
  regardless of upland ownership.
    4. Adjacent to and surrounding Great  Barn  island  in  the  city  and
  county  of New York, and between high and low water mark on such island,
  but not so as to affect the navigation of the  waters  surrounding  such
  island.
    5.  Adjacent to and surrounding Staten Island, but not so as to extend
  more than five hundred feet into the water from low water mark  on  said
  island,  except  where  the  legally established pier and bulkhead lines
  extend more than five hundred feet beyond low water mark, in which  case
  grants may be made to such lines.
    6.  Adjacent  to and surrounding Long Island, and all that part of the
  former or present county of Westchester lying on the East river or  Long
  Island   sound,  but  not  beyond  any  permanent  exterior  water  line
  established by law.
    7. (a) The commissioner of general services may grant in perpetuity or
  otherwise, to the owners of the land adjacent  to  the  land  underwater
  specified  in this section, to promote the commerce of this state or for
  the purpose of beneficial enjoyment  thereof  by  such  owners,  or  for
  agricultural  purposes,  or  for  public  park,  beach, street, highway,
  parkway, playground, recreation or conservation  purposes,  so  much  of
  said  land  underwater  as  the  commissioner  deems  necessary for that
  purpose. No such grant shall be  made  to  any  person  other  than  the
  proprietor of the adjacent land. Any such grant made to any other person
  shall  be  void,  except  that,  subject to the other provisions of this
  section, the commissioner of general services may transfer  jurisdiction
  over  state-owned  lands underwater to a state agency for the purpose of
  protecting environmentally sensitive lands underwater even if the  state
  agency  is  not  the proprietor of the adjacent upland. The commissioner
  may also lease such land underwater to such owner of the adjacent upland
  or, with the consent of such owner of the adjacent  upland,  to  others,
  for terms up to forty years. No such grant or lease shall be made of any
  lands  belonging to the city of New York, or so as to interfere with the
  rights of that city or of the Hudson River Railroad Company, or  of  its
  successor  the  New  York  Central and Hudson River Railroad Company. In
  making any grant, lease, permit or other conveyance, the commissioner of
  general services shall, upon administrative findings, and to the  extent
  practicable,  reserve  such  interests  or  attach  such  conditions  to
  preserve the public interest in use of state-owned lands underwater  and
  waterways   for  navigation,  commerce,  fishing,  bathing,  recreation,
  environmental protection and access  to  the  navigable  waters  of  the
  state,  with  due  regard  for  the  need  of affected owners of private
  property to safeguard their property. The commissioner shall by official
  rules establish criteria and guidelines for determinations with  respect
  to the leasing or selling of such lands underwater.
    Where  the boundary line between land underwater and the adjacent land
  lies within a public road or street, and the name of the owner or owners


 of such adjacent land or the place of residence cannot be ascertained to
  the satisfaction of the commissioner, grants or leases may  be  made  by
  the  commissioner in his or her discretion to the owner or owners of the
  land adjoining the road or street inshore of such land underwater in the
  manner  herein  provided,  but  a  grant  or  lease so made shall not be
  regarded as depriving any other person of the exercise  of  his  or  her
  riparian rights.
    Where  the  title  to such public road or street is in a county, city,
  town or village, grants or leases may be made by the commissioner in the
  manner herein provided to the owner of the land adjoining  the  road  or
  street  inshore of such land underwater, but no such grant shall be made
  unless the consent thereto of such county, city, town or  village  shall
  first  be  filed  with  the  commissioner,  or  unless, having been duly
  personally served with a  notice  of  application  of  such  grant,  the
  county,  city,  town  or  village  fails  to  file an objection with the
  commissioner or, having filed such objection, fails to  present  to  the
  commissioner  sufficient  proof  or  other  reasons  satisfactory to the
  commissioner why the grant should not be made.
    (b) No wharf, dock, pier,  jetty,  platform,  breakwater,  mooring  or
  other  structure  shall  be  constructed,  erected, anchored, suspended,
  placed  or  substantially  replaced,  altered,  modified,  enlarged,  or
  expanded  in,  on  or  above state-owned lands underwater, nor shall any
  fill be placed on such  lands  underwater,  unless  a  lease,  easement,
  permit,  or  other  interest  is  obtained  from the commissioner, which
  authorizes the use and occupancy of those state-owned  lands  underwater
  to  be  affected by such act or acts, provided however, that there shall
  be excepted in the uniform regulations issued pursuant to paragraph  (f)
  of  this  subdivision  any  existing  structure  for  non-commercial use
  constructed prior to June seventeenth, nineteen hundred  ninety-two,  by
  or  on  behalf  of  the owner of adjacent upland who owned prior to June
  seventeenth, nineteen hundred ninety-two, which has a surface  area,  as
  measured at the outermost perimeter, including surface waters between or
  encompassed  within the structure of less than five thousand square feet
  in area, and with respect to docking facilities, has a  capacity  of  no
  more  than  seven  boats thirty feet in length. For the purposes of this
  subdivision, the term "structure" shall not include discharge or  intake
  pipes,  pipelines,  cables,  or  conduits.  Thereafter there shall be so
  excepted any structure constructed by or  on  behalf  of  the  owner  of
  adjacent uplands that:
    (i)  has  a  surface  area,  as  measured  at the outermost perimeter,
  including surface waters directly  between  or  encompassed  within  the
  structure,  of  less  than  four  thousand  square  feet in area and not
  exceeding fifteen feet in height, as measured at  the  uppermost  point,
  above  the mean high water line and, with respect to docking facilities,
  has a capacity of five or fewer boats thirty feet in  length  and,  with
  respect  to  mooring  facilities, has a capacity of fewer than ten boats
  thirty feet in length;  provided  that  the  commissioner  may  by  rule
  promulgated  pursuant  to  paragraph  (f) of this subdivision determine,
  based on a different surface area or other criteria  of  size  and  use,
  that  other  types  of  structure  in  particular  circumstances  do not
  represent significant encroachments on state-owned lands underwater, and
    (ii) is water dependent,  which  shall  mean,  for  purposes  of  this
  section,  an  activity  which  can  only  be  conducted  on, in, over or
  adjacent to a water body because such activity requires direct access to
  that water body, and  which  involves,  as  an  integral  part  of  such
  activity, the use of the water.
    (c)  The  requirements of obtaining a lease, easement, permit or other
  interest from the commissioner  pursuant  to  the  rules  set  forth  in


 paragraph  (f)  of  this  subdivision  shall  not apply to the person or
  entity who was the upland owner on June  seventeenth,  nineteen  hundred
  ninety-two,  of lands adjacent to filled state-owned lands underwater or
  formerly  underwater,  in  respect  of  those  filled  lands,  including
  accompanying seawalls; provided  however,  that  any  right,  title  and
  interest  of  the state in and to any such state-owned lands shall in no
  respect be diminished or impaired by the provisions of this section, nor
  by any exemption in the uniform regulations authorized by paragraph  (f)
  of this subdivision.
    Upon any transfer of such lands, or at the request of the owner of the
  adjacent upland, the commissioner may convey such lesser interest as may
  be  minimally required to allow a conveyance of marketable title by that
  owner of the adjacent land.  Consideration  charged  in  such  instances
  shall reflect the interest so conveyed.
    (d)  (i)  The  commissioner  of  environmental  conservation  and  the
  secretary of state shall review any proposed lease, easement, permit  or
  other  interest, except for facilities in existence on June seventeenth,
  nineteen hundred ninety-two, and which are not the subject of an  action
  by  the  attorney  general  for unlawful occupation of state lands under
  water on the effective date  of  this  paragraph.  The  commissioner  of
  environmental  conservation  shall  recommend  conditions to protect the
  environment and natural resources. The commissioner of general  services
  shall  incorporate  those  conditions  in any lease, easement, permit or
  other interest, giving due regard as well to the recommendations of  the
  secretary  of  state  with  respect to coastal issues, or shall deny the
  proposal  if  the  commissioner  of  environmental  conservation,   upon
  administrative  findings,  determines  that  the  environment or natural
  resources cannot be adequately protected. Such lease, easement,  permit,
  or  other conveyance of an interest shall state the purpose for which it
  is made, and shall also be subject to all applicable federal, state  and
  local laws, rules, regulations and codes.
    (ii)  The  owner, occupier or any other person or entity (except those
  against whom there has been commenced on  the  effective  date  of  this
  paragraph  an action by the attorney general, for unlawful occupation of
  state lands under water) with a legal  or  beneficial  interest  in  any
  structure  not  excepted  by  paragraph  (b)  of  this  subdivision  and
  occupying state lands underwater on the  effective  date  of  the  rules
  authorized  by paragraph (f) of this subdivision, as adopted pursuant to
  subdivision five of section two hundred two of the state  administrative
  procedure  act,  shall make application for such lease, easement, permit
  or other interest within one year from that effective date.
    Except where timely application for such an  interest  has  been  made
  within  one  year  pursuant  to  this  subdivision,  the commissioner is
  authorized to require the term of such lease, easement, permit, or other
  interest to be retroactive  to  the  effective  date  of  the  rules  so
  adopted.  Any instrument conveying an interest in real property which is
  made retroactive shall include provision for  payment  of  consideration
  for the portion of the term which extends retroactively including, where
  appropriate,  interest  on  such  consideration  at  the  same rate then
  currently in effect and applied to judgments rendered in  the  court  of
  claims.
    (iii) The commissioner shall make reasonable efforts to provide notice
  to persons affected by the requirements of this section.
    (e)(i)  The  commissioner  may  impose  a  fee  in connection with the
  issuance of any such lease, easement, permit, or other  interest,  which
  fee  shall  be  established  by  rule  pursuant to paragraph (f) of this
  subdivision, and which shall take into account other  factors  affecting
  value  including  but  not limited to classes of structure, types of use


 (including whether the use is for public or private purposes),  location
  and region, size, usefulness of the parcel standing alone and such other
  criteria  as the commissioner may determine, but which shall exclude the
  value   of  improvements  thereon  constructed  and  maintained  by  the
  adjoining upland owner. The rules and regulations required by  paragraph
  (f)  of  this subdivision shall prescribe that in the event an applicant
  for a lease, easement or other interest in real property  shall  dispute
  and request a reduction of the commissioner's determination of the value
  of  the  interest  to  be  conveyed,  the  commissioner  shall, upon the
  applicant's submission of an appraisal of the  value  of  such  property
  interest  conducted  in  accord  with  standard  and  accepted appraisal
  methodology by an independent appraiser qualified as prescribed in  this
  paragraph  and  which  appraisal varies in its conclusion as to value by
  ten  percent  or  more  of  the  value  previously  established  by  the
  commissioner,  and  upon  the applicant's agreement to be bound thereby,
  contract with a second independent appraiser, qualified as prescribed in
  this paragraph, to render an appraisal of  the  value  of  the  interest
  proposed to be conveyed, the results of which appraisal shall be binding
  upon  both  the applicant and the commissioner of general services. Such
  appraiser shall be selected by the commissioner of general services from
  among a group of at least three appraisers identified by  the  applicant
  all  of  whom must be qualified as prescribed in this paragraph and each
  of whom must agree to employ standard  appraisal  methodology.  For  the
  purposes  of  this provision a qualified appraiser shall be certified by
  the secretary of state to transact business as  a  real  estate  general
  appraiser  and shall conduct a regular business of the appraisal of real
  property interests. In the event that the appraisal  contracted  for  in
  such  manner  shall  conclude that the value of the property interest in
  question is equal to the value previously determined by the commissioner
  plus or minus ten percent, the entire cost of such  appraisal  shall  be
  borne  by  the  applicant,  otherwise,  the entire cost thereof shall be
  borne by the commissioner of general services.
    (ii) For leases, easements  and  conveyances  of  such  interests  for
  commercial use of structures on state-owned underwater lands, the annual
  fee imposed shall not exceed two percent of the user's net annual income
  for structures not in existence on the effective date of this paragraph.
  Nor,  in  connection with a structure in existence and in commercial use
  on the effective date of  this  paragraph,  shall  the  fee  charged  in
  connection  with such a conveyance made after the effective date of this
  subparagraph exceed annually  the  following  schedule  for  five  years
  following  the  effective  date  of  the  interest  conveyed pursuant to
  subdivision (b) of this section provided timely application pursuant  to
  that  subdivision  has been made: .2 (two-tenths) of one percent; second
  year: .4 (four-tenths) of one percent; third-year:  .6  (six-tenths)  of
  one  percent; fourth year: .8 (eight-tenths) of one percent; fifth year,
  and thereafter: one percent; provided that all such percentages in  this
  paragraph  shall  be  that percentage of the net income derived from the
  structure or structures on  state-owned  lands,  excluding  transactions
  involving sales or repair of boats, and sale of gasoline; and the dollar
  valuation  of  the interest conveyed shall not be increased from year to
  year during that five year period. The fee charged shall  be  discounted
  ten percent for annual permits.
    (iii)  For  leases,  easements  and  conveyances of such interests for
  residential use of non-exempt structures in  existence  and  residential
  use  on  the  effective date of this paragraph, the annual fee shall not
  exceed the lesser of twenty dollars per slip or one hundred dollars.
    (iv) Nothing in this paragraph  shall  preclude  the  commissioner  of
  general services from agreeing, upon the request of and negotiation with


 the  owner  or  user  of  adjacent  upland, to such other conveyances or
  agreements consistent with this section providing for different periodic
  payments, or a more flexible payment structure, than the  fee  caps  and
  fees,  respectively, set forth for commercial and residential facilities
  herein. Moreover, notwithstanding the fee caps set in this section,  the
  commissioner  may  exceed those caps if required to cover the yearly pro
  rata share, over  the  term  of  the  conveyance  or  interest,  of  the
  administrative costs in connection with that conveyance or interest.
    (f)  The  commissioner,  in  consultation  with  the  commissioner  of
  environmental conservation, the secretary of state, the office of parks,
  recreation and historic preservation and other interested state agencies
  administering state-owned lands underwater, shall promulgate pursuant to
  article two of the state administrative procedure act  such  rules  with
  respect to grants, leases, easements and lesser interests for the use of
  state-owned land underwater, and the cession of jurisdiction thereof, as
  in  his  or  her  judgment  are  reasonable and necessary to protect the
  interests of the people in such lands underwater. Such regulations shall
  include without being limited to: the fees  to  be  charged,  consistent
  with  the  provisions of this section, including mitigation of such fees
  in the event of economic hardship on  existing  commercial  enterprises;
  fee  limitations to administrative expenses for municipal uses which are
  public, non-commercial and offer services free or for nominal fees,  and
  for  uses undertaken and operated for public and non-commercial purposes
  by not-for-profit corporations characterized as charitable  corporations
  as  defined in paragraph (a) of section one hundred two (Definitions) of
  the not-for-profit corporation law, and for uses undertaken and operated
  for public purposes by a corporation formed pursuant  to  the  religious
  corporation  law or by a corporation formed pursuant to a special act of
  this state and which has as its principal purpose a  religious  purpose;
  such  further  exemptions for projects as the commissioner determines do
  not  represent  significant  encroachments;   limitations   on   grants,
  including conversion grants, with respect to underwater lands consistent
  with the public purposes of this subdivision and limiting such grants to
  exceptional  circumstances; and factors to be examined in considering an
  application for a lease, easement or other interest. Those factors shall
  include without limitation the following: (i) the  environmental  impact
  of  the  project;  (ii)  the  values  for  natural  resource management,
  recreational uses, and commercial uses of the pertinent underwater land;
  (iii) the size, character and effects of  the  project  in  relation  to
  neighboring  uses;  (iv) the potential for interference with navigation,
  public uses of the waterway and rights of other riparian owners; (v) the
  effect of the project on the natural resource interests of the state  in
  the  lands;  (vi)  the  water-dependent nature of the use; (vii) and any
  adverse economic impact on existing commercial  enterprises.  The  final
  promulgation  of  rules  establishing  fees  or  fee structures shall be
  subject to the approval of the director of the budget.
    (g) (i) From one year after the effective date of the rules authorized
  by paragraph (f) of this subdivision and adopted pursuant to subdivision
  five of section two hundred two of the  state  administrative  procedure
  act,  and  thereafter,  any person who violates any of the provisions of
  this subdivision; or who fails to  perform  any  duty  imposed  by  this
  subdivision;  or  who  violates  or  fails  to  comply  with  any  rule,
  regulation, determination  or  order  of  the  commissioner  promulgated
  pursuant  to  this  subdivision  may  be  enjoined  from continuing such
  violation, and in any event shall be liable for a civil penalty  of  not
  more than five hundred dollars for each such violation and an additional
  civil  penalty  of not more than one hundred dollars for each day during
  which such violation continues; provided, however, that  such  penalties


 shall  be  imposed  by the commissioner only after written notice and an
  opportunity to be heard are given to the owner, occupier or other person
  or entity  having  a  legal  or  beneficial  interest  in  a  prohibited
  structure or area of fill which notice shall be transmitted by certified
  mail,  return receipt requested and which shall set forth the provisions
  of this section, a description of the prohibited structure  or  area  of
  fill,  the  amount  of the penalty, that the person must comply with the
  provisions of this section within thirty days,  and  the  specific  date
  thirty  days  thereafter  following which the person shall be subject to
  such penalty and after which further penalties shall accrue on  a  daily
  basis.
    (ii)  If  the  commissioner of environmental conservation notifies the
  commissioner of any failure  to  comply  with  conditions  of  a  lease,
  easement  or  other  interest,  the  commissioner shall investigate such
  suspected violation. The commissioner, on his or her own  initiative  or
  at  the request of the commissioner of environmental conservation, shall
  thereafter take enforcement action as described herein  or  request  the
  attorney  general to institute an action to enjoin such violation and to
  recover any damages therefor.
    8. The commissioner may authorize the use and occupation by the United
  States of lands of the state under water, for the purpose of improvement
  of navigation, including sites for lighthouses, beacons  and  lighthouse
  keepers'  dwellings  and  navy  yards  and  naval stations, and may cede
  jurisdiction over any such land but such jurisdiction so ceded shall  be
  upon  the  express  condition  that the state of New York shall retain a
  concurrent jurisdiction with the United States in and over the  property
  and premises so conveyed, so far as that all civil and criminal process,
  which  may  issue  under the laws or authority of the state of New York,
  may be  executed  thereon  in  the  same  way  and  manner  as  if  such
  jurisdiction  had  not  been  ceded,  except  so far as such process may
  affect  the  real  or  personal  property  of  the  United  States.  The
  provisions of section seventy-seven shall not apply to any authorization
  of use and occupation under the provisions of this subdivision.
    9. Private rights or rights of property of individuals, if any, of any
  nature  or description, shall not be taken away nor impaired nor impeded
  without due process of law.
    10. No  grant  for  public  park,  beach,  street,  highway,  parkway,
  playground, recreation or conservation purposes shall be made under this
  section  to  other than a county, city, town or village. A grant so made
  may be made with or without consideration and shall be upon  such  terms
  and  conditions  as  may be imposed by the commissioner. A grant so made
  shall be upon the condition that if at any  time  the  land  so  granted
  shall not be used for the purpose set forth therein or shall be used for
  any other purpose, the title so granted shall thereupon revert to and be
  in  the  people  of  the state of New York. Where a grant has heretofore
  been made by the commissioner for one or more of the purposes enumerated
  herein, the commissioner, in his discretion  and  upon  such  terms  and
  conditions  as  he  may  impose  and with or without consideration, upon
  application by the county  board  of  supervisors,  board  of  estimate,
  common  council,  town  board  or  village board, as the case may be, is
  authorized to alter or amend such grant,  in  respect  to  the  purposes
  thereof  and  with  respect to the whole or part of the land under water
  therein granted  and  described,  so  that  the  grant  may  thenceforth
  nevertheless  be  for one or more of the purposes enumerated herein. The
  provisions of section seventy-seven of this article shall not apply upon
  an application to alter or amend a grant so heretofore made.
    11. Where a grant of land under water has previously been made by  the
  state  under  the  provisions  of  this  article,  for  the  purposes of


 commerce,  commerce  or  beneficial  enjoyment,  restricted   beneficial
  enjoyment,  or  otherwise,  where  the purpose of the grant is less than
  that of beneficial enjoyment, and by  reason  of  the  nature  of  which
  previous  grant  there  remains in the state a right, title or interest,
  the commissioner may, in his discretion,  grant  such  right,  title  or
  interest  in  or to the whole of the land under water so granted or part
  thereof, to the grantee or to one who has  succeeded  to  the  title  or
  interest  so  previously  granted,  and  a  grant  so  made  may be made
  regardless of upland ownership and without  publication  or  posting  of
  notice  of  application  as  provided  by  section seventy-seven of this
  article, but no such grant shall be made for  less  than  the  appraised
  value  of  the  right,  title or interest of the state in the land under
  water or part thereof, as the case may be, and shall be upon such  terms
  and  conditions  as  shall be imposed by the commissioner to protect the
  interests of the state.
    12.  The  commissioner,  in  his  discretion,  upon  such  terms   and
  conditions  and for such consideration as the commissioner may determine
  may grant and convey to the owner or owners of  the  adjacent  land  the
  right,  title and interest of the people of the state of New York in and
  to the lands now or formerly under the waters of the arms,  branches  or
  tributaries of any navigable waters of the state which arms, branches or
  tributaries  have  become non-navigable, and a grant so made may be made
  without publication or posting of notice of application as  provided  by
  section seventy-seven of this chapter.
    13.  The  powers  granted  to  the  commissioner  by this section may,
  notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, continue to be  exercised
  by  it  in  respect  to  lands  under  the waters of the Niagara and St.
  Lawrence rivers except as  to  those  areas  thereof  that  are  natural
  resources  of  the state of New York for the creation and development of
  hydroelectric power, but the commissioner shall not make  any  grant  of
  lands  under  the  water  of  either  of  said  rivers  unless the power
  authority of the state of New York shall, prior to the issuance  of  any
  such  grant,  advise  the  commissioner, in writing, that such grant, if
  made, will not interfere with its St. Lawrence or Niagara project.
    14. Proceeds from the sales, leases, grants of  easements  and  lesser
  interests,  including  permits for the use of lands under water pursuant
  to this section shall be deposited in the environmental protection  fund
  established pursuant to section ninety-two-s of the state finance law.




   § 76. Surrender of grant.  A grantee or his successor in interest, may
  at  his  option  surrender  to the state, without consideration or for a
  compensation to be determined by the commissioner, the lands under water
  theretofore granted to him or any  part  thereof,  by  filing  with  the
  commissioner a certificate duly executed and acknowledged, declaring his
  intention  of  such  surrender and containing a description of the lands
  surrendered,  subject  to  the  acceptance  of  such  surrender  by  the
  commissioner;  and  such  surrender  when  so  accepted shall be without
  prejudice to an  application  for  a  new  grant  upon  such  terms  and
  conditions as the commissioner may determine.




   § 77. Notice  of application therefor.  Every applicant for a grant of
  land under water  shall,  previous  to  his  application,  cause  notice
  thereof   to  be  published  at  least  once  a  week  for  four  weeks,
  successively, in a newspaper printed in the county in which the land  so
  intended  to  be  applied  for  is  situated,  unless the said lands are
  situated wholly or in part in a city or village  where  a  newspaper  is
  published  then  such notice shall be published in such newspaper; and a
  copy of such notice to be posted for the same period upon  the  door  of
  the court house of such county or at such other place in or at the court
  house  as  is  generally  used  for the posting of legal notices, and if
  there be no court house in the county, at such place as the commissioner
  directs. The aforementioned four-week period shall be a full  period  of
  twenty-eight  days. In cities having a population of one million or more
  inhabitants, the applicant for a grant comprising ten thousand  or  more
  square  feet  shall also serve personally, or by registered or certified
  mail, a written notice containing  a  description  of  such  land  under
  water,  together  with  the  name and address of the applicant, upon all
  owners of waterfront land  within  three  hundred  feet  from  the  side
  boundaries  of the upland of the applicant.  For purposes of identifying
  such owners of waterfront land, the latest completed assessment roll may
  be used in lieu of title search.  The  applicant  shall  file  with  the
  commissioner  proof of service of such notice at least twenty days prior
  to the date of application. However for the purposes of jurisdiction and
  the validity of any grant issued under this section, the  commissioner's
  finding  that the notice requirements of this section have been complied
  with is final and conclusive.




   § 78. Failure  to  comply  with conditions of grant; annulment.  On or
  before the tenth day of January in each year the commissioner of general
  services shall examine the records of all grants of land under water for
  which patents  shall  have  been  issued  containing  conditions  to  be
  complied  with  within  fixed  period  of  time  after the issue of such
  patents and make a list of all such grants containing such conditions of
  which the periods for performance have expired. It  shall  thereupon  be
  the   duty   of  the  commissioner  of  general  services  to  cause  an
  investigation to be made without delay for the purpose  of  ascertaining
  whether  or  not compliance with the conditions contained in such grants
  shall  have  been  had,   and   he   shall   report   thereon   to   the
  attorney-general.  It shall be the duty of the attorney-general to begin
  actions against all such patentees or their successors  in  interest  or
  assigns  for  the annulment of all patents the conditions of which shall
  be found not to have been complied with within the period fixed in  such
  grants for compliance.




   § 80. Definitions.  As used in this article:
    1.  "Gold mine" means a mineral deposit in which the total sales value
  of the gold is more than fifty per centum of  the  value  of  all  other
  minerals associated or occurring with the gold in the mine.
    2.  "Silver  mine"  means  a  mineral deposit in which the total sales
  value of the silver is more than fifty per centum of the  value  of  all
  other minerals associated or occurring with the silver in the mine.
    3.  "Minerals"  means  all  minerals  and rocks, more particularly any
  inorganic substance which can be extracted  from  the  earth,  excepting
  gas, oil and water.
    4.  "State  lands" means all lands now or hereafter owned by the state
  of New York except lands in the forest preserve as  defined  by  section
  sixty-three of the conservation law.
    5.  "Filer"  means  the  person  filing  a notice of discovery, or his
  heirs, distributees, representatives or successors in interest.




   § 81. Minerals  subject  to  state  ownership; exploration of mines on
  state lands.  1. The following minerals are the property of  the  people
  of the state of New York in their right of sovereignty:
    (a) All deposits of gold and silver in or upon private lands and lands
  belonging  to  the  state heretofore or hereafter discovered within this
  state.
    (b) All deposits of  minerals  and  fossils  heretofore  or  hereafter
  discovered  in or upon any lands belonging to the people of the state of
  New York.
    2. The commissioner of general services may, upon written  application
  by  any  citizen of the United States, issue to such applicant a permit,
  consent, or  lease  of  such  duration  as  the  commissioner  may  deem
  advisable,  upon  such  terms  and  conditions as the commissioner shall
  determine, to enter upon state lands, for the purpose of  exploring  for
  mines  and  minerals  or  for  the purpose of breaking up such lands and
  working any mine or extracting any mineral in such lands.
    In the case of state lands other than unappropriated state lands,  the
  state  department, agency, commission or institution having jurisdiction
  over such lands shall  receive  notice  from  the  commissioner  of  any
  application to explore, break-up or mine, and shall have a period of not
  less  than thirty days to report thereon in writing to the commissioner,
  and no permit, consent or lease shall be issued until  such  report  has
  been  received  or  the  thirty day period has expired, and shall not be
  effective until approved by the governor.




   § 82. Notice  of discovery; filing; fee; bounty to discoverer; royalty
  to state.  1. Any person discovering a mine or deposit of gold or silver
  in or upon private lands within this  state,  and  any  citizen  of  the
  United  States  discovering  a mine or deposit of any mineral in or upon
  state lands may work the same subject to the provisions of this  article
  but  not  until  he  files  written  notice  of  such discovery with the
  secretary of state, which notice shall be indexed and  registered  in  a
  permanent  record  to be kept by such secretary, describing particularly
  the nature and situation of such mine or minerals.
    2. Notices filed pursuant to this section shall be in such form as the
  secretary of state  shall  prescribe  and  shall  contain,  among  other
  things, the following information:
    (a) The name and address of the filer.
    (b) The name of the owner of the land.
    (c)  An accurate description together with a map made on tracing cloth
  with india ink of the land against which the notice is  filed,  in  form
  sufficient for the convenient location of the land, which land shall, so
  far  as practicable, be of equal length and width and shall comprise not
  more than forty acres.
    (d) A statement subscribed by the filer and affirmed by him to be true
  under the penalties of perjury that he has read or knows the  provisions
  of  this  article  and  is  familiar  with  the  conditions to be by him
  performed precedent to the acquisition, continuation and preservation of
  any rights flowing from his filing of such notice.
    3. A fee of fifty dollars shall be paid to the secretary of state with
  each such notice.
    4. The filer shall have the sole benefit of minerals extracted from  a
  mine or deposit on state land on the payment to the state of such annual
  rental  and  such  royalty as the commissioner shall deem reasonable and
  proper provided, however, that the minimum royalty  shall  not  be  less
  than  two per centum of the market value of all such minerals. The filer
  shall be exempted from paying a royalty to the people of  the  state  on
  the  market value of all gold and silver extracted from a gold mine or a
  silver mine on private lands for a term of five years under  notices  of
  discovery  filed on or after April sixteen, nineteen hundred forty-five,
  to be computed from the date of filing of the notice of  discovery;  and
  after  the expiration of such term, the filer shall pay to the people of
  the state a royalty of one per  centum  of  the  market  value  of  such
  products.
    A  statement  of  all  minerals extracted from the premises covered by
  notice of discovery, together with the market value  thereof,  shall  be
  made  within  six  months  from  the  time  such products shall first be
  extracted,  and   semi-annually   thereafter,   under   oath,   to   the
  commissioner,  and  payments of such royalty shall be made semi-annually
  to the commissioner at the time of making of such statement of  minerals
  extracted.  Such  payments of royalty shall thereafter be transmitted to
  the state department of taxation and finance by  the  commissioner.  Any
  wilful  falsehood in the contents of such statement made by the filer to
  the commissioner shall work a forfeiture to the state of  the  value  of
  the  whole  amount extracted during the period covered by such statement
  and he shall be immediately liable to the  state  for  payment  of  said
  amount.  Upon  failure to make the statement of minerals extracted, when
  due, and the  payments  of  royalty,  when  due,  the  commissioner  may
  terminate  all  rights  to  explore  and  mine in the manner hereinafter
  provided. From time to time the legislature may provide for a  different
  rate  of compensation to be paid to the state or for other conditions or
  standards governing the exercise of the right to  explore  for  or  mine
  minerals on state lands or gold and silver on private lands.


   5.  The  filer  shall immediately notify the secretary of state of any
  change in his address or of his interest in his rights under his  notice
  of  discovery,  the manner in which such change of interest is effected,
  and the name and address of any successor or successors to his interest,
  in  whole or in part. Such notice shall be in writing and duly sworn to.
  In the event no such notice is received by the secretary of  state,  any
  notice  of  default  as  herein provided for, mailed by the secretary of
  state to the filer at the last known address, shall be binding upon  all
  parties in interest for all purposes.




   § 83. Entry  upon  lands to work mines; effect of notice.  1.  Nothing
  contained in this article shall affect any right heretofore  granted  by
  special  act  of  the  legislature  nor  affect the terms of any consent
  heretofore given by the commissioner  of  general  services  to  persons
  having  discovered  deposits  of minerals but any such person shall upon
  the taking effect of this act be otherwise subject to and bound  by  the
  provisions of this article; nor give any person a right to enter upon or
  break up the lands of any other persons, or of the state, or to work any
  mine  in  such lands, unless and until there shall have been recorded in
  the office of the clerk of the county in which such lands are located or
  of the register, if the recording officer in such county is a  register,
  the  written and duly acknowledged consent of the owner thereof, or when
  the lands belong to the state, a certified copy of the consent given  by
  the  commissioner  pursuant  to subdivision two of section eighty-one of
  this article, upon such terms and  conditions  as  such  owner  or  said
  commissioner,  as the case may be, may make and specify in such consent.
  Permission to erect buildings for working mines upon state lands may  be
  given  by the commissioner, when such commissioner is satisfied that the
  erection or occupation of such buildings will not be detrimental to  the
  interests  of  the  state.  Nothing  in this article shall authorize any
  person working a mine upon state lands to  cut  or  destroy  any  timber
  whatever  except such trees as it may be actually necessary to remove in
  order to uncover or to erect structures upon or  make  a  road  to  such
  mine,  or  to provide space for such buildings and for mine tailings and
  the like. For each tree measuring four inches or more in diameter  at  a
  height  of  one  foot  from the ground, which shall be so cut, the party
  operating the mine shall pay into the state  treasury  the  sum  of  one
  dollar.
    2.  The  filing  of  notice  of  discovery  on  lands other than those
  belonging to the state gives one so filing no right of property in  such
  lands  or  the mines or minerals therein, nor any lien thereon. All such
  rights flow solely from the owner of such lands or those  holding  under
  him except that, in the event that the mines or minerals thereon consist
  of  gold  or  silver,  all rights to explore, mine or work flow from the
  state acting by the commissioner as in the case of  lands  belonging  to
  the state subject to the above said written consent of the owner.




   § 84. Mining  rights; regulations; continuation; termination.  1.  All
  rights to explore for or extract minerals from a mine  or  deposit  that
  have  heretofore arisen by reason of the filing of a notice of discovery
  or by reason of the issuance of a permit or consent by the  commissioner
  of  general services under this article or under former article seven or
  which shall hereafter arise by reason of  the  filing  of  a  notice  of
  discovery  or  the  issuance  of a permit or consent by the commissioner
  under this article shall expire as to  those  heretofore  filed  at  the
  expiration  of  thirty months from the effective date of this act and as
  to those hereafter filed at the expiration of  thirty  months  from  the
  date  of filing of notice unless the person claiming under any notice so
  filed and his predecessors, if any, in interest shall have  expended  in
  each of the two years first elapsed in the said thirty months' period at
  least  two  hundred  fifty dollars in respect to each forty acres of the
  lands as to which notice was filed, in  the  exploration  for  mines  or
  minerals  or  in  operations relating to or preliminary to the mining of
  such lands or in both such explorations and mining, and shall have  made
  statements  of  the  amounts  of  minerals,  if any, extracted from such
  mines, to the commissioner, and shall have paid a royalty,  if  due,  on
  the  market  value of such minerals to the commissioner as prescribed in
  this article. Where a number  of  contiguous  forty  acre  parcels,  the
  mining  rights in which are owned in common, comprise a group, the total
  expenditure made for such group, whether or not such group  is  made  up
  entirely  of state land or state land and private land, may be allocated
  and credited  to  each  such  forty  acre  parcel  for  the  purpose  of
  determining  compliance  with  this  section,  notwithstanding that such
  expenditure may have been made on only one or more parcels in such group
  and not on every forty acre parcel therein, providing however that  such
  total  expenditure  must  be  at  least  equal  to  the  required  total
  expenditure of two hundred fifty dollars for each forty acre  parcel  in
  such group.
    2. Such right to explore or mine shall continue for successive periods
  each of thirty months, provided always that the requirements for minimum
  annual  expenditures with respect to the land affected by such notice of
  discovery as provided in subdivision  one  of  this  section  have  been
  complied   with  in  each  preceding  thirty  months'  period,  and  the
  statements of minerals, if any, extracted from such mine have been  made
  to  the  commissioner  and  royalty, if due, paid to the commissioner as
  required in this article.
    3. The proof of the making of such expenditures shall be submitted  to
  the  state  geologist,  in  such form as he may require, or, if minerals
  have been extracted, shall be submitted to  the  commissioner  with  the
  statement  of  the  amounts  of  minerals so extracted, on or before the
  thirtieth day after the last day of the first two  years  of  each  such
  thirty months' period.
    4. Failure to comply with any or all of the provisions of this article
  relating  to  the  statements  of  minerals  extracted,  the payments of
  royalty, expenditures and  proof  of  expenditures  shall  be  deemed  a
  default   in   the  performance  of  the  conditions  essential  to  the
  continuation of the rights of the  filer.  The  commissioner  shall,  at
  least  ninety days prior to the expiration of the current thirty months'
  period, as to any filer who is in default, mail to  such  filer  at  his
  last  address  known  to  the  commissioner, a notice to the effect that
  there has been default in the performance of the conditions essential to
  the continuation of the rights of the filer and that  such  rights  will
  expire  at  the end of the current thirty months' period, specifying the
  date. The filer may before the expiration of said thirty-months'  period
  file with the commissioner a petition for the right to appear before him


 to  establish the fact of compliance with this article. Upon the receipt
  of such petition, the commissioner shall designate a time and place  for
  a  hearing  thereon  and  advise  the filer and the state geologist. If,
  after  such  hearing,  the  commissioner  shall  be  satisfied  that the
  provisions of this article have been performed by the filer, or shall be
  satisfied by reasons or proof submitted that there  is  good  cause  for
  failure  to  comply  with  the provisions of this article, he shall make
  proper record or note of such fact in his office; and in his  discretion
  the rights under such filing shall then continue for a succeeding period
  of   thirty  months  from  the  expiration  of  the  current  period  of
  effectiveness.  If such filer shall not file  such  petition,  with  the
  commissioner,  or  having  filed  such  petition,  shall not satisfy the
  commissioner that he has performed the conditions stated in this article
  for the continuation of rights under a notice of  discovery,  then  such
  rights  shall  be  deemed  terminated as of the last day of such current
  thirty months' period.   The commissioner shall make  proper  record  or
  note in his office of the expiration of such rights.






   § 85. Rules and regulations.  The commissioner of general services may
  prescribe  the  form  and  contents  of all notices provided for by this
  article and may, from time to time, make, adopt and enforce  such  rules
  and  regulations,  not  inconsistent  with  this article, as he may deem
  necessary or proper for the administration of this article.




   § 90. Accelerating or impeding flow of mineral waters.  Pumping, or by
  any  artificial  contrivance  whatsoever  in any manner accelerating the
  natural flow, or producing an unnatural flow of that  class  of  mineral
  waters  holding  in  solution  natural  mineral  salts  and an excess of
  carbonic acid gas from any well made by  boring  or  drilling  into  the
  rock,  or  pumping,  or  by any artificial contrivance whatsoever in any
  manner accelerating the natural flow or producing an unnatural flow,  of
  natural  carbonic acid gas issuing from or contained in any well made by
  boring or drilling into the rock, is hereby  declared  to  be  unlawful.
  Pumping,  or  by  any  artificial  contrivance  whatsoever in any manner
  accelerating the natural flow, or producing an unnatural flow,  of  that
  class of mineral waters holding in solution natural mineral salts and an
  excess  of  carbonic  acid  gas from any well made by boring or drilling
  into the rock, or pumping, or by any artificial  contrivance  whatsoever
  in  any  manner accelerating the natural flow, or producing an unnatural
  flow of, natural carbonic acid gas issuing from or contained in any well
  made by boring or drilling into the rock, by reason whereof the  natural
  flow  from any mineral spring or any mineral well belonging to any other
  person or corporation, is impeded,  retarded,  diminished,  diverted  or
  endangered, or the quality of its waters is impaired, or the quantity of
  its  carbonic  acid  gas  or  mineral  ingredients diminished, is hereby
  declared to be unlawful. Pumping, or  otherwise  drawing  by  artificial
  appliance  from  any well made by boring or drilling into the rock, that
  class of mineral waters holding in solution natural mineral salts and an
  excess  of  carbonic  acid  gas,  or  pumping,  or  by  any   artificial
  contrivance  whatsoever  in  any  manner producing an unnatural flow of,
  carbonic acid gas issuing from or contained in any well made  by  boring
  or  drilling  into  the rock, for the purpose of extracting, collecting,
  compressing, liquefying or vending such gas  as  a  commodity  otherwise
  than  in  connection  with  the  mineral  water  and  the  other mineral
  ingredients with which it was  associated,  is  hereby  declared  to  be
  unlawful.  The  doing of any act or thing whatsoever whereby the natural
  flow from any spring or well of that class of mineral waters holding  in
  solution  natural  mineral  salts and an excess of carbonic acid gas, is
  impeded, retarded, diminished, diverted or endangered, or the quality of
  its waters is impaired, or the quantity of  its  carbonic  acid  gas  or
  mineral ingredients diminished, is hereby declared to be unlawful.




   § 91. Action  to  restrain.   Any citizen of the state may maintain an
  action to restrain any person or corporation from committing any of  the
  unlawful  acts  specified in section ninety of this chapter, in any city
  or town in which said citizen is assessed for and is liable to  pay,  or
  within one year before the commencement of the action has paid, a tax.
    The  attorney-general  may  at  any  time,  in  the  exercise  of  his
  discretion, bring and maintain an action in the name of  the  people  of
  the state of New York, to restrain any person or corporation from any of
  the unlawful acts specified in section ninety of this chapter.  It shall
  be  the  duty of the attorney-general to institute and prosecute such an
  action, upon the written request of ten citizens of this state  who  are
  assessed for taxes therein and whose aggregate assessments amount to not
  less  than  ten thousand dollars, and who shall state, in writing, facts
  and circumstances showing any such unlawful act  or  acts  and  give  an
  undertaking  with  sureties  to  be approved by a justice of the supreme
  court to indemnify the people against the costs of such action.




   § 92. Limitation  of article.  Nothing in this article contained shall
  be construed to affect the Onondaga salt springs reservation, located in
  Onondaga county, or the springs of any county adjacent thereto.




   § 92-a. Waste  of  mineral  waters.    1.  The  waste of that class of
  mineral waters holding in solution natural mineral salts and  an  excess
  of carbonic acid gas is hereby declared to be unlawful.
    2.  Waste  defined. The permitting of the flow or escape of that class
  of mineral waters defined in section ninety of  this  article  shall  be
  deemed a waste thereof, unless such flow shall be necessary to the care,
  protection  or preservation of the spring or well, or for the purpose of
  the actual use of the owner or occupant of the land or others  with  his
  consent,  including  the  sale  or commercial use of the waters or gases
  flowing therefrom. The permitting of such flow, except for the immediate
  use or sale of such waters or gases or  the  immediate  service  to  the
  public,  for  a  longer  period than twenty-four hours in any one month,
  shall be presumptive evidence of the waste thereof, unless authorized by
  the  commissioner  of  parks  and  recreation  as  provided  in  section
  ninety-two-b of this article.




   § 92-b. Permits  authorizing  flow  of  springs.   The commissioner of
  parks and recreation may issue an annual permit permitting the  flow  of
  such  spring  in  such  amount  and  at  such times as such permit shall
  specify.  No permit shall be issued unless it appears that the  flow  of
  such  spring will not result in the depletion of the amount of flow, gas
  or mineral content of the spring for which a permit is asked, or of  any
  other  like  spring,  nor  unless  it also appears that the flow of said
  spring is of scenic  interest  or  that  the  flow  of  such  spring  is
  necessary to regulate or protect the flow of neighboring springs.  If at
  any  time  it  satisfactorily  appears  to the commissioner of parks and
  recreation that the required conditions for issuing a permit  no  longer
  exist, such permit may be revoked upon ten days notice.




   § 92-c. Actions  to  restrain  violations of law; Saratoga county.  In
  addition to those persons authorized to bring actions  pursuant  to  the
  provisions   of  section  ninety-one,  the  commissioner  of  parks  and
  recreation may maintain an action to restrain any person or  corporation
  from  committing  any of the unlawful acts specified in sections ninety,
  ninety-two-a and ninety-two-b herein, provided such acts  are  committed
  within the county of Saratoga.




   § 138. When    attorney-general    may    maintain   action.       The
  attorney-general  may  maintain   an   action   to   vacate   or   annul
  letters-patent,  granted  by  the  people of the state, in either of the
  following cases:
    1. Where they were obtained by means of a  fraudulent  suggestion,  or
  concealment  of  a  material  fact,  made  by,  or with the knowledge or
  consent of, the person to whom they were issued.
    2. Where they were issued in ignorance of a material fact, or  through
  mistake.
    3.  Where  the  patentee,  or  those  claiming under him, have done or
  admitted an act, in violation of the terms and conditions upon which the
  letters-patent were granted, or have, by any other means, forfeited  the
  interest acquired under the same.
    Whenever  the attorney-general has good reason to believe that any act
  or omission, specified in this section, can  be  proved,  and  that  the
  person  to  be  made  defendant has no sufficient legal defence, he must
  commence such an action.




   § 139. Jury  trial.  All the issues of fact in an action brought under
  this article are triable of right by a jury.




   § 139-a. Judgment-roll  and effect of judgment.  Where final judgment,
  vacating or annulling letters-patent, is rendered in an action,  brought
  as  prescribed  in  the  last section, the attorney-general must cause a
  copy of the judgment-roll to be forthwith filed in  the  office  of  the
  commissioner  of general services, who must make an entry in his records
  stating the substance and effect of the judgment, and the time when  the
  judgment-roll   was  filed.     The  real  property,  granted  by  those
  letters-patent, may thereafter be disposed of by the commissioner, as if
  the letters-patent had not been issued.




   § 139-b. Transcript  to be filed in each county where real property is
  situated.  Immediately after making the entry  prescribed  in  the  last
  section,  the commissioner of general services must transmit a certified
  transcript thereof to the clerk, or the register, as the case  requires,
  of  each  county, in which the real property affected by the judgment is
  situated.    The  clerk  or  register  must  file  it;   and,   if   the
  letters-patent  are recorded in his office, he must note the contents of
  the transcript in the margin of the record.






	

   § 160. Construction.    This  chapter  shall  not  limit or modify the
  provisions of the railroad law relating to the grant or acquisition, for
  railroad purposes, of any lands belonging to the people  of  the  state,
  except  that  no  railroad  corporation  may  condemn  any  canal  lands
  abandoned pursuant to the provisions of article  four  of  this  chapter
  until  after  they have been sold and conveyed in the manner provided by
  this chapter.




   § 141. Laws  repealed.   Of the laws enumerated in the schedule hereto
  annexed, that portion specified in the last column is hereby repealed.




   § 142. When   to   take  effect.    This  chapter  shall  take  effect
  immediately.