Section  1.  Short title. This chapter shall be known as the "Personal
  Property Law."




   §  30.  Definitions.  As  used  in  this  article, the term "transfer"
  includes sale, assignment, conveyance,  deed  and  gift,  and  the  term
  "agreement" includes promise and undertaking.




   §  37.  Fraudulent  intent  a  question  of  fact. The question of the
  existence of fraudulent intent in cases arising under this article, is a
  question of fact and not of law.




   § 38. Transfers or charges without consideration. A transfer or charge
  shall  not  be  adjudged  fraudulent as against creditors or purchasers,
  solely  on  the  ground  that  it  was  not  founded   on   a   valuable
  consideration.




   §  39.  Successors  to rights of creditors and purchasers. A transfer,
  charge, sale or assignment, or proceeding declared by this  article,  to
  be  void, as against creditors or purchasers, is equally void as against
  the heirs, successors, personal representatives  or  assignees  of  such
  creditors or purchasers.




   § 40. Bona fide purchasers. This article does not affect or impair the
  title  of  a  purchaser  or  incumbrancer  for a valuable consideration,
  unless it appear that such purchaser or incumbrancer had previous notice
  of the fraudulent intent of  his  immediate  vendor,  or  of  the  fraud
  rendering void the title of such vendor.




   §  45-a.  Salary  or  earnings  of  public  officer or employee. 1. No
  assignment of, or power of  attorney  to  collect  or  other  instrument
  affecting, the whole or any part of his salary or earnings by an officer
  or  employee  of the state or of any political subdivision thereof or of
  any public authority or public  corporation,  or  of  any  board,  body,
  office  or  agency supported by public funds, unless approved in writing
  by the head of the department,  authority,  court,  corporation,  board,
  body,  office  or  agency in which such officer or employee is employed,
  and unless given either as security for or as a manner or method of  the
  repayment  of,  money  actually  advanced  to  or at the request of such
  officer or employee by any bank, trust company  or  credit  union  doing
  business  in  the State of New York, shall in any way operate to prevent
  the payment of such salary or  earnings  directly  to  such  officer  or
  employee.  In  the  event  of  the  payment  of  such salary or earnings
  directly to such officer or employee, notwithstanding the  existence  of
  an  assignment  of,  or power of attorney to collect or other instrument
  affecting, the whole or part thereof, which was not approved by the head
  of the department, authority, court, corporation, board, body, office or
  agency in which such officer or employee is employed, or which  was  not
  given  in  favor  of  any  such  bank,  trust company or credit union as
  hereinabove stated, no person shall have any cause  of  action  therefor
  against  the  state  or  such  political  subdivision  thereof  or  such
  authority, court, corporation, board, body, office  or  agency  for  the
  recovery  of  any moneys by virtue of such assignment, power of attorney
  to collect or other instrument which was not so approved, or  which  was
  not given in favor of any such bank, trust company or credit union.
    2.  Any  such  assignment, power of attorney or other instrument which
  may be filed  hereafter  shall  contain  the  name  of  the  officer  or
  employee,  his  title  or position and the department, authority, court,
  corporation, board, body, bureau, agency, office and subdivision thereof
  in which he is employed.
    3. The state or any political subdivision thereof  or  any  authority,
  court,  corporation,  board,  body,  office  or  agency  to  which  such
  assignment, power of attorney or other instrument shall be presented for
  filing, shall be entitled to receive the sum  of  two  dollars.  In  the
  event,  however,  that  such  assignment,  power  of  attorney  or other
  instrument  contains  a  provision  to  the  effect  that  the  same  is
  ineffective   unless   subsequent   written  notice  is  given  to  make
  deductions, the filing fee shall be fifty cents; and the filing  fee  of
  any  subsequent written notice to make deductions in accordance with the
  terms of any such assignment, power  of  attorney  or  other  instrument
  shall be one dollar and fifty cents.  The filing fee of any other notice
  or  paper  relating  to  any such assignment, power of attorney or other
  instrument shall be one dollar.




   §  46.  Definitions.  In  this  article  unless the context or subject
  matter otherwise requires:
    1. "Assignment" means any assignment of or order for  payment  of  any
  earnings,  whether given outright or as security. "Assignment" shall not
  include a payroll deduction, nor any part of earnings required by law to
  be withheld in payment of taxes, nor such sums as may be deducted by the
  employer for payment to a labor union or to a trust fund for the benefit
  of employees, pursuant to agreement in writing either with the  employee
  or with a labor union of which the employee is a member.
    2.  "Payroll  deductions"  means  only such sums as an employee may in
  writing authorize his employer to pay  out  on  the  employee's  behalf,
  where the authorization is revocable, and does not purport to create any
  enforceable right in any third party.
    3.   "Earnings"   means  any  salary,  wages,  commissions,  or  other
  compensation for services. "Future earnings" means earnings which become
  payable by an employer, to the assignor or persons claiming  under  him,
  after the execution of the instrument of assignment.
    4.  "Indebtedness"  means  any  obligation  to  pay  money, whether as
  principal, guarantor or surety, including such obligations  arising  out
  of  loans, purchases of real or personal property, services rendered, or
  any other transaction whatsoever.
    5. "Employer" means any person owing earnings to an assignor,  whether
  such earnings were due when the assignment was executed, or later became
  due,  and  whether  the  employment  was existing when an assignment was
  made, or did not commence until later.
    6. "Assignor" means one who executes an assignment.
    7.  "Assignee"  means  one  to  whom  any  sum  is  payable  under  an
  assignment.
    8.   "Garnishment"   means   any   levy   on   execution,  attachment,
  sequestration, proceedings to enforce a judgment or other legal  process
  by  which  a  creditor or other claimant to any portion of an employee's
  earnings stops payment by an employer to an employee or obtains  payment
  due   the  creditor.  "Garnishment"  shall  not  include  an  order  for
  installment payments to a judgment creditor.




   §  46-a. No implied repeal. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to
  limit any other statutory provision. Any express statutory provision, in
  force at the time this article takes effect, and which  is  inconsistent
  with any provision of this article, shall prevail.




   § 46-b. Assignments of future earnings collectible only as prescribed.
  Assignments  of  future earnings shall be collectible only as prescribed
  in sections forty-eight to forty-eight-d, inclusive, of this chapter.




   §  46-c.  Formal  requisites  of assignments of less than one thousand
  dollars and of assignments  securing  certain  guarantees  amounting  to
  fifteen  hundred  dollars  or  less.  No  assignment of future earnings,
  securing or relating to  any  indebtedness  aggregating  less  than  one
  thousand dollars, shall be valid for any purpose whatsoever unless:
    (a)   such  assignment  shall  be  contained  in  a  separate  written
  instrument in which all printed matter is in at least eight  point  type
  and  which  shall  have written or printed thereon in a size equal to at
  least ten point bold type the following  title:  "Assignment  of  Wages,
  Salary,  Commissions or other Compensation for Services," and shall have
  written or printed at the bottom thereof just above the  place  reserved
  for  the signature of the assignor in a size equal to at least ten point
  bold type the following:  "This  is  an  Assignment  of  Wages,  Salary,
  Commissions or Other Compensation for Services";
    (b)  such  assignment  shall,  either  in  its  text  or  in a writing
  permanently attached thereto, identify specifically and  describe  fully
  the  transaction  to  which  it relates, said description to include the
  name and address of the assignee, the identity of the  merchandise  sold
  or  services  rendered or other basis of the indebtedness secured by, or
  consideration given for the assignment, and the date  on  and  place  at
  which payments are to be made; and on the face or back of the instrument
  there   shall   be  a  summary  of  sections  forty-six-c,  forty-six-e,
  forty-six-f, forty-seven-e, forty-eight,  forty-eight-a,  forty-eight-b,
  forty-eight-c and forty-nine of the personal property law;
    (c)  such  assignment,  if given as security, is security only for the
  transaction  or  series  of  transactions  identified  specifically  and
  described  therein, or a renewal thereof, and no other valid and legally
  enforceable assignment exists in connection with the same transaction or
  series  of  transactions;  provided,  however,  that  nothing  in   this
  paragraph  shall  invalidate  an  assignment securing a guarantee of the
  payment of the purchase price of goods, wares or  merchandise  amounting
  to  fifteen  hundred  dollars  or  less  sold  for  a  use  other than a
  commercial  or  business  use,  notwithstanding  the  fact   that   such
  assignment   secures   subsequent   transactions  in  addition  to  that
  originally secured, where the liability of the guarantor is limited to a
  period of two years from the date  of  the  assignment,  and  where  the
  assignment  sets  forth the maximum amount for which the guarantor shall
  be liable; provided further that no assignment of future earnings  shall
  be  valid  with respect to any transaction or series of transactions for
  the purchase of goods, wares or  merchandise  for  a  price  of  fifteen
  hundred  dollars  or  less  sold  for  a  use other than a commercial or
  business use, when such assignment is executed by a guarantor or by  one
  of  two  or  more  purchasers,  unless  such goods are purchased for the
  common use of the assignor and the purchaser or co-purchaser.




   §  46-d.  Guarantee  of  certain  purchases  secured  by assignment of
  earnings.  No guarantee given to the seller to  secure  the  payment  of
  goods, wares or merchandise amounting to fifteen hundred dollars or less
  sold for any use other than a commercial or business use, the payment of
  which  is  secured  by  an assignment of future earnings, shall be valid
  unless  such  instrument  of  guarantee  identifies   specifically   and
  describes  fully  the  transaction or series of transactions secured. If
  the instrument of guarantee is given to secure  subsequent  transactions
  in addition to the transaction or series of transactions secured by such
  assignment,  the  liability  of  the  guarantor under such instrument of
  guarantee as to subsequent transactions shall be limited to transactions
  within a period of two years from the date of its execution,  and  shall
  set  forth  the  maximum amount for which the guarantor shall be liable.
  Each instrument of guarantee shall be executed  in  duplicate,  and  one
  copy shall be given to the guarantor immediately upon its execution.




   §  46-e.  Personal  execution  of  assignment by assignor; delivery of
  copies of papers.  No assignment of future earnings shall be  valid  for
  any  purpose  whatever  unless such assignment is personally executed by
  the assignor. A copy thereof and of any papers attached thereto together
  with a copy or copies of any papers executed by the assignor  pertaining
  to the transaction or series of transactions described in the assignment
  shall  be delivered to the assignor before such assignment is filed with
  the employer.




   §  46-f.  Limit  on  interest and other charges. Except as provided in
  article nine of the banking law, no person shall directly or  indirectly
  receive  or  accept,  whether  by discount or otherwise, for the use and
  sale of his personal credit or for making or continuing any  advance  or
  loan  of money (1) in anticipation of earnings assigned outright, or (2)
  on the security of an assignment of any earnings assigned as security, a
  greater sum than at the rate of eighteen per centum  per  annum  on  the
  amount  of  such  loan  or  advance,  either  as  a  bonus,  interest or
  otherwise, or under the guise of a charge for investigating  the  status
  of  a  person applying for such loan or advance, or drawing of papers or
  other service in connection with  such  loan  or  advance,  except  such
  charges as are now permitted by section 5-531 of the general obligations
  law.  Any  assignment,  whether  outright  or as security, which is made
  wholly or partly in consideration of  or  as  security  for  a  loan  or
  advance  which violates this section, shall be void, and invalid for any
  purpose whatsoever. Every person, firm,  corporation,  director,  agent,
  officer  or  member  thereof  who  shall  violate  any provision of this
  section, directly or indirectly, or assent to such  violation  shall  be
  guilty of a misdemeanor.




   § 47. Public filing of assignment before filing with employer.  Except
  as  provided  in  section  forty-nine  of this chapter, an assignment of
  future earnings or a true copy thereof, must be filed  with  the  county
  clerk as provided for in section forty-seven-a before such assignment or
  a copy thereof is filed with the assignor's employer.




   §  47-a.  Place  of filing. An assignment of future earnings or a true
  copy thereof authenticated by a notary public or commissioner of  deeds,
  together  with  an  itemized statement setting forth the amount then due
  the assignee and the date and amount of payments theretofore  made  upon
  the  indebtedness, may be filed in the office of the county clerk of the
  county in which the assignor resides at the time of the filing  thereof,
  if  he  resides within the state, and if he resides without the state or
  his residence is unknown, in the county where the assignor  is  employed
  at  the time of the filing thereof.  If the assignor is employed without
  the state and his residence is without the  state  or  is  unknown,  the
  assignment or authenticated true copy thereof and accompanying statement
  may be filed in the county where the assignor resided at the time of the
  execution thereof.




   §  47-b.  Filing,  entering  and indexing. 1. The filing officer shall
  mark upon the assignment or true copy thereof filed with him the date of
  its filing and shall file such assignment or true copy  thereof  in  his
  office  for public inspection. He shall keep a separate book in which he
  shall enter the names of the assignor and  assignee,  the  date  of  its
  filing,  its  filing  number and the date of cancellation thereof, or of
  its vacation  by  order  of  the  court.  Such  book  shall  be  indexed
  alphabetically  under  the  names  and  changed  names,  if any, of both
  assignor and assignee.
    2.  A  county  clerk  may  adopt  a  new  indexing  system   utilizing
  electro-mechanical, electronic or any other method he deems suitable for
  maintaining the indexes.




   §  47-c.  Refiling.  The  filing  of  assignments shall be valid for a
  period of two years only.  The validity of the filing may in  each  case
  be  extended for successive additional periods of one year from the date
  of refiling by filing in the office of the county clerk of the county in
  which the original assignment or duly  authenticated  copy  thereof  was
  filed  a  true  copy  of the original assignment within thirty days next
  preceding the expiration of  each  period,  with  a  statement  attached
  signed  and verified by or on behalf of the assignee, setting forth that
  the assignment is in force and stating the amount remaining unpaid. Such
  copy, with statement attached, shall be filed and entered  in  the  same
  manner  as an assignment or copy thereof filed and entered for the first
  time, and the filing officer shall be entitled to a like fee as upon the
  original filing.




   §  47-d.  Cancellation of assignment. Upon the payment or satisfaction
  of the indebtedness, and upon written demand delivered personally or  by
  registered  mail  by  the  assignor,  the  assignee  shall  execute  and
  acknowledge or prove, and deliver to the assignor a certificate  setting
  forth  that  the  indebtedness  has been paid or otherwise satisfied and
  discharged. Such certificate must recite the date of the assignment, the
  names of the parties thereto, the amount of the  original  indebtedness,
  the   filing  number,  the  date  of  filing  thereof,  including  every
  assignment of said assignment, if any, specifying in the recital of each
  assignment the date thereof, the  names  of  the  parties  thereto,  the
  filing date and the serial number thereof.
    If  for  ten  days  after  such  demand  the assignee fails to mail or
  deliver such a statement  of  satisfaction,  he  shall  forfeit  to  the
  assignor  five  dollars,  and  be  liable for all damages suffered. Upon
  presentation of such statement of satisfaction the filing officer  shall
  file  the  same and note the cancellation of the assignment and the date
  thereof on the margin of the page where the assignment has been entered.




   §  47-e.  Vacating  of  an  assignment,  by  order  of  a court. 1. An
  assignment may be vacated by a judgment of a  court  of  record  upon  a
  special  proceeding  brought by the assignor, his employer or any person
  having an interest therein. Before such judgment  shall  be  granted  an
  order  to show cause and the petition upon which it was granted shall be
  served upon the assignee, specifying the grounds upon which such  relief
  is  sought and requiring the assignee to show cause, at a time and place
  specified therein, why the assignment should  not  be  vacated.  If  the
  application  is  made by a person other than the assignor, a copy of the
  order to show cause and the petition upon which it was granted shall  be
  served upon the assignor, as the court shall direct. Such order shall be
  returnable  at  a  special term of a court of record in the county where
  the assignment is filed, if it has been filed, or, whether  or  not  the
  assignment  has  been filed, in the county where the assignor resides or
  the county where the assignee resides, and shall be returnable at a time
  not less than eight days from the service thereof unless  the  court  to
  whom the application is made shall find that a greater or lesser time is
  appropriate in the circumstances.
    The  order  to  show  cause and the petition upon which it was granted
  shall be served upon the assignee either (1) by personal service, or (2)
  by leaving them at his or  its  place  of  business  with  a  person  of
  suitable  age  and  discretion  with  directions  to deliver them to the
  assignee and mailing a copy by certified mail to the  assignee  directed
  to  the  address  specified in the assignment or if none is specified in
  the assignment to his or its last known address, or (3) as the court may
  direct. Proof of such  service  shall  be  made  by  affidavit.  If  the
  assignee  is a co-partnership consisting of two or more partners service
  on one partner shall constitute service on the co-partnership.
    2. Upon presentation of a transcript of a judgment  pursuant  to  this
  section,  vacating  an  assignment,  and  upon  payment of fees provided
  therefor, a county clerk in whose office the assignment is  filed  shall
  file the transcript of the judgment and shall enter on the margin of the
  page  where  the  assignment  is  entered, and against the assignment to
  which the judgment relates, the words "Vacated by order of the court."
    3. This section  does  not  enlarge  the  territorial  limits  of  the
  jurisdiction of any court.
    4.  No  assignment purporting upon its face or otherwise shown to have
  been made in compliance with the direction of the court in an action  or
  proceeding in a family court or in a matrimonial action or proceeding in
  a  court  of  this  state  shall be vacated by an order pursuant to this
  section.
    5.  In  any  proceeding  under  this  section  the  court  shall  have
  jurisdiction  to consider any and all defenses to the assignment and the
  debt secured thereby. The court may grant such interim relief as may  be
  appropriate.  The  burden of proving the assignment and the debt secured
  thereby shall be on the assignee.




   §  48.  Notice to be mailed to assignor prior to filing with employer.
  1.  No assignment of future earnings shall be filed with the  assignor's
  employer  until  twenty  days  shall have elapsed after a written notice
  shall have been mailed to the assignor by certified mail, return receipt
  requested, addressed to his last known place of residence  stating  that
  unless  the amounts in default are paid within twenty days from the date
  of the mailing,  the  assignment  will  be  filed  with  the  assignor's
  employer.  If  the  aforesaid  notice  is returned undelivered it may be
  mailed to the assignor by  certified  mail,  return  receipt  requested,
  addressed to the assignor at the address where he is employed or, in the
  alternative, it may be served in the same manner as a summons.
    Such written notice shall not be mailed by the assignee until at least
  twenty-one  days  shall  have elapsed after default by the assignor in a
  payment due on the indebtedness and such written  notice  shall  contain
  substantially  the  following language: "Bring this notice with you when
  making any payment on account of your indebtedness and have the  payment
  endorsed on this notice."
    2.  If  a  payment in any amount is accepted by the assignee after the
  mailing of said notice and if the fact  of  such  payment  is  noted  in
  writing  by  the  assignee at the time of the acceptance of the payment,
  either upon the notice or upon some other paper bearing a  reference  to
  said  notice,  the assignor shall no longer be considered in default for
  the purpose of permitting an assignment to be filed with the  assignor's
  employer. In the event, however, of any subsequent default, the assignee
  may  file  the  assignment  upon  compliance  with the provisions of the
  preceding paragraph of this section  as  though  no  prior  default  had
  occurred.
    3.  The  written  notice  required  by subdivision one of this section
  shall be accompanied by copies of the papers required to be delivered by
  section forty-six-e of this article and by a written notice which  shall
  contain substantially the following language:
    "If  you  believe  that  you  have  a  defense  to  the aforesaid wage
  assignment or the debt secured thereby you are entitled to follow either
  of the following procedures designed as (a) and (b).
    (a) You are entitled  to  a  hearing  before  a  court  of  record  in
  accordance  with the provisions of section forty-seven-e of the personal
  property law which reads as follows:
  (insert provisions of section forty-seven-e  of  the  personal  property
  law)
    (b)  Within  ten  days  after receipt of the aforesaid notice, you are
  entitled to mail to the  assignee,  by  certified  mail  return  receipt
  requested,  a written notice containing your name, residence address and
  substantially the following language:
    'I (insert name) residing at (insert address)  hereby  affirm  that  I
  have  a bona fide defense to the claim in your notice dated (insert date
  of notice) and to the wage assignment given as security therefor,  based
  upon the following facts (state the facts constituting the basis of your
  defense)'"
    4.  Upon  receipt  of such notice the assignee shall be precluded from
  filing such wage assignment with the employer until it obtains an  order
  of  a  court  of  record  authorizing such filing. The assignee shall be
  entitled to institute a special proceeding  in  a  court  of  record  to
  obtain such an order. At least eight days' notice of the application for
  such  order  shall  be given to the assignor in the manner prescribed in
  subdivision one of this section and if a hearing is  held  the  assignor
  shall  have  all  the rights prescribed by section forty-seven-e of this
  article.




   §  48-a.  Manner  of  collection;  percentage  of earnings deductible;
  restriction against multiple deductions.  Subject to subdivision two  of
  this  section,  any  assignment  of future earnings shall be collectible
  from the assignor's employer  at  the  time  of  each  payment  of  such
  earnings  commencing  with  the  first  payment  thereof  made after the
  expiration of ten days from the date of filing with the  employer  of  a
  true  copy  of  such  assignment,  authenticated by a notary public or a
  commissioner of deeds, together with an itemized statement of the amount
  then due the assignee, which statement shall  set  forth  the  following
  information  (1)  the  date  and amount of each payment theretofore made
  upon the indebtedness and (2) in case public  filing  is  required,  the
  date  upon which such assignment or true copy thereof was filed with the
  filing officer as described in section forty-seven-a, of this chapter.
    2. The following limitations set forth in paragraphs (a), (b) and  (c)
  of  this  subdivision  shall  apply  to the collection of assignments of
  future earnings securing or relating  to  any  indebtedness  aggregating
  less than one thousand dollars;
    (a)  the  amount  collectible  in  any  month shall not exceed ten per
  centum of the assignor's future earnings payable in such month;
    (b) if at the time of the filing  with  the  employer  (1)  any  other
  assignment  of  future  earnings  is  subject  to  payment,  or  (2) any
  garnishment against such earnings or  order  against  the  assignor  for
  installment  payments  to  a  judgment  creditor, is in force, no amount
  shall be collectible while such other assignment is subject  to  payment
  or such garnishment or order is in force;
    (c)  no portion of future earnings shall be withheld from the assignor
  or paid to satisfy such assignment in whole or in part while any portion
  of the indebtedness secured by any valid assignment securing or relating
  to  an  indebtedness  aggregating  less  than  one   thousand   dollars,
  previously  filed  with  the  employer  in accordance with this section,
  shall remain unpaid.
    3. No portion of future earnings shall be withheld from  the  assignor
  or  paid to satisfy in whole or in part any subsequent garnishment while
  any portion of the indebtedness secured by any valid assignment securing
  or relating to  an  indebtedness  aggregating  less  than  one  thousand
  dollars  filed  with  the employer in accordance with this section shall
  remain unpaid, but nothing contained herein shall exempt the earnings of
  a judgment debtor from the  application  of  an  order  for  installment
  payments to a judgment creditor.




   §  48-b. Amount of exempt earnings. Notwithstanding anything contained
  in this article, no portion of the assignor's future earnings  shall  be
  withheld  by  reason  of any assignment, unless such earnings exceed the
  sum of eighty-five dollars per week.




   §  48-c. Assignment of future earnings by person unemployed; effect of
  loss of employment. If the assignor is not employed at the time he makes
  an assignment of future earnings, but is thereafter employed, his future
  earnings shall  nevertheless  become  collectible  by  the  assignee  as
  provided  in  this  article  upon the filing of the prescribed documents
  with the employer. No assignment of future earnings shall become invalid
  by reason of the cessation of employment, or  cessation  of  payment  of
  earnings,  but  shall  continue  in  effect,  and  may be applied to the
  payment of any future earnings from the same  or  other  employment,  in
  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  this  article,  so  long  as  the
  indebtedness secured by the assignment shall remain unpaid in  whole  or
  in  part. If the assignor is re-employed by the same employer before the
  expiration of ninety  days  from  the  termination  of  employment,  the
  assignment  shall  continue  to be collectible without further filing of
  papers. If the employee is re-employed on or  after  the  expiration  of
  such ninety days, the assignment shall again become collectible from the
  employer  as  provided in section forty-eight-a only after copies of the
  assignment and the other documents specified in such section  have  been
  filed with the employer following the re-employment.




   §  48-d.  Payroll  deductions  not included. Payroll deductions may be
  made by the employer notwithstanding any restriction  in  this  article,
  and  shall  be  deductible  in  addition  to the payments under any wage
  assignment permitted by this article; provided however that in any  case
  where payroll deductions and a payment due under an assignment will more
  than  equal  an  installment  of earnings due, the assignment shall have
  priority over any payroll deductions.




   §  49.  Certain provisions not applicable to banks, trust companies or
  credit unions. 1. The provisions of section forty-seven of this  article
  shall not be applicable to any bank, trust company or credit union doing
  business in the state of New York.
    2.  The provisions of section forty-eight of this article in so far as
  they require any delay by an assignee, before filing with the  employer,
  shall  not  apply  to  assignments  given either as security for or as a
  manner or method of the repayment of money actually advanced  to  or  at
  the  request  of the assignor by any bank, trust company or credit union
  doing business in the state of New York; provided, however,  that  every
  such  assignment  must  have  printed  on the face thereof the following
  words: "This assignment is executed as security for, or as a  manner  or
  method  of  the repayment of, money advanced by a bank, trust company or
  credit union doing  business  in  New  York."  No  assignment,  however,
  received  by  any  bank,  trust  company or credit union pursuant to any
  agreement between it and a person who has sold merchandise or  furnished
  services to, or at the request of, the assignor, shall be deemed to have
  been  given  as  security for, or as a manner or method of repayment of,
  money actually advanced to, or at the request of,  the  assignor  within
  the meaning of this section.




   §  49-a.  Statement  to be filed by lenders upon assignment. 1.  Every
  person, firm or corporation engaged in  or  seeking  to  engage  in  the
  business  of  lending  money  upon  security  of an assignment of, or of
  purchasing upon discount future or accrued earnings, shall file with the
  clerk of the county in which said person, firm or  corporation  has  its
  place   of  business  or  transacts  business  a  statement  under  oath
  containing the name and residence of the individual; or  in  case  of  a
  firm,  the  names  and  residences  of the partners; or in the case of a
  corporation, the names and residences of  the  officers  and  directors,
  managers  or trustees of such corporation; and the place or places where
  said business is transacted by such an individual, firm or  corporation.
  It  shall  be unlawful to engage in the business of lending money in the
  manner set forth in this section without,  prior  to  engaging  in  such
  business, filing a statement as provided in this section.
    2.  The  several county clerks of the state shall keep an alphabetical
  index of all persons, firms or corporations filing certificates provided
  for  in  this  section;  and  for  the  indexing  and  filing  of   such
  certificates, the fee shall be as provided in the civil practice law and
  rules. A copy of such certificate, duly certified to by the county clerk
  in whose office the same was filed, shall be presumptive evidence of the
  facts contained therein in all courts of the state.




   §  250. Exemption of exhibits at international exhibitions. No process
  of attachment, execution, sequestration, replevin, distress or any  kind
  of  seizure  shall  be  served  or  levied  upon articles, goods, wares,
  merchandise or property of any description while the same is enroute  to
  or  from,  or  while  on  exhibition  or  deposited by exhibitors at any
  international exhibition held under the auspices or supervision  of  the
  United  States,  within any city or county of this state, nor shall such
  property be subject to attachment, seizure, levy or sale, for any  cause
  whatever,  in  the  hands  of  the  authorities  of  such  exhibition or
  otherwise.




   §  251.  Definitions.  1.  The term "property" as used in this article
  means money, instruments payable, drawn or issued to bearer or to  cash,
  goods,   chattels   and   tangible  personal  property  other  than  (a)
  "instruments" as  defined  in  subdivision  two  of  this  section,  (b)
  animals,  (c)  wrecks  governed by the provisions of the navigation law,
  (d)  logs  and  other  property  governed  by  section   three   hundred
  twenty-three  of  the  town law and (e) vehicles governed by the vehicle
  and traffic law.
    2. The term "instrument" as used in this article means a check, draft,
  promissory  note,  bond,  bill  of  lading,  warehouse  receipt,   stock
  certificate  or other paper or document, other than those payable, drawn
  or issued to bearer  or  to  cash  and  other  than  money,  evidencing,
  representing  or  embodying a chose in action or a right with respect to
  property or a share, participation or other interest in property  or  in
  an enterprise.
    3.  The  term "lost property" as used in this article includes lost or
  mislaid property. Abandoned property,  waifs  and  treasure  trove,  and
  other property which is found, shall be presumed to be lost property and
  such  presumption  shall  be  conclusive  unless it is established in an
  action or proceeding commenced within six months after the date  of  the
  finding that the property is not lost property.
    4.  The term "owner" as used in this article means any person entitled
  to possession of the lost property as against the finder and against any
  other person who has made a claim.
    5. The term "finder" as used in this  article  means  the  person  who
  first takes possession of lost property.
    6.  "Transportation facility" as used in this article means a railroad
  car or coach, Pullman car, street  surface  railroad  car,  subway  car,
  motor  bus,  motor  coach, taxicab, aircraft or steamship, and any other
  vehicle or conveyance used for carriage of persons whether or  not  such
  use   is   in   the  course  of  a  business  of  transporting  persons.
  "Transportation company" as  used  in  this  article  means  the  person
  carrying  on  a  business of operating a transportation facility. A taxi
  driver is a "transportation company" with respect to a taxicab which  he
  owns and operates as owner.




   §  252.  Found  property  and  found  instruments to be deposited with
  police; penalty for failure to deliver to police; delivery to persons in
  possession of premises where found. 1. Except as provided in subdivision
  five of section two hundred fifty-six of this chapter  or  as  otherwise
  prescribed  pursuant  to  section  two  hundred  fifty  of  the  general
  municipal law, any person who finds lost property of the value of twenty
  dollars or more or comes into possession of property  of  the  value  of
  twenty  dollars or more with knowledge that it is lost property or found
  property shall, within ten days after  the  finding  or  acquisition  of
  possession thereof, either return it to the owner or report such finding
  or  acquisition  of  possession  and  deposit  such property in a police
  station or police headquarters of the city where the finding occurred or
  possession was acquired, but if the finding occurred or  possession  was
  acquired  in  buildings  or on grounds or premises under the control and
  supervision of the commissioner of  general  services  as  described  in
  article  two  of the public buildings law, then the property may also be
  deposited in a station of the capital buildings police. If  the  finding
  occurred  or  possession was acquired outside a city, then such property
  shall be deposited in a station or substation of the state police or  in
  a  police  station or police headquarters, including a sheriff's office,
  of the county, town, or village where the finding occurred or possession
  was acquired. If the finding occurred  or  possession  was  acquired  in
  buildings  or on grounds or premises constituting a state park, parkway,
  recreational facility or historic site under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
  commissioner  of  parks, recreation and historic preservation, then such
  property may also be deposited in a station of the regional  state  park
  police.  If the finding occurred or possession was acquired in buildings
  or on the grounds or premises of the state-operated institutions in  the
  state  university  of New York, then such property may also be deposited
  with a security  officer  or  police  officer  appointed  by  the  state
  university.  Property  so deposited shall be retained and disposed of in
  accordance with procedures set forth in sections two hundred fifty-three
  through two hundred fifty-seven of this chapter except that  the  powers
  and  duties  in  said  sections  mentioned to be performed by the police
  shall be performed by security officers or police officers appointed  by
  the state university.
    2.  Except  as  provided  in  subdivision  five of section two hundred
  fifty-six of this chapter or as otherwise prescribed pursuant to section
  two hundred fifty of the general municipal law, any person who finds  an
  instrument or comes into possession of an instrument with knowledge that
  it  has  been  found  shall,  within  ten  days  after  the  finding  or
  acquisition of possession thereof, either return it to a person entitled
  thereto or report the finding or acquisition of possession  and  deposit
  the  instrument  in a police station or police headquarters, as provided
  in subdivision one of this section, as  if  such  instrument  were  lost
  property having a value of ten dollars or more.
    3.  Except as provided in subdivision four of this section, any person
  who shall refuse or wilfully neglect to comply with  the  provisions  of
  subdivision  one or subdivision two of this section shall be guilty of a
  misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a  fine  of
  not  more  than  one  hundred  dollars or imprisonment not exceeding six
  months or both.
    4. A person shall not be subject to criminal prosecution  for  failure
  to report a finding or acquisition of possession of found property or of
  a found instrument to the police and deposit such property or instrument
  with  the  police  if,  in  lieu  thereof,  he  delivers the property or
  instrument to the  person  in  possession  of  the  premises  where  the
  property  or  instrument was found, provided he had no reason to believe


 that such person would not comply with subdivision  one  or  subdivision
  two of this section.
    A  person  who  delivers  found  property or a found instrument to the
  person in possession of the premises where the  property  or  instrument
  was found is not liable to the owner or person entitled thereto for such
  delivery  if  he had no reason to believe that such person in possession
  of the premises would not comply with subdivision one or subdivision two
  of this section.




   §  253. Duties of police. 1. Unless otherwise prescribed in accordance
  with section two hundred fifty of the general municipal law  or  section
  two  hundred  twenty-five-a  of  the  executive law and unless otherwise
  provided by law applicable specifically to matters  prescribed  in  this
  section,  the  police  with whom found property or a found instrument is
  deposited shall accept and retain custody of the property or instrument,
  or proceeds of  the  property  in  the  event  of  a  sale  pursuant  to
  subdivision five of this section, and shall give notice of such custody,
  as provided in this section.
    The police with whom found property or a found instrument is deposited
  as  provided  in  this  article shall give to the person depositing it a
  receipt identifying the  transaction  of  deposit  and  identifying  the
  property  or  instrument.  Such identification may be by description and
  recital of the  facts  of  the  transaction  or  by  reference  numbers,
  duplicate copies of records, or other method connecting the receipt with
  the records of the police with respect to the property or instrument and
  the transaction.
    2. Such property or instrument shall be transmitted, together with the
  report  of  the  person  who deposited it with the police, to the police
  officer  or  other  official  designated  to  hold  such   property   or
  instrument,  who shall make entry in his records of such deposit and the
  report of the person depositing such property  or  instrument  with  the
  police.
    3.  If  the  report  of  the  person  who  deposited  the  property or
  instrument shows that the property or instrument was found  in  a  place
  other  than  a  public  street  or  highway,  the police with whom it is
  deposited shall give notice of the finding and  deposit,  including  the
  location   of  the  office  to  which  the  property  or  instrument  is
  transmitted, to the occupant of  the  premises  where  the  property  or
  instrument was found or to the person in charge of such premises.
    The  police  with whom an instrument is deposited shall give notice of
  the deposit to each person whose  name  and  address  appears  upon  the
  instrument  or  whose  name so appears and whose address is known to the
  police.
    4. If at any time the police have reason to believe that a person  has
  an  interest  in  found  property  or  in  a  found  instrument in their
  possession and reason to know his whereabouts, they shall give notice of
  the finding and deposit and the location of  the  office  to  which  the
  property or instrument is transmitted to such person.
    5. (a) Property having salvage value only may be sold by the police in
  such  manner  as  may  be  reasonable in the circumstances.   Perishable
  property shall be sold by the police as soon as possible in such  manner
  as may be reasonable in the circumstances.
    (b)  Property which requires special care may be kept by the police in
  public or private facilities which the police deem appropriate  for  the
  purpose of preserving it.
    (c)  Any property may be sold by the police at public auction when the
  expenses reasonably incurred in dealing with it, including  expenses  of
  taking  of  custody,  transportation, storage and appraisal, any special
  expense incurred  in  giving  notice,  and  any  other  special  expense
  attributable  to  administration  of  this  article  with respect to the
  particular property, amount to more than one-half the amount  reasonably
  estimated  as  the  net  sum  likely  to  be  realized by sale at public
  auction.
    (d) If property is sold as provided in this subdivision  the  proceeds
  remaining  after deducting the amount of reasonable expenses of the sale
  and reasonable expenses of dealing with the property prior to the  sale,


 including  any  items  of  expense  mentioned in paragraph (c), shall be
  dealt with as lost property having the value of the property sold.
    6.  Subject  to  subdivision three of section two hundred fifty-six of
  this chapter and to section thirteen hundred  ten  or  other  applicable
  section  of the abandoned property law, instruments shall be retained in
  the custody of the police with whom they were deposited until  delivered
  to  the  person  entitled  thereto  as  provided  in section two hundred
  fifty-five of this chapter.
    7. Except as provided in subdivision  three  of  section  two  hundred
  fifty-six  of  this  chapter,  lost  property,  and the proceeds of sale
  pursuant to subdivision five of this section remaining  after  deduction
  of  expenses  as  provided  in  that  subdivision,  shall be kept in the
  custody of the police for the following periods, unless sooner delivered
  to the owner as provided in section two hundred fifty-four:
    Property having a value of less than one hundred dollars  or  proceeds
  of  property having such value, three months; property having a value of
  one hundred dollars or more  but  less  than  five  hundred  dollars  or
  proceeds  of  property  having such value, six months; property having a
  value of five hundred dollars  or  more  but  less  than  five  thousand
  dollars  or  proceeds  of property having such value, one year; property
  having a value of five thousand dollars or more or proceeds of  property
  having such value, three years.
    8.  Three months before the expiration of the period applicable to the
  property in question, as specified in subdivision seven of this section,
  if the property has not been delivered  to  the  owner  as  provided  in
  section  two  hundred  fifty-four,  the  police shall give notice to the
  owner, if known, and to any person they have reason to  believe  has  an
  interest  in  the  property,  if the address or a former address of such
  owner or person is known, and to all persons who have made claim to  the
  property,  and  to  the  finder  and  any  person  who  has filed notice
  asserting the right of the finder as provided  in  section  two  hundred
  fifty-six.  Such  notice  shall  be  in  writing  and  shall  be  served
  personally or sent by certified mail to the last known  address  of  the
  person  to  whom  it is sent and shall state, in substance:  (a) that if
  within three months after the date of personal service or mailing of the
  notice the owner does not claim the property, and if at the end of  such
  three  months no action is pending to determine rights to such property,
  written notice of which action was served upon the police having custody
  of the property, the property will be delivered to the finder or, if  he
  establish  his  right,  to  a person entitled to assert the right of the
  finder as provided in section two hundred fifty-six; and (b) that if  at
  the  expiration  of  three  months  and  ten  days after the date of the
  personal service or mailing of the notice, the owner has not claimed the
  property and the finder, or a person entitled to assert the right of the
  finder as provided in section two hundred fifty-six,  has  not  demanded
  delivery  of  it,  and  no action is pending to determine rights to such
  property, notice of which was served upon the police having  custody  of
  the  property, it will be sold at public auction; and (c) in the case of
  property in the custody of the state police, that the  proceeds  of  the
  sale  will  be deposited in the abandoned property fund of the state and
  in the case of property in the custody of other police that the proceeds
  will become the property of the city, county, town or village.




   § 254. Disposition of lost property. Except as provided in section two
  hundred  fifty-six  of  this  chapter,  lost property deposited with the
  police, and the money constituting proceeds of  lost  property  sold  as
  provided   in  subdivision  five  of  section  two  hundred  fifty-three
  remaining after deduction of expenses  as  therein  provided,  shall  be
  disposed of as follows:
    1.  It  shall  be  delivered  to  the  owner, upon his demand and upon
  payment of all reasonable expenses incurred in connection therewith,  if
  no  written  notice  of  any other claim to the property has been served
  upon the police having custody, and the time  specified  in  subdivision
  seven of section two hundred fifty-three of this chapter has not expired
  or, if such period has expired, no demand has been made by the finder or
  a  person  entitled  to  assert  the  right of the finder as provided in
  section two hundred fifty-six of this chapter.
    2. If at the end of the  period  specified  in  subdivision  seven  of
  section  two  hundred  fifty-three  of  this  chapter  the owner has not
  claimed the property, it shall be delivered to  the  finder,  or  person
  entitled  to  assert the rights of the finder as provided in section two
  hundred fifty-six of this chapter, upon his demand  therefor,  and  upon
  payment of all reasonable expenses incurred in connection therewith.
    3.  If at the end of ten days after expiration of the period specified
  in subdivision seven of section two hundred fifty-three, the  owner  has
  not  claimed  it,  and no demand has been made by the finder or a person
  entitled to assert the right of the finder as provided  in  section  two
  hundred fifty-six of this chapter, property consisting of money shall be
  paid  as provided in section two hundred fifty-eight of this chapter and
  other property shall be sold at public auction and the proceeds shall be
  paid as provided in such section two hundred  fifty-eight.    Where  the
  property was deposited with the state police, such sale shall be held in
  accordance with rules of the comptroller.




   § 255. Disposition of instruments. 1. An instrument deposited with the
  police shall be delivered to the person entitled thereto upon payment of
  all reasonable expenses incurred in connection therewith.
    2. No instrument deposited with the police shall be destroyed or sold.
  Except   as  provided  in  subdivision  three  of  section  two  hundred
  fifty-six, no such instrument shall be returned to the  finder,  or  his
  employer,  or the person who deposited it with the police, or the person
  upon whose premises it was found.




   §  256.  Exceptions.  1. If a finder takes possession of lost property
  while he is upon premises with respect to which his presence is a crime,
  the person in possession of the premises where  the  lost  property  was
  found  shall  have  the  rights of the finder as provided in section two
  hundred fifty-four of this chapter, if, before the property is delivered
  to the finder by the police, he files with the police having custody  of
  the property a written notice asserting his rights.
    2. If the finder is an officer or employee of the state or of a public
  corporation  and  takes  possession of the property in the course of his
  official duty, the state or public corporation shall be deemed to be the
  finder for the the  purposes  of  section  two  hundred  fifty-four  and
  section  two hundred fifty-seven of this chapter. If, in any other case,
  the finder is an employee under a duty to deliver the lost  property  to
  his  employer,  the  employer  shall  have  the  rights of the finder as
  provided in section two hundred fifty-four if, before  the  property  is
  delivered  to  the  finder  by the police, he shall file with the police
  having custody of the property a written notice asserting such rights.
    3. If either lost property deposited with the police or an  instrument
  deposited  with the police was discovered upon the enclosed safe deposit
  premises of a safe deposit company or safe deposit department of a bank,
  the police shall return it to the safe deposit company or  bank  at  the
  expiration  of six months from the date of deposit. Upon receipt thereof
  the safe deposit company or bank shall hold the property  or  instrument
  as  bailee  for  the  person  entitled  thereto.  If such person has not
  claimed it at the expiration of fifteen  years  from  the  date  it  was
  returned  by  the  police  and  the  property or instrument has not been
  delivered to the state comptroller pursuant to an order of  the  supreme
  court  as  provided  in  section  thirteen  hundred ten of the abandoned
  property law, the safe deposit company or bank shall pay that portion of
  such property which consists of money to the  comptroller  as  unclaimed
  property.  The  safe deposit company or bank shall sell such property as
  does not consist of money and shall sell such  instrument  at  a  public
  sale,  and  the proceeds from such sale, less the expenses of such sale,
  including the costs of any advertising,  shall  be  paid  to  the  state
  comptroller  as  unclaimed  property.  Any  such  property or instrument
  determined to be valueless at  such  sale  shall  be  delivered  to  the
  comptroller as unclaimed property.
    4.  A  person  who  finds  or  comes into possession of property or an
  instrument while he is in or on a transportation facility  while  it  is
  being  operated  as  such  shall  be  subject  to the provisions of this
  article if he leaves the transportation facility at any  place  in  this
  state  taking  with  him  at  the  time of such departure property or an
  instrument found by him in or upon the transportation facility or  found
  property  or a found instrument of which he acquired possession while in
  or upon the transportation facility. In such case  the  place  where  he
  leaves   the  transportation  facility  taking  the  found  property  or
  instrument with him shall be deemed for the purposes of this article  to
  be the place where the finding occurred or possession was acquired.
    For  the purposes of subdivision four of section two hundred fifty-two
  of this chapter, a transportation facility shall  be  deemed  "premises"
  and  "person  in  possession  of  the premises" shall include any person
  actually operating a transportation facility and any officer,  agent  or
  employee of the transportation company actually or apparently authorized
  to receive delivery of the property or instrument.
    For   the  purposes  of  subdivision  three  of  section  two  hundred
  fifty-three, a transportation  facility  operated  by  a  transportation
  company  shall  be  deemed "premises" and the transportation company, or
  its officer, agent or employee authorized to act with respect to custody


 of lost and found property, shall be deemed to be the person  in  charge
  of such premises.
    5.  Except  as  otherwise  prescribed  pursuant to section two hundred
  fifty of the general municipal  law,  if  the  person  who  reports  the
  finding  or acquisition of possession of found property or an instrument
  is (a) a transportation company subject to the provisions of an  act  of
  congress  known as the "interstate commerce act," as amended, or engaged
  in air transportation pursuant to certificate or  permit  of  the  civil
  aeronautics  board  issued  pursuant  to an act of congress known as the
  "civil aeronautics act of nineteen hundred  thirty-eight,"  as  amended,
  and  the  property  or instrument was found on a transportation facility
  operated by such transportation company or (b) a safe deposit company or
  bank and the property or instrument was found on enclosed  safe  deposit
  premises  of such safe deposit company or of the safe deposit department
  of such bank, such transportation company, safe deposit company or  bank
  shall not be required to deposit such property or instrument at the time
  the  report  is  made,  but  shall  within  sixty days after it acquired
  possession of the  property  or  instrument  deposit  such  property  or
  instrument  with  the  police to whom the report was made, unless within
  such time the property has been returned to the owner or the  instrument
  has  been  returned  to  a  person entitled thereto. Such transportation
  company, safe deposit company  or  bank  shall  hold  such  property  or
  instrument  subject  to inspection at any time by the police to whom the
  report was made or by the police designated by an agreement pursuant  to
  section two hundred fifty-one of the general municipal law.
    A  transportation  company,  safe  deposit  company  or bank retaining
  possession of property or an instrument  pursuant  to  this  subdivision
  after  report  of  its  acquisition of possession thereof shall (a) give
  notice of its acquisition of possession of the instrument to each person
  whose name and address appears  on  the  instrument  or  whose  name  so
  appears and whose address is known to it, and (b) if such transportation
  company,  safe  deposit  company  or  bank  has reason to believe that a
  person has an interest in the property or instrument and reason to  know
  his  whereabouts,  shall  give notice to him of its possession. But this
  paragraph does not require  that  a  transportation  company  give  such
  notice  or notices with respect to instruments enclosed in an article of
  baggage or in a briefcase, purse or like article at the time it acquired
  possession of such article.
    6. If at any time an  action  or  proceeding  shall  be  commenced  to
  determine  the  right  to found property or to an instrument and written
  notice of such action shall be served upon the police having custody  of
  the  property or instrument, the police shall not thereafter deliver the
  property or instrument to any person except pursuant to court order.
    7. This article does not supersede or limit any other statute or  rule
  of  law  governing  custody or disposition of articles in the custody of
  the police which constitute evidence of the commission of  a  crime,  or
  which  may  not  lawfully  be  possessed,  or  which may not lawfully be
  possessed without license.




   § 257. Title to lost property. 1. The title to lost property which has
  been deposited with the police shall vest in the finder, or other person
  entitled  to  assert the rights of the finder as provided in section two
  hundred fifty-six of this chapter, when the property is delivered to him
  in accordance with section two hundred fifty-four of  this  chapter  and
  shall vest in the buyer when the property is sold as provided in section
  two hundred fifty-three or two hundred fifty-four of this chapter.
    2.  If  the finder of lost property under the value of ten dollars has
  made reasonable effort to find the owner and restore it to him, and  has
  been  unable  to  do  so,  the  title to such property shall vest in the
  finder at the end of one year after the finding.




   §  258.  Proceeds to be paid into fund. Proceeds from the sale of lost
  property,  less  lawful  deductions,  or  the  money  constituting  lost
  property,  shall  be paid into the treasury of the county, city, town or
  village in the police department of which  the  property  was  deposited
  unless  otherwise  provided pursuant to section two hundred fifty of the
  general municipal law or other applicable statute, or into the abandoned
  property fund of the state if the property was deposited with the  state
  police,  the  capital buildings police or the regional state park police
  or returned to a safe deposit company or bank pursuant  to  section  two
  hundred  fifty-six  of this chapter, or into a fund established pursuant
  to  subdivision  eight  of  section  three  hundred  fifty-five  of  the
  education  law  if the property was deposited with a security officer or
  police officer appointed by the state university.




   § 285. Definitions. As used in this article:
    1.  The  term "bond" means (a) a bond, note or other obligation of any
  kind or nature, whether secured or unsecured, which is part of an  issue
  held  by  more than one person, or (b) a certificate or other instrument
  which is part of an issue held by more than one  person  evidencing  any
  interest  in  any  bond, note or other obligation of any kind or nature,
  whether secured or unsecured.
    2. The term "bondholder" means the owner of a bond.
    3. The term "obligor" includes the obligor of a  bond  as  defined  in
  clause  (a)  of  paragraph  one  of  this  section;  the  obligor  of an
  obligation, interests in which are evidenced by a  bond  as  defined  in
  clause  (b)  of  paragraph  one  of  this  section; and the owner of any
  property securing any bond or any such obligation.
    4.  The  term  "trust  indenture"  means  any  agreement,  conveyance,
  transfer,  mortgage  or  other  instrument,  pursuant to which bonds are
  issued, or which affect the rights of bondholders.
    5. The term "trustee" includes any person to  whom  any  property  has
  been transferred as security for an issue; any person who is the obligee
  or  holder  of an obligation, interests in which are evidenced by a bond
  as defined in clause (b) of paragraph  one  of  this  section;  and  any
  person  who,  under the terms of a trust indenture, is granted rights or
  remedies which may be exercised for the benefit of bondholders.
    6. The term "default" means any non-compliance for thirty days or more
  by the obligor with any provision of a bond or  of  a  trust  indenture,
  whether or not under the terms of such bond or such trust indenture such
  non-compliance  is  regarded as a default, and whether or not any period
  of grace or other period prescribed in such bond or such trust indenture
  as a prerequisite for taking any action has expired.
    7. The term "qualified bondholder" means any bondholder  who  (a)  has
  acquired  a  bond  by  purchase before the default or the institution of
  proceedings which is the basis  of  an  application  under  section  two
  hundred  eighty-six and in any event at least one year before the making
  of such application, unless such bondholder shall have been an  original
  purchaser  or  (b) who has acquired a bond by gift or inheritance from a
  bondholder who acquired the same by purchase before the default  or  the
  institution  of  proceedings  which is the basis of an application under
  section two hundred eighty-six and in any  event  at  least  six  months
  before  the  making of such application; provided, however (a) that such
  bond was not purchased for the purpose of making  such  an  application;
  (b)  that  the  list  of  bondholders  shall  not  be for the purpose of
  communicating with bondholders in the interests of an object other  than
  the  particular indenture securing the issue of bonds; and (c) that such
  petitioner has not within five years sold or offered for sale  any  list
  of  stockholders  of  any corporation, or aided or abetted any person in
  procuring any stock list for any such purpose or  sold  or  offered  for
  sale  any  list  of  bondholders  of any obligor or aided or abetted any
  person in procuring such a list for any such purpose.




   § 286. Grounds for proceeding. Whenever there has been a default under
  a  bond  or  a  trust  indenture  which  has not been cured, or whenever
  proceedings have been instituted under any federal or state law for  the
  modification  of  a bond or a trust indenture or for a reorganization of
  the  obligor,  in  connection  with  which  such   a   modification   is
  contemplated,  any  qualified bondholder owning such a bond, or owning a
  bond to which such a trust indenture relates, may apply to  the  supreme
  court  or the county court, by special proceeding for judgment directing
  the trustee of the issue and every obligor of the bond, or any of  them,
  to  furnish to the applicant a list of the names and addresses of all of
  the  bondholders  of  the  issue  so  far  as  they  have  knowledge  or
  information  with  respect  to such names and addresses, irrespective of
  how such knowledge or information was acquired.




   §  287.  Contents of petition. The petition shall briefly describe the
  issue, stating the date, maturity and size thereof so far  as  known  to
  the  petitioner;  shall  set forth the default or proceedings upon which
  the application is based, and, if based on a default, the fact that such
  default has not been  cured;  shall  show  the  purpose  for  which  the
  application  is  made;  and shall contain an allegation that the list is
  not intended for sale, and shall further show that  such  bond  was  not
  purchased  for  the purpose of making such an application; that the list
  of bondholders shall not  be  for  the  purpose  of  communicating  with
  bondholders  in  the  interests  of  an object other than the particular
  indenture securing the issue of bonds; and that such petitioner has  not
  within  five  years sold or offered for sale any list of stockholders of
  any corporation, or aided or abetted any person in procuring  any  stock
  list  for  any  such  purpose  or  sold  or offered for sale any list of
  bondholders of any obligor or aided or abetted any person  in  procuring
  such a list for any such purpose.




   §  288. Judgment. If the court shall be satisfied that the allegations
  of the petition are true, and that the interests of the  bondholders  of
  the  issue  as a whole will not be adversely affected by the granting of
  the application, it shall enter judgment directing  the  trustee,  every
  obligor,  any  receiver  appointed  by  a court, depositary or committee
  purporting to act for or on behalf of bondholders, or such  of  them  as
  may  have  been  duly  served, to furnish to the applicant a list of the
  names and addresses of all bondholders of  the  issue  so  far  as  they
  respectively  have  knowledge  or  information with respect to the same.
  Such judgment may contain such terms and conditions  as  the  court  may
  deem proper with respect to the time when and place where such lists are
  to  be  furnished,  and  the  payment of the expense of furnishing same.
  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, however, if  a
  default was the basis of the application and such default has been cured
  before  the  entry of judgment, or if the institution of proceedings was
  the  basis  of  the  application  and  such  proceedings  have   finally
  terminated  before  the  entry  of  judgment, the proceeding may, in the
  discretion of the court, be dismissed.




   §  301.  Definitions.  In  this article, unless the context or subject
  matter otherwise requires:
    1. "Motor vehicle" or "vehicle" means any device propelled or drawn by
  any power other than muscular power, upon or  by  which  any  person  or
  property  is  or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, road
  or street except that it shall not include a "snowmobile" as defined  in
  subdivision three of section 21.05 of the parks, recreation and historic
  preservation  law.  "Motor  vehicle"  or  "vehicle" also means a "mobile
  home" or a "manufactured home". "Mobile  home"  or  "manufactured  home"
  means  a  structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the
  traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or forty  body  feet
  or  more  in length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty or
  more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed
  to be used as a dwelling with or without  a  permanent  foundation  when
  connected  to  required  utilities,  and includes the plumbing, heating,
  air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein.
    2. "Retail buyer" or "buyer" means a person who buys a  motor  vehicle
  from  a  retail  seller and who executes a retail instalment contract in
  connection therewith.
    3. "Retail seller" or "seller"  means  a  person  who  sells  a  motor
  vehicle  to  a  retail  buyer  under  or  subject to a retail instalment
  contract.
    4. "Retail instalment sale" or "sale" means a sale, other than  for  a
  commercial  or  business  use  or  for the purpose of resale, of a motor
  vehicle by a retail seller to a retail  buyer  for  a  time  sale  price
  payable  in  two  or  more instalments, payment of which is secured by a
  retail instalment contract. The cash sale price of  the  motor  vehicle,
  the  amount,  if  any,  included for insurance, official fees and credit
  service charge shall together constitute the time sale price.
    5. "Retail instalment contract"  or  "contract"  means  an  agreement,
  entered into in this state, pursuant to which the title to, the property
  or  a  security interest in or a lien upon a motor vehicle, which is the
  subject matter of a retail instalment sale, is retained or  taken  by  a
  retail  seller from a retail buyer as security, in whole or in part, for
  the buyer's obligation. The term includes  such  an  agreement  wherever
  entered  into if executed by the buyer in this state and if solicited in
  person by a salesman or other person acting on his own behalf or that of
  the seller. The  term  also  includes  a  contract  whereby  a  security
  interest  in  favor  of the seller is created or retained and a contract
  for the bailment or leasing of a motor vehicle by which  the  bailee  or
  lessee  contracts to pay as compensation for its use a sum substantially
  equivalent to or in excess of its value and by which it is  agreed  that
  the  bailee  or  lessee  is  bound  to  become, or for no other or for a
  nominal consideration has the option of becoming, the owner of the motor
  vehicle upon full compliance with the terms of the contract.
    6. "Cash sale price" means the cash sale  price  stated  in  a  retail
  instalment  contract  for  which the seller would sell to the buyer, and
  the buyer would buy from the seller, the  motor  vehicle  which  is  the
  subject matter of the retail instalment contract if the sale were a sale
  for  cash  instead  of a retail instalment sale. The cash sale price may
  include any taxes, registration, license and other fees and charges  for
  insurance,  for  accessories  and their installation and for delivering,
  servicing, repairing or  improving  the  motor  vehicle  and  for  other
  services  incidental  to  the  agreement. It also may include the unpaid
  balance of any amount financed under an outstanding motor  vehicle  loan
  agreement  or  motor  vehicle  retail  instalment contract or the unpaid
  portion of the early termination obligation under an  outstanding  motor
  vehicle retail lease agreement.


   7.  "Official  fees" means the filing or other fees required by law to
  be paid to a public officer to perfect the interest or lien, in or on  a
  motor  vehicle,  retained or taken by a seller under a retail instalment
  contract, and to file or record a release, satisfaction or discharge  of
  the contract.
    8.  "Credit  service charge" means that part of the time sale price by
  which it exceeds the aggregate of the cash sale price and the amount, if
  any, included in a retail instalment sale  for  insurance  and  official
  fees.
    9.  "Financing agency" means a person engaged, in whole or in part, in
  the business of purchasing retail instalment contracts from one or  more
  retail  sellers.  The  term includes but is not limited to a bank, trust
  company, savings bank, savings and loan association, private  banker  or
  investment  company,  if  so  engaged.  The  term also includes a retail
  seller engaged, in whole or in part, in the business of  holding  retail
  instalment contracts acquired from retail buyers.
    10.  The  "holder"  of  a  retail instalment contract means the retail
  seller of the motor vehicle under or subject to the contract or, if  the
  contract  is  purchased  by  a  financing  agency or other assignee, the
  financing agency or other assignee.
    11.  "Person"   means   an   individual,   partnership,   corporation,
  association or other group, however organized.
    12. Words in the singular include the plural and vice versa.




   §  302.  Requirements  as  to retail instalment contracts. 1. A retail
  instalment  contract  shall  be  in  writing,  shall  contain  all   the
  agreements  of  the  parties  and  shall  be signed by the buyer and the
  seller.
    2. The printed portion of the contract shall  be  in  at  least  eight
  point  type.  The  contract  shall  contain printed or written in a size
  equal to at least ten-point bold type:
    (a) Both at the top of the  contract  and  directly  above  the  space
  reserved  for  the  signature of the buyer, the words "RETAIL INSTALMENT
  CONTRACT";
    (b) A specific statement that liability insurance coverage for  bodily
  injury  and property damage caused to others is not included, if that is
  the case; and
    (c) One of the following notices: "NOTICE TO THE BUYER: 1. Do not sign
  this contract before you read it or if it contains any blank  space.  2.
  You  are  entitled  to a completely filled in copy of this contract when
  you sign it. 3. Under the law, you  have  the  following  rights,  among
  others:  (a)  To  pay off in advance the full amount due and to obtain a
  partial refund of the credit service charge; (b) To redeem the  property
  if  repossessed for a default; (c) To require, under certain conditions,
  a resale of the property if repossessed. 4. According to  law  you  have
  the  privilege of purchasing the insurance on the motor vehicle provided
  for in this contract from an agent or broker of your own selection,"  or
  "NOTICE  TO  THE BUYER: 1. Do not sign this agreement before you read it
  or if it contains any blank space. 2. You are entitled to  a  completely
  filled  in  copy of this agreement. 3. Under the law, you have the right
  to pay off in advance the full amount due and under  certain  conditions
  to obtain a partial refund of the credit service charge. 4. According to
  law  you  have  the  privilege  of purchasing the insurance on the motor
  vehicle provided for in this contract from an agent or  broker  of  your
  own  selection",  or "NOTICE TO THE BUYER: 1. Do not sign this agreement
  before you read it or if  it  contains  any  blank  space.  2.  You  are
  entitled  to a completely filled in copy of this agreement. 3. Under the
  law, you have the right to pay off in advance the full  amount  due.  If
  you  do  so,  you  may,  depending  on  the nature of the credit service
  charge, either:  (a)  prepay  without  penalty,  or  (b)  under  certain
  circumstances obtain a rebate of the credit service charge. 4. According
  to  law  you have the privilege of purchasing the insurance on the motor
  vehicle provided for in this contract from an agent or  broker  of  your
  own selection".
    3.  The  seller  shall  deliver  to  the  buyer, or mail to him at his
  address shown on the contract, a copy of  the  contract  signed  by  the
  seller.  Until the seller does so, a buyer who has not received delivery
  of  the  motor  vehicle  shall have an unconditional right to cancel the
  contract and to receive  immediate  refund  of  all  payments  made  and
  redelivery  of  all  goods  traded-in  to the seller on account of or in
  contemplation of the  contract.  Any  acknowledgment  by  the  buyer  of
  delivery of a copy of the contract shall be printed or written in a size
  equal to at least ten point bold type and, if contained in the contract,
  shall  also  appear directly above the legend required above the buyer's
  signature by sub-division two (a) of this section.
    4. The contract shall contain the names of the seller and  the  buyer,
  the  place of business of the seller, the residence or place of business
  of the buyer as specified by the buyer and a description  of  the  motor
  vehicle including its make, year model, model and identification numbers
  or marks.
    5. The contract shall contain:


   (1) All items required to be disclosed by the act of congress entitled
  "Truth  in  Lending Act" and the regulations thereunder, as such act and
  regulations may from time to time be amended;
    (2)  The  amount,  if  any,  included  for  insurance,  specifying and
  describing the coverages and  the  amount  included  for  each  type  of
  coverage;  however,  if  any insurance policy complies with the standard
  provisions form for automobile  physical  damage  policy  or  any  other
  automobile  physical  damage  policy  form  which  is  equally  or  more
  favorable to the insured and which is filed with the  superintendent  of
  financial  services,  the contract need not contain a description of any
  type of coverage under such standard automobile physical  damage  policy
  form  or a specification of the amount included in the contract therefor
  if it contains a specification of the type or types of coverage and  the
  total amount included in the contract therefor.
    6.  The  amount,  if any, included for insurance, shall not exceed the
  premiums chargeable in  accordance  with  rate  filings  made  with  the
  superintendent  of  financial services for similar insurance. The seller
  or financing agency, if insurance on the motor vehicle is included in  a
  retail  instalment contract, shall within thirty days after execution of
  the retail instalment contract send or cause to be sent to the  buyer  a
  policy  or policies or certificate of insurance, written by an insurance
  company authorized to do business in this state, clearly  setting  forth
  the  amount of the premium, the kind or kinds of insurance and the scope
  of the coverage and all the terms, exceptions, limitations, restrictions
  and conditions of the contract or contracts of insurance. The buyer of a
  motor  vehicle  under  a  retail  instalment  contract  shall  have  the
  privilege  of  purchasing  such insurance from an agent or broker of his
  own selection and of selecting an insurance company  acceptable  to  the
  seller;  provided,  however, that the inclusion of the insurance premium
  in the retail instalment contract when  the  buyer  selects  the  agent,
  broker  or  company,  shall be optional with the seller and in such case
  the seller or financing agency shall have  no  obligation  to  send,  or
  cause  to  be sent, to the buyer the policy or certificate of insurance.
  Nothing contained in this subdivision however shall be deemed to modify,
  limit or in any way contravene the provisions of  section  two  thousand
  five hundred two of the insurance law.
    If any such policy or certificate of insurance on the motor vehicle is
  cancelled,  the unearned insurance premium refund received by the holder
  of the contract, or, if the amount included  therefor  in  the  contract
  exceeds  the  cost to the holder of the contract for such insurance, the
  unearned portion of the amount so included, together with  the  unearned
  portion  of  the  credit  service  charge  applicable  thereto, shall be
  credited to the final maturing  instalments  of  the  retail  instalment
  contract  except  to  the  extent  applied  toward  payment  for similar
  insurance protecting the interests of the buyer and the  holder  of  the
  contract or either of them.
    The  amount,  if any, included for group credit life insurance, credit
  unemployment insurance, or for insurance other than on the motor vehicle
  shall not exceed the premiums chargeable in accordance with rate filings
  made with the superintendent of financial services for such insurance by
  the insurer. If such group credit life or other insurance  is  cancelled
  the refund for unearned insurance premiums received or receivable by the
  holder  of  the  contract,  or  the excess of the amount included in the
  contract for group credit life  insurance  over  the  premiums  paid  or
  payable by the holder of the contract therefor, together with, in either
  case,  the  unearned  portion  of  the  credit service charge applicable
  thereto, shall be credited to the  final  maturing  instalments  of  the


 retail instalment contract, provided that no such credit need be made if
  the amount thereof would be less than one dollar.
    6-a.  If the buyer is obligated under the terms of a retail instalment
  contract to maintain insurance on the motor vehicle that is the  subject
  of  the  contract and if subsequent to the execution of the contract the
  buyer fails to maintain the insurance, the holder may make  advances  to
  procure  the  equivalent limits of insurance for either the interests of
  the buyer and the holder or  of  either  of  them,  and  any  amount  so
  advanced  may be the subject of a credit service charge from the date of
  such advance as though such amount was part of the  amount  computed  as
  provided  in  the  closing paragraph of subdivision one of section three
  hundred three of this article. Each amount so advanced shall be  secured
  by  the  motor  vehicle if so provided in the contract and if the holder
  notifies the buyer in writing of the advance of such amount and  of  his
  or her option to repay such amount in any one of the following ways:
    (a)  Full  payment  within ten days from the date of giving or mailing
  the notice;
    (b) Full  amortization  during  the  term  of  the  insurance  or  the
  remaining term of the contract, at the option of the holder;
    (c)  If  offered by the holder, as a final balloon payment payable one
  month after the last scheduled payment under the contract;
    (d) If offered by the holder, full amortization after the term of  the
  contract,  to  be payable in instalments which do not exceed the average
  instalment payable under the contract; or
    (e) If offered by the holder, any other amortization plan.
    If the buyer neither pays in full the amount so advanced nor  notifies
  the  holder  in  writing  of  his  or  her choice regarding amortization
  options before the expiration of ten days from the  date  of  giving  or
  mailing  of  the  notice  by  the  holder, the holder shall amortize the
  amount so advanced pursuant to paragraph (b) of this subdivision.
    7. The holder of a retail instalment contract may, if the contract  so
  provides, collect a delinquency and collection charge on each instalment
  in  default  for  a  period  not  less than ten days in an amount not in
  excess of the rate or rates agreed to in the contract.  In  addition  to
  such  delinquency  and collection charge, the retail instalment contract
  may provide for the payment of attorneys'  fees  not  exceeding  fifteen
  percent  of  the  amount  due and payable under such contract where such
  contract is referred to an attorney  not  a  salaried  employee  of  the
  holder of the contract for collection, plus the court costs.
    8.  No retail instalment contract shall be signed by any party thereto
  when it contains blank spaces to be filled in after it has  been  signed
  except that, if delivery of the motor vehicle is not made at the time of
  the  execution  of the contract, the identifying numbers or marks of the
  motor vehicle or similar information and  the  due  date  of  the  first
  instalment  may  be  inserted  in  the contract after its execution. The
  buyer's  written  acknowledgment,  conforming  to  the  requirements  of
  subdivision  three  of this section, of delivery of a copy of a contract
  shall be conclusive proof of such delivery and of compliance  with  this
  subdivision in any action or proceeding by or against an assignee of the
  contract  without  knowledge  to  the  contrary  when  he  purchases the
  contract.
    9. (a) No retail instalment contract shall contain  any  provision  by
  which  the  buyer  agrees  not  to assert against an assignee a claim or
  defense arising out of the sale or require or entail  the  execution  of
  any  note  or series of notes, which when separately negotiated will cut
  off as to third parties any right of action or defense which  the  buyer
  may  have  against  the  seller.  The  assignee  of a retail installment
  contract or obligation shall be subject to all claims  and  defenses  of


 the  buyer  against the seller arising from the sale notwithstanding any
  agreement to the contrary,  but  the  assignee's  liability  under  this
  subdivision  shall  not  exceed  the amount owing to the assignee at the
  time the claim or defense is asserted against the assignee.
    (b)  Limitations on assignee liability referred to in paragraph (a) of
  this  subdivision  shall  be  exclusive  of  any  reasonable  costs  and
  attorney's fees the court may award.
    10.  Notwithstanding  any  contrary provision of the personal property
  law, lien law, banking law or other law:  (a)  a  financing  agency  may
  purchase  a  retail  instalment contract from a seller on such terms and
  conditions and for such price as may be mutually agreed upon; and (b) no
  filing of the assignment, no notice to the buyer of the assignment,  and
  no  requirement  that  the  seller be deprived of dominion over payments
  upon the contract or over the vehicle if repossessed by or  returned  to
  the  seller,  shall be necessary to the validity of a written assignment
  of  a  retail  instalment  contract  as  against  creditors,  subsequent
  purchasers, pledgees, mortgagees or encumbrancers of the seller.
    11.  Unless the buyer has notice of actual or intended assignment of a
  retail instalment contract, payment thereunder made by the buyer to  the
  last  known holder of such contract shall be binding upon all subsequent
  holders or assignees.
    12. Upon written request from  the  buyer,  the  holder  of  a  retail
  instalment  contract  shall  give  or  forward  to  the  buyer a written
  statement of the dates and amounts of  payments  and  the  total  amount
  unpaid under such contract. A buyer shall be given a written receipt for
  any payment when made in cash.
    13.  No  retail  instalment  contract  shall  contain any provision by
  which:
    (a) in the absence of the buyer's default, the holder may, arbitrarily
  and without reasonable cause, accelerate the maturity of any part or all
  of the amount owing thereon;
    (b) a power of attorney is given to confess judgment in this state, or
  an assignment of wages is given;
    (c) the seller or holder of the contract or other person acting on his
  behalf is given authority to enter upon the buyer's premises unlawfully,
  or to commit any breach of the peace in the repossession  of  the  motor
  vehicle;
    (d)  the buyer waives any right of action against the seller or holder
  of the contract, or other person acting on his behalf, for  any  illegal
  act committed in the collection of payments under the contract or in the
  repossession of the motor vehicle;
    (e)  the  buyer  executes a power of attorney appointing the seller or
  holder of the contract, or other person acting on  his  behalf,  as  the
  buyer's  agent  in  collection  of payments under the contract or in the
  repossession  of  the  motor  vehicle;  provided,  however,  that   this
  paragraph  shall  not  prohibit  the  inclusion  in  a retail instalment
  contract of a limited power of attorney or other  provision  authorizing
  the  holder  to execute in the name of the buyer any proofs of insurance
  claims or losses or to endorse the name of the buyer  on  any  insurance
  settlement draft or check;
    (f)  the  seller is relieved from liability for any legal remedy which
  the buyer may have had against the seller under  the  contract,  or  any
  separate instrument executed in connection therewith;
    (g)  the  maturity  of  any part or all of the amount owing thereon is
  accelerated where, following a default consisting solely of the  failure
  to  make  timely  instalment payments and the subsequent repossession of
  the motor vehicle, the buyer makes timely  tender  of  an  amount  which


 would  be  sufficient  to  redeem  the  vehicle  in  the absence of such
  provision;
    (h)  the  buyer  waives  any right to a trial by jury in any action or
  proceeding arising out of the contract.
    14. Any  such  prohibited  provision  shall  be  void  but  shall  not
  otherwise affect the validity of the contract.




   §  302A.  Total  loss  notice  and waiver of the gap amount. 1. If the
  retail instalment contract provides that the buyer shall be  responsible
  upon  a  total loss of the vehicle occasioned by its theft, confiscation
  or physical damage for the gap amount as defined in paragraph  fifty-two
  of subsection (a) of section one hundred seven of the insurance law, the
  holder,  prior  to the execution of the contract, shall by a notice on a
  separate document conspicuously disclose that fact and  the  obligations
  for  which  the  buyer  would  remain  liable  in  the event of a theft,
  confiscation or total loss of the vehicle. If  the  holder  is  required
  under  subdivision two of this section to offer to waive its contractual
  right to hold the buyer liable for the gap amount  in  the  event  of  a
  total  loss  of  the vehicle occasioned by its theft or physical damage,
  the notice shall also: (a) state that for a separate charge disclosed in
  the notice the holder will waive its contractual right to hold the buyer
  liable for the gap amount in the event of a total loss  of  the  vehicle
  occasioned  by  its  theft  or  physical damage; (b) contain a provision
  informing the buyer that he or she may, as an alternative to  purchasing
  a  waiver, be able to purchase insurance covering the gap amount from an
  insurance company which has  been  licensed  by  the  superintendent  of
  financial  services  to write motor vehicle debtor gap insurance in this
  state; and (c) contain a provision  permitting  the  buyer  to  indicate
  whether  he  or  she  wants the holder to waive its contractual right to
  hold the buyer liable for the gap amount in the event of a total loss of
  the vehicle occasioned by its theft or physical damage. The notice shall
  be signed by the buyer. The holder shall provide a copy  of  the  signed
  notice  to the buyer and shall maintain a copy in the holder's files for
  at least the term of the contract. Failure to provide the notice and  to
  obtain  the  buyer's  signature  as  required  by this subdivision shall
  invalidate any provision of the agreement which otherwise would obligate
  a buyer to pay to the holder, after a total loss of  the  motor  vehicle
  occasioned  by  its  theft,  confiscation  or  physical  damage, the gap
  amount. No retail installment contract shall  be  conditioned  upon  the
  buyer's  obtaining of motor vehicle debtor gap insurance as set forth in
  subparagraph (B) of paragraph twenty-six of subsection  (a)  of  section
  one thousand one hundred thirteen of the insurance law.
    2.  If the retail instalment contract provides that the buyer shall be
  responsible upon a total loss of the vehicle occasioned by its theft  or
  physical  damage  for the gap amount, the holder, prior to the execution
  of the agreement, shall offer to waive its contractual right to hold the
  buyer liable for the gap amount in the event of  a  total  loss  of  the
  vehicle  occasioned  by  its  theft  or  physical  damage, only if motor
  vehicle creditor gap insurance coverage is available to the  holder  and
  such  coverage  is  obtained from a property/casualty insurance company,
  which has been licensed by the superintendent of financial  services  of
  this  state to write motor vehicle creditor gap insurance in this state.
  This offer may be made contingent upon the payment by  the  buyer  of  a
  separate charge that shall not exceed the cost of motor vehicle creditor
  gap insurance covering the retail instalment contract. Nothing contained
  in  this section shall be construed to authorize a waiver, in connection
  with a transaction with respect to  which  motor  vehicle  creditor  gap
  insurance  has  not  been  obtained,  of a contractual right to hold the
  buyer liable for the gap amount in the event of  a  total  loss  of  the
  vehicle occasioned by its theft or physical damage.
    3.  A  holder  shall  not  be  obligated under subdivision two of this
  section to offer to waive its contractual right to hold the buyer liable
  for the gap amount if, during the current calendar year  or  during  the
  odd-numbered  calendar  year  immediately preceding the calendar year in
  which the agreement is entered  into,  the  holder  has  received  motor


 vehicle  creditor gap insurance declination notices or other evidence of
  unavailability from every insurance company whose name  appears  on  the
  department  of  financial  services  compilation  of insurance companies
  which  during  that calendar year were authorized to write motor vehicle
  creditor gap insurance in this state.  Evidence  of  these  declinations
  shall  be retained by such a holder of such a holder for a period of six
  years after the expiration of the  calendar  year  in  which  they  were
  issued.
    4. In order to enable holders or their anticipated assignees to comply
  with  the  requirements  imposed by subdivision two of this section, the
  superintendent of financial services shall compile and make available  a
  periodically  updated  list  of  those  insurance  companies  which  are
  authorized to write motor vehicle creditor  gap  insurance  coverage  in
  this state.
    5.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to the holder,
  under a retail instalment contract under which the buyer is  not  liable
  upon  a  total loss of the vehicle occasioned by its theft, confiscation
  or physical damage for the gap amount.




   §  303.  Credit  service  charge  limitation.  1.  A retail seller may
  contract for in a retail instalment contract  and  charge,  receive  and
  collect the credit service charge authorized by this article at the rate
  or rates agreed to by the retail seller and the buyer.
    The  credit  service  charge  authorized  by this subdivision shall be
  computed on an amount equal to the total of the difference  between  the
  cash  sale price of the motor vehicle and the amount of the buyer's down
  payment and the amount of official fees, and such charge may be made  on
  the  amount  included  in the contract for insurance as determined under
  subdivision six of section three hundred two of this chapter.
    2. The credit service charge  at  the  rate  or  rates  authorized  in
  subdivision  one  shall  be  computed  on  the amounts on which they are
  respectively required to be computed as specified in subdivision one  on
  contracts  payable in successive monthly instalments substantially equal
  in amount extending for a period of one year. On contracts providing for
  instalments extending for a period less than or greater than  one  year,
  the credit service charge shall be computed proportionately.
    3. When a retail instalment contract provides for unequal or irregular
  instalments,  the  credit service charge shall be at the effective rates
  provided in subdivision one, having  due  regard  for  the  schedule  of
  instalments.
    4.  As an alternative to the credit service charge provided for above,
  a retail seller may contract for in a  retail  instalment  contract  and
  charge,  receive  and  collect a credit service charge calculated on the
  unpaid balances  of  an  amount  computed  as  provided  in  the  second
  paragraph  of  subdivision one above, for the time outstanding according
  to a generally accepted actuarial method at rates  that  may  vary  from
  time  to  time and in accordance with the provisions of the contract. On
  any contract with a variable rate credit service charge made pursuant to
  this subdivision the rate shall be determined at  regular  intervals  as
  set forth in the contract and in accordance with such regulations as the
  superintendent of financial services shall prescribe but said rate shall
  not  vary  more  often  than once in any three month period and shall be
  based  on  a  published  index  that  is  (a)  readily  available,   (b)
  independently  verifiable,  (c)  beyond the control of the retail seller
  and (d) approved by the superintendent.
    The superintendent shall adopt  regulations  with  respect  to  retail
  installment contracts that provide for a variable rate of credit-service
  charge,  including  but  not limited to: (a) providing for disclosure to
  the buyer by the retail seller of the circumstances under which the rate
  may increase, any limitations on the increase, the effect of an increase
  and an example of the payment terms that would result from an  increase;
  (b)  providing  for  disclosure  to  the buyer by the retail seller of a
  history of the fluctuations of the index over  a  reasonable  period  of
  time;  and  (c)  providing  for notice to the buyer by the retail seller
  prior to any rate increase or change in the terms of payment.
    5. The credit  service  charge  shall  be  inclusive  of  all  charges
  incident to investigating and making the contract, and for the extension
  of  the credit provided for in the contract and no fee, expense or other
  charge whatsoever shall be taken, received, reserved or  contracted  for
  except  as  provided  in  this  section, in subdivision seven of section
  three hundred two and three hundred six and, if expressly  provided  for
  in the retail instalment contract the amount of official fees as defined
  in  section  three  hundred  one  and  the  amount, if any, included for
  insurance pursuant to subdivision five of section three hundred two.
    6. Notwithstanding the maximum credit  service  charge  authorized  by
  this  article, such maximum credit service charge shall not apply to any
  retail installment sale insured or guaranteed in whole or in part by the


 Federal Housing Administration,  the  Veterans  Administration,  or  any
  other department or agency of the United States government.




   §  304.  Cancellation  of  contract. After the payment of all sums for
  which the buyer is obligated under a  retail  instalment  contract,  and
  upon written demand made by the buyer, the holder of such contract shall
  mail  to  the  buyer  at  his  last  known  address, good and sufficient
  instruments to indicate payment in full and to release all  security  in
  the motor vehicle.




§  305.  Credit  upon anticipation of payments. 1. Notwithstanding the
  provisions of any retail instalment contract to the contrary, any  buyer
  may  pay  it  in  full  at  any  time  before  the maturity of the final
  instalment of the time balance thereof and if he does so  shall  receive
  and  be  entitled to receive a refund credit thereon and if the contract
  included an amount for group credit life insurance, the  further  refund
  credit thereon for such anticipation, whether or not the maturity of the
  time  balance of the contract was accelerated by the holder by reason of
  the buyer's default or otherwise. The amount of any such  refund  credit
  shall  be the unearned portion of the credit service charge, after first
  deducting an acquisition cost of fifteen dollars, or,  if  the  contract
  has  been  extended,  deferred  or  refinanced,  the  additional  charge
  therefor, determined according to a generally accepted actuarial method.
  Where the amount of the credit for anticipation of payment is less  than
  one dollar, no refund need be made.
    If the credit service charge imposed on the retail instalment contract
  is  computed pursuant to subdivision four of section three hundred three
  of this article the contract may, after  deduction  of  the  acquisition
  cost of fifteen dollars, be prepaid in full without penalty.
    2.  The  amount  of  the  further  refund credit for group credit life
  insurance shall be equal to the excess of the  amount  included  in  the
  contract  for  group  credit  life  insurance  over the premiums paid or
  payable by the holder of  the  contract  for  such  insurance,  if  such
  premiums  were  paid or payable periodically, or the refund for unearned
  group credit life insurance premium received or receivable by the holder
  of the contract, if such premium was paid or  payable  in  a  lump  sum,
  provided  that  no such further refund credit need be made if the amount
  thereof would be less than one dollar.
    3. In the event (i) the maturity of the contract is accelerated due to
  the default of the buyer or otherwise and judgment is obtained, or  (ii)
  repayment  is made pursuant to group credit life insurance, the buyer or
  his legal representative, as the case may be, shall be entitled  to  the
  same  refund  credits as if the contract had been prepaid in full on the
  date of acceleration or repayment.




   § 306. Refinancing. 1. The holder of a retail instalment contract may,
  upon  agreement  with  the buyer, extend the scheduled due date or defer
  the  scheduled  payment  of  all  or  any  part  of  any  instalment  or
  instalments  payable  thereunder.  The  agreement  for such extension or
  deferment must be in writing and signed  by  the  parties  thereto.  The
  holder  may  charge  and  contract  for  the  payment of an extension or
  deferred charge by the buyer and collect and receive the  same,  at  the
  rate or rates agreed to by the holder and the buyer on the amount of the
  instalment or instalments, or part thereof, extended or deferred for the
  period of extension or deferral. Such period shall not exceed the period
  from  the date when such extended or deferred instalment or instalments,
  or part thereof,  would  have  been  payable  in  the  absence  of  such
  extension  or deferral, to the date when such instalment or instalments,
  or part thereof, are made payable under the agreement  of  extension  or
  deferment;  except that a minimum charge of one dollar for the period of
  extension or deferral may be made in any case  where  the  extension  or
  deferral  charge,  when  computed at such rate or rates, amounts to less
  than one dollar. Such agreement may also provide for the payment by  the
  buyer  of  the additional cost to the holder of the contract of premiums
  for continuing in force, until the end of such period  of  extension  or
  deferral,  any insurance coverages provided for in the contract, subject
  to the provisions of subdivision six of section three hundred two.
    2. The holder of a retail instalment contract may, upon  agreement  in
  writing with the buyer, refinance the payment of the unpaid time balance
  of  the contract by providing for a new schedule of instalment payments.
  The holder may charge and contract for the payment of a refinance charge
  by the buyer at the rate or rates agreed to by the holder and the  buyer
  and  collect  and  receive  the same, but such refinance charge shall be
  based upon the amount refinanced, plus any additional cost of  insurance
  and  of  official  fees  incident  to  such  refinancing and any accrued
  collection and delinquency charges, after  the  deduction  of  a  refund
  credit  in  an  amount  equal to that to which the buyer would have been
  entitled under section three hundred five of  this  chapter  if  he  had
  prepaid  in  full  his  obligations under the contract but, in computing
  such refund credit, there shall not be allowed such an  amount  as  will
  bring  the  earned  credit  service  charge  up to fifteen dollars. Such
  agreement for refinancing may also provide for the payment by the  buyer
  of  the  additional  cost  to the holder of the contract of premiums for
  continuing in force, until the maturity of the contract  as  refinanced,
  any  insurance coverages provided for therein, subject to the provisions
  of subdivision  six  of  section  three  hundred  two.  The  refinancing
  agreement  shall set forth all items required to be disclosed by the act
  of  congress  entitled  "Truth  in  Lending  Act"  and  the  regulations
  thereunder,  as  such  act  and  regulations  may  from  time to time be
  amended.




   §  307.  Penalties.  1.  Any  person  who  shall  wilfully violate any
  provision of this article shall be guilty  of  a  misdemeanor  and  upon
  conviction  shall  be  punished  by  a  fine  not exceeding five hundred
  dollars.
    2. A wilful violation of sections three hundred two or  three  hundred
  three by any person shall bar his recovery of any credit service charge,
  delinquency  or  collection  charge  or refinancing charge on the retail
  instalment contract involved.
    3. Notwithstanding the provisions  of  this  section  any  failure  to
  comply  with  any  provision of this article may be corrected within ten
  days after the holder is notified thereof in writing by the  buyer,  or,
  in  the  absence  of  such  notice, the seller or holder may voluntarily
  correct any such failure to comply and, if  so  corrected,  neither  the
  seller  nor the holder shall be subject to any penalty under subdivision
  two of this section.




   §  308.  Waiver.  Any  waiver of the provisions of this article by the
  buyer shall be unenforceable and void.




   §  309. Exceptions. The provisions of section three hundred six and of
  subdivision  ten  of  section  three  hundred  two  shall  apply  to  an
  instalment sale of a motor vehicle for any use.




   §  310.  Severability.  If  any  provision  of  this  article  or  the
  application  thereof   to   any   person   or   circumstance   is   held
  unconstitutional,  the  remainder  of the article and the application of
  such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not  be  affected
  thereby.




   §  311.  Short  title. This article may be cited as "The Motor Vehicle
  Retail Instalment Sales Act."




   §  312.  Refund  credit on cancellation of credit related insurance or
  prepayment of contract. The provisions of this article requiring refunds
  and refund credits with respect to group credit life insurance, in cases
  of cancellation of group credit life insurance or  of  prepayment  of  a
  retail instalment contract shall also require refunds and refund credits
  with  respect  to  credit unemployment insurance, group credit accident,
  group credit health or group credit accident  and  health  insurance  in
  cases  of  cancellation  of  such  insurance  or  prepayment of a retail
  instalment contract which included such insurance.




   §  313.  Guaranties  to  sellers of liabilities of buyers under retail
  instalment contracts. No guaranty given to the seller or to  the  seller
  and  the  seller's assignee of the liabilities of a buyer under a retail
  instalment contract shall be valid unless the guaranty  is  incorporated
  in  or endorsed on the contract or identifies the contract and specifies
  the time balance thereof or, if the guaranty  relates  to  one  or  more
  future  retail  instalment  contracts,  it  limits  the liability of the
  guarantor to contracts dated within a period of two years from the  date
  of  the  guaranty  and  sets  forth  the  maximum  amount  for which the
  guarantor shall be liable. A copy of the  guaranty  shall  be  given  or
  mailed  to  the  guarantor  upon  or immediately after the execution and
  delivery of the original guaranty by the guarantor.
    As used in this section, "retail instalment contract"  and  "contract"
  include a retail instalment contract as defined in the retail instalment
  sales  act,  constituting article ten of this chapter. This section does
  not apply to a guaranty made by  a  seller  or  a  holder  of  a  retail
  instalment contract.




   §  314.  Security  interest  in  other  property. No retail instalment
  contract, or any other agreement executed in connection therewith, shall
  provide for the creation of a security interest in any personal or  real
  property,  other  than  the motor vehicle which is the subject matter of
  the retail instalment  sale  (or  accessories  therefor  or  special  or
  auxiliary equipment used in connection therewith), to secure the payment
  of  the  time  sale  price  under  such  contract  or  any part thereof,
  provided, however, that the prohibition of this  section  shall  not  be
  applicable  to  the taking of a mortgage or other security interest upon
  or in connection with real property to secure the payment  of  the  time
  sale  price  of  a retail installment sale, if the subject matter of the
  retail installment sale is a mobile home  or  trailer  which  is  to  be
  annexed  to  or  situated  on  such  real  property. Any such prohibited
  provision shall be void but shall not otherwise affect the  validity  of
  such contract.




   § 315. Claim for deficiency after default and repossession. If a buyer
  defaults on any instalment of the time sale price and the holder obtains
  possession  of  the  motor  vehicle  and  disposes  of it as provided by
  section 9--610 of the uniform commercial code, the buyer shall be liable
  to the holder for any deficiency to the extent provided in that section;
  provided, however, that in calculating such deficiency  there  shall  be
  deducted  from  the amount thereof as prescribed by such section 9--610,
  an amount equal to that portion of the refund credit to which the  buyer
  would  have  been  entitled  under  section  three  hundred five of this
  chapter if, at the time the holder disposed of the  motor  vehicle,  the
  buyer had not been in default and had prepaid in full the balance of the
  time sale price as the amount realized upon the disposition of the motor
  vehicle bears to the balance of the time sale price.




   §  316.  Notice  of buyer's redemption rights. The holder of any motor
  vehicle installment contract who  repossesses  or  accepts  a  voluntary
  surrender  of a motor vehicle pursuant to the provisions of article nine
  of  the  uniform  commercial  code,  or  any  contract,   shall   within
  seventy-two  hours of such repossession or surrender, personally deliver
  or mail to the buyer at his last known address a written notice  setting
  forth  the  right of such buyer to redeem such motor vehicle, the dollar
  amount necessary to redeem, and the name, address and  telephone  number
  of  the  holder  from  which  information may be obtained regarding such
  redemption.




   §  330.  Short  title. This article may be cited as the "Motor Vehicle
  Retail Leasing Act".




   §  331.  Definitions.  In  this article, unless the context or subject
  matter otherwise requires:
    1. "Motor vehicle" or "vehicle" means any device propelled or drawn by
  any power other than muscular power, upon or  by  which  any  person  or
  property  is  or may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, road
  or street. The term does  not  include  a  "snowmobile"  as  defined  in
  subdivision three of section 21.05 of the parks, recreation and historic
  preservation  law  or  other vehicles not designed primarily for highway
  transportation, but which may incidentally transport persons or property
  on a public highway.
    2. "Retail lessee" or "lessee" means a natural  person  who  leases  a
  motor  vehicle  from  a  retail lessor primarily for personal, family or
  household use and who executes a retail lease  agreement  in  connection
  therewith.    For  purposes  of  section  three  hundred thirty-four and
  subdivisions two and three of section three hundred  forty-six  of  this
  article, the term also includes a person who makes a payment to a lessor
  or  leaves  his  vehicle with a lessor pending the execution of a retail
  lease  agreement.    Except  as  provided  in  sections  three   hundred
  forty-eight  and three hundred forty-nine of this article, the term does
  not  include  a  person  who  leases  a  motor  vehicle  primarily   for
  agricultural,   business  or  commercial  use  or  for  the  purpose  of
  subleasing.
    3. "Retail lessor" or "lessor" means a person regularly engaged in the
  business of leasing or selling motor vehicles who leases a motor vehicle
  to a retail lessee under or subject to a retail lease agreement.
    4. "Retail lease" or "lease" means a transfer from a retail lessor  to
  a retail lessee of the right to possession and use of a motor vehicle in
  return  for consideration. The term does not include a sale, including a
  sale on approval or a sale  or  return,  a  retail  instalment  sale  as
  defined  in article nine of this chapter or the retention or creation of
  a security interest in a motor vehicle.
    5. "Retail lease agreement" or "agreement" means an agreement, entered
  into in this state, for the lease of a  motor  vehicle,  and  which  may
  include  the  purchase  of  goods  or  services incidental thereto, by a
  retail lessee for a scheduled term exceeding four months, whether or not
  the lessee has the option to purchase or otherwise become the  owner  of
  the  vehicle  at the expiration of the agreement. The term includes such
  an agreement wherever entered into if executed by  the  lessee  in  this
  state and if solicited in person by a person acting on his own behalf or
  that  of  the  lessor.  The  term  does  not include a retail instalment
  contract or a rental-purchase agreement as defined in articles nine  and
  eleven  of  this  chapter. An agreement that substantially complies with
  this article does not create a security interest in a motor  vehicle  as
  the  term  "security  interest"  is  defined in paragraph thirty-five of
  subsection (b) of section 1--201 of the uniform commercial code.
    6. "Additional early termination  charge"  means  the  initial  dollar
  amount  of  the  early  termination  charge  the  portion  of  which  is
  recoverable by the holder upon early  termination  in  addition  to  the
  amounts  specified  in  paragraphs (a) through (e) of subdivision one of
  section three hundred forty-one of this article.  The  additional  early
  termination  charge  may  only  include  amounts which are reasonable in
  light of the anticipated or  actual  harm  caused  by  the  delinquency,
  default  or early termination, the difficulties of proof of loss and the
  inconvenience or  nonfeasibility  of  otherwise  obtaining  an  adequate
  remedy. Any fees or charges included in the additional early termination
  charge may not also be included in the capitalized cost.
    * 7.  "Initial early termination charge" means the sum of the adjusted
  initial lease value and the additional early termination  charge,  which


 would  be recoverable under the lease agreement if the agreement were to
  be terminated before any of the periodic rental payments had become due.
  The term does not include any  vehicle  disposition  fee  or  any  other
  components  of  a  lessee's  early termination liability which could not
  have been incurred by the lessee at lease inception.
    * NB There are 2 sb 7's
    * 7. "Adjusted capitalized cost" means the capitalized cost  less  any
  capitalized  cost reduction payments made by the lessee at the inception
  of the lease and any net trade-in allowance granted by the lessor.
    * NB There are 2 sb 7's
    8.  "Anticipated  assignee"  means  the  person  to  whom  the  lessor
  anticipates  that  the  agreement  will  be  assigned  and  to  whom the
  agreement subsequently is assigned by the lessor.
    9. "Base rental payment" means that portion of the  monthly  or  other
  periodic  rental  payment  which is equal to the sum of: (a) the average
  monthly or other periodic lease charge; and (b) the average  monthly  or
  other  periodic  depreciation. For purposes of this article, the average
  monthly or other periodic depreciation may include a  monthly  or  other
  periodic  charge  for  any  item  that  the  lessor  has included in the
  capitalized cost.
    10. "Conspicuous" means that a term or clause is  so  written  that  a
  reasonable  person  against  whom it is to operate ought to have noticed
  it. Whether or not a term or clause is conspicuous is a question of  law
  for decision by the court.
    11.  "Capitalized  cost"  means the agreed upon amount which serves as
  the basis for determining the base rental payment and a portion  of  the
  early  termination  liability  of  the  lessee. The capitalized cost may
  include any taxes, registration,  license  acquisition,  assignment  and
  other  fees  and  charges for insurance, for a waiver of the contractual
  obligation  to  pay  the  gap  amount,   for   accessories   and   their
  installation,  for  delivering,  servicing,  repairing  or improving the
  motor vehicle and for other services incidental  to  the  agreement.  It
  also  may  include  the  unpaid  balance of any amount financed under an
  outstanding  motor  vehicle  loan  agreement  or  motor  vehicle  retail
  instalment  contract  or  the  unpaid  portion  of the early termination
  obligation under an outstanding motor vehicle  retail  lease  agreement.
  The term does not include any lease charge or any amount included in the
  additional early termination charge.
    12.  "Capitalized  cost  reduction"  means  any payments made by cash,
  check or similar means that are in the nature of  downpayments  made  by
  the lessee at the inception of the lease for the purpose of reducing the
  capitalized cost.
    13.  "Constant  yield  method"  means:  (a)  in the case of a periodic
  payment lease, that method of determining the lease  charge  portion  of
  each  base  rental  payment  pursuant to which the lease charge for each
  computational period is earned in advance by  multiplying  the  constant
  rate  implicit in the lease times the balance subject to lease charge as
  it declines during  the  lease  term.  At  any  given  time  during  the
  scheduled term of a periodic payment lease, the balance subject to lease
  charge  is  the difference between the adjusted capitalized cost and the
  sum of: (i)  all  depreciation  amounts  accrued  during  the  preceding
  computational  periods;  and  (ii) the first base rental payment; (b) in
  the  case  of  a  single  or  advance  payment  lease,  that  method  of
  determining  the periodic earning of lease charges pursuant to which the
  lease charge for each computational  period  is  earned  in  advance  by
  multiplying  the  constant  rate implicit in the lease times the balance
  subject to lease charge as it increases during the scheduled lease term.
  At any given time during the scheduled  term  of  a  single  or  advance


 payment  lease,  the  balance  subject  to lease charge is determined by
  subtracting from the estimated residual value  the  total  lease  charge
  scheduled  to  be  earned  over  the term of the lease and adding to the
  difference  all lease charges accrued during the preceding computational
  periods; (c) in the case of either type of  lease,  the  periodic  lease
  charge  calculations  are  based  on the assumption that the holder will
  receive the rental payments on their exact due dates and that the  lease
  goes to its full term.
    14. "Estimated residual value" means the estimated value of the leased
  vehicle  at  the  scheduled end of the lease term, used by the lessor in
  determining the base rental payment, as established by the lessor at the
  time he enters into a retail lease agreement.
    15. "Gap amount" has the meaning ascribed to it in paragraph fifty-two
  of subsection (a) of section one hundred seven of the insurance law.
    16. "Gap insurance" has  the  meaning  ascribed  to  it  in  paragraph
  twenty-six  of  subsection  (a)  of  section  one  thousand  one hundred
  thirteen of the insurance law. For purposes of paragraphs (a) and (b) of
  subdivision six of section three hundred thirty-seven of  this  article,
  gap  insurance  shall not be deemed "liability insurance or insurance on
  the vehicle".
    17. "Group credit insurance" means group credit life insurance,  group
  credit  accident  insurance, group credit health insurance, group credit
  accident and health insurance or group credit unemployment insurance.
    18. "Holder" means the retail lessor  of  a  motor  vehicle  under  or
  subject to a retail lease agreement or, if the agreement is purchased by
  an  assignee,  the  assignee.  Unless  and  until  it  realizes upon its
  security interest therein, the term does not include a pledgee of one or
  more lease agreements to secure a bona fide loan thereon.
    19. "Lease charge" means the charge to be paid by  the  retail  lessee
  for  the  privilege  of  making the rental payments as scheduled under a
  retail lease agreement. The term does not include any amount included in
  the capitalized cost. The term also does not  include  any  delinquency,
  default,  disposition,  early  termination, collection, or reinstatement
  charge and the amount, if any, included in a retail lease agreement  for
  taxes,  registration, license acquisition, assignment and other fees and
  charges for insurance,  for  accessories  and  their  installation,  for
  delivering,  servicing, repairing or improving the motor vehicle and for
  other services incidental to the agreement, whether or not such  amounts
  are  included  in  the  capitalized  cost,  paid for separately at lease
  inception by cash, check or similar means or paid for on  a  monthly  or
  other periodic basis in addition to the base rental payment.
    20.   "Person"   means   an   individual,   partnership,  corporation,
  association or other group, however organized.
    21. "Precomputed lease transaction" means a retail  lease  transaction
  in  which  the  base  rental  obligation  is  a sum comprising the total
  depreciation estimated to occur during the scheduled term of  the  lease
  and  the  amount  of  the lease charge computed in advance. A disclosure
  required by the act of Congress entitled "Consumer Leasing Act of  1976"
  does not in itself make a lease charge or transaction precomputed.
    22.  "Realized  value" means: (a) the price received by the holder for
  the leased vehicle at disposition; (b) the highest offer received by the
  holder for disposition of the leased vehicle; or  (c)  the  fair  market
  value  of the vehicle, determined pursuant to subdivision one of section
  three hundred forty of this article by a mutually acceptable independent
  appraiser, at the scheduled end of the lease term or, if  the  lease  is
  terminated  prior  thereto,  at early termination. The realized value of
  the vehicle may be its value in the customary wholesale market.


   23. "Renegotiation" means the satisfaction of an existing retail lease
  agreement and the replacement of the existing agreement by a  new  lease
  agreement  undertaken  by the same lessor or holder and the same lessee.
  The term does not include: (a) the substitution of the leased vehicle or
  the  addition  or return of a vehicle in a multiple-vehicle lease, if in
  either case the average payment allocable to  a  rental  period  is  not
  increased  by more than twenty-five percent; (b) a deferral or extension
  of one or more periodic payments, or portions of a periodic payment; (c)
  a reduction in charges in the agreement; (d) an  agreement  involving  a
  court  proceeding;  or  (e)  any other agreement or event which does not
  constitute  a  "renegotiation"  under  the  act  of  Congress   entitled
  "Consumer  Leasing  Act of 1976" and the regulations thereunder, as such
  act and regulations may from time to time be amended.
    24. Words in the singular include the plural and vice versa.




   §  332.  Rebate  or discount for information or assistance in lease or
  sale of motor vehicle. No lessor shall induce or attempt to  induce  any
  person  to enter into an agreement subject to this article by offering a
  subsequent rebate, discount, commission or other consideration,  on  the
  condition  that  the  lessee  provide  information or assistance for the
  purpose of enabling the lessor to either lease or sell a  motor  vehicle
  to another person.


   §  333.  Pre-lease  availability  of sample form of agreement.  1. The
  lessor of a motor vehicle shall make a blank sample copy of its  current
  form  of  retail  lease  agreement  readily available for examination by
  prospective lessees by:
    (a) Furnishing it upon request prior to the consummation of  a  retail
  lease transaction; and
    (b)  Posting  in  its  place  of  business a sign stating that a blank
  sample copy of its form of retail  lease  agreement  is  available  upon
  request.
    2.  An assignee who has prepared a form of retail lease agreement that
  is used by a lessor shall provide the lessor with blank sample copies of
  that form of agreement which the lessor  may  use  to  comply  with  the
  delivery requirement imposed upon it by paragraph (a) of subdivision one
  of  this section. An assignee who does so shall have no liability if the
  lessor to whom those materials are provided fails to  comply  with  this
  section.




   §  334.  Payment  or  trade-in  pending  execution of lease agreement;
  refund or return upon non-execution. 1. Any payment made by cash,  check
  or  similar  means  to  a lessor pending the execution of a retail lease
  agreement shall be refunded  to  the  lessee  in  the  event  the  lease
  agreement is not executed. Any refund required by this subdivision shall
  be  made  by  the  lessor  within  fifteen business days after the lease
  application is rejected by the lessor or the prospective assignee.
    2. If a lessee is required to make a payment  to  a  lessor  by  cash,
  check  or  similar  means  pending  the  execution  of  a  retail  lease
  agreement, the lessor shall notify the lessee in writing that the lessee
  has the right, if the lease application is not  approved,  to  have  any
  traded-in  vehicle  returned promptly and receive a prompt refund of any
  payments made.
    3. If a lessee leaves his motor vehicle with the lessor in lieu of  or
  in addition to a payment by cash, check or similar means, and the lessor
  and  lessee  agree  that  the  parties  shall  enter into a retail lease
  agreement, the lessor shall not sell or transfer the  vehicle  traded-in
  until the lessee and the lessor execute a retail lease agreement. In the
  event  a  lease  agreement  is  not  executed, the lessor shall promptly
  return to the lessee the vehicle traded-in.
    4. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any fee  charged,
  received  or  collected by a holder in connection with the assumption of
  an existing retail lease agreement.
    5. The provisions of this section shall not apply to  the  sale  of  a
  motor  vehicle  by  a prospective lessee to a prospective lessor under a
  separate contract of sale for the price specified  in  the  contract  if
  such  contract  is executed before the parties have consummated a retail
  lease agreement, is in writing, is dated as of the date of the sale  and
  is  signed  by  the  parties.  To be exempt under the provisions of this
  subdivision, such agreement shall also:
    (a) clearly and conspicuously disclose to the  seller  that  the  sale
  price  for the vehicle establishes its value for purposes of determining
  the amount the lessor will credit  as  a  "capitalized  cost  reduction"
  under any retail lease agreement subsequently consummated by the parties
  or  as  the  amount  due  to the lessee for the vehicle in the event the
  parties fail to consummate a retail lease agreement;
    (b) contain a conspicuous clause that is initialled separately by  the
  prospective lessee whereby such lessee agrees to leave the amount of the
  purchase  price  on  deposit  with  the  prospective  lessor pending the
  consummation of a retail lease agreement for a currently produced  model
  year  vehicle  that  is to be ordered specially from the manufacturer or
  for a model year vehicle that is not yet in production as of the date of
  the sale of the lessee's vehicle; and
    (c) stipulate that seventy-five days after the date of the  sale,  the
  prospective  lessee shall be entitled on demand to payment of the agreed
  upon price for the vehicle unless within  that  time  the  parties  have
  consummated  a  separate  retail  lease  agreement  or have agreed to an
  earlier payment of the price to the lessee.






   §  335.  Total  loss  notice  and  waiver of the gap amount. 1. If the
  retail lease agreement provides that the  lessee  shall  be  responsible
  upon  a  total loss of the vehicle occasioned by its theft, confiscation
  or physical damage  for  the  gap  amount,  the  lessor,  prior  to  the
  execution  of  the  agreement,  shall by a notice on a separate document
  conspicuously disclose that fact  and  the  obligations  for  which  the
  lessee  would  remain  liable  in  the event of a theft, confiscation or
  total loss of the vehicle. If the lessor is required  under  subdivision
  two  of this section to offer to waive its contractual right to hold the
  lessee liable for the gap amount in the event of a  total  loss  of  the
  vehicle  occasioned  by  its  theft or physical damage, the notice shall
  also: (a) state that for a separate charge disclosed in the  notice  the
  lessor  will  waive  its contractual right to hold the lessee liable for
  the gap amount in the event of a total loss of the vehicle occasioned by
  its theft or physical damage; (b)  contain  a  provision  informing  the
  lessee  that  he or she may as an alternative to purchasing a waiver, be
  able to purchase insurance covering the gap  amount  from  an  insurance
  company  which  has  been  licensed  by  the superintendent of financial
  services to write motor vehicle lessee gap insurance in this state;  and
  (c)  contain a provision permitting the lessee to indicate whether he or
  she wants the lessor to waive its contractual right to hold  the  lessee
  liable  for  the  gap amount in the event of a total loss of the vehicle
  occasioned by its theft or physical damage. The notice shall  be  signed
  by the lessee. The lessor or assignee shall provide a copy of the signed
  notice  to  the  lessee,  and  shall  maintain a copy in the lessor's or
  assignee's files for at least the term of the lease. Failure to  provide
  the  notice  and  to  obtain  the lessee's signature as required by this
  subdivision shall  invalidate  any  provision  of  the  agreement  which
  otherwise  would  obligate  a lessee to pay to the holder, after a total
  loss of the motor vehicle  occasioned  by  its  theft,  confiscation  or
  physical  damage  the  gap  amount.  No  retail lease agreement shall be
  conditioned upon the lessee's obtaining  of  motor  vehicle  lessee  gap
  insurance  as  set  forth in subparagraph (B) of paragraph twenty-six of
  subsection (a) of section one  thousand  one  hundred  thirteen  of  the
  insurance law.
    2.  If  the  retail  lease agreement provides that the lessee shall be
  responsible upon a total loss of the vehicle occasioned by its theft  or
  physical  damage  for the gap amount, the lessor, prior to the execution
  of the agreement, shall offer to waive its contractual right to hold the
  lessee liable for the gap amount in the event of a  total  loss  of  the
  vehicle  occasioned  by  its  theft  or  physical  damage, only if motor
  vehicle lessor gap insurance coverage is available to the lessor or  the
  anticipated   assignee   and   such   coverage   is   obtained   from  a
  property/casualty insurance company, which  has  been  licensed  by  the
  superintendent  of  financial  services  of  this  state  to write motor
  vehicle lessor gap insurance in this  state.  This  offer  may  be  made
  contingent  upon  the  payment  by  the lessee of a separate charge that
  shall not exceed the cost of lessor gap insurance  covering  the  retail
  lease  transaction plus an administrative fee not to exceed ten dollars.
  Nothing contained in this section shall  be  construed  to  authorize  a
  waiver,  in  connection  with a transaction with respect to which lessor
  gap insurance has not been obtained, of a contractual right to hold  the
  lessee  liable  for  the  gap amount in the event of a total loss of the
  vehicle occasioned by its theft or physical damage.
    3. A lessor shall not be  obligated  under  subdivision  two  of  this
  section  to  offer  to  waive  its  contractual right to hold the lessee
  liable for the gap amount if, during the current calendar year or during
  the odd-numbered calendar year immediately preceding the  calendar  year


 in  which  the  agreement is entered into, the lessor or the anticipated
  assignee of the lessor has received motor vehicle lessor  gap  insurance
  declination  notices  or  other  evidence  of  unavailability from every
  insurance  company  whose  name  appears  on the department of financial
  services compilation of insurance companies which during  that  calendar
  year were authorized to write motor vehicle lessor gap insurance in this
  state. Evidence of these declinations shall be retained by such a lessor
  or  the  anticipated assignee of such a lessor for a period of six years
  after the expiration of the calendar year in which they were issued.
    4. In order to enable lessors or their anticipated assignees to comply
  with the requirements imposed by subdivision two of  this  section,  the
  superintendent  of financial services shall compile and make available a
  periodically  updated  list  of  those  insurance  companies  which  are
  authorized  to write motor vehicle lessor gap insurance coverage in this
  state.
    5. Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to the  lessor,
  or  any anticipated assignee of a lessor, under a retail lease agreement
  under which the lessee is not liable upon a total loss  of  the  vehicle
  occasioned  by  its  theft,  confiscation or physical damage for the gap
  amount.




   §  336.  Business  purpose  statement.  1. A preprinted or typewritten
  affirmation or other provision indicating that a vehicle is being leased
  primarily  for  agricultural,  business  or  commercial  use  shall   be
  inadmissible  in evidence in any trial, hearing, action or proceeding on
  behalf of a lessor or holder unless the affirmation or  other  provision
  is  printed  or  typewritten in a separate document signed by the lessee
  that contains: (a) a space which the lessee must complete  in  order  to
  identify  the  nature of his or her business; and (b) directly above the
  space reserved for the signature of the lessee, a conspicuous  statement
  informing  the lessee that important consumer protections will not apply
  if the vehicle is being leased primarily for agricultural,  business  or
  commercial use.
    2.  This  section  shall  not  apply  if  the  retail  lease agreement
  contains: (a) a provision permitting the lessee to specify  whether  the
  vehicle  is being leased primarily for personal, family or household use
  or primarily for agricultural,  business  or  commercial  use;  and  (b)
  either  in  close proximity to the provisions permitted by paragraph (a)
  of this subdivision or directly above the notice required  by  paragraph
  (c)  of  subdivision  two  of section three hundred thirty-seven of this
  article, a notice printed or  written  in  a  size  equal  to  at  least
  eight-point  bold  type  that  is substantially similar to the following
  notice:  "WARNING: Important consumer protections may not apply if  this
  agreement  indicates  that  you  are  leasing  the vehicle primarily for
  agricultural, business or commercial use."
    3. The statement by the lessee of the purpose for which the vehicle is
  being leased shall not be  dispositive  of  the  issue  of  whether  the
  vehicle is being leased primarily for personal, family or household use.
  In  determining  whether  the  vehicle  is  being  leased  primarily for
  personal, family or household use, the court shall  consider  any  other
  factors relevant to that determination.




   §  337.  Requirements as to retail lease agreements. 1. A retail lease
  agreement shall be in a writing and, except  as  otherwise  provided  in
  subdivision  two  of  section  three hundred forty-five of this article,
  signed contemporaneously  by  the  lessor  and  the  lessee.  Except  as
  provided  in  sections  three  hundred  thirty-five  and  three  hundred
  thirty-six of this article, a retail lease agreement shall contain in  a
  single document all the agreements of the parties.
    2.  The  printed portion of the agreement shall be printed in at least
  eight-point type  in  ink  that  contrasts  with  the  paper  used.  The
  agreement shall contain the following items printed or written in a size
  equal to at least ten-point bold type:
    (a)  Both  at  the  top  of the agreement and directly above the space
  reserved for the signature of the lessee, the words  "LEASE  AGREEMENT",
  "RETAIL LEASE AGREEMENT" or "MOTOR VEHICLE LEASE AGREEMENT";
    (b)  A  specific statement that physical damage or liability insurance
  coverage for bodily injury and property damage caused to others  is  not
  included, if that is the case; and
    (c)  Directly  above the acknowledgment permitted by subdivision three
  of this section to appear above the space reserved for the signature  of
  the  lessee,  a written notice informing the lessee that: (i) the lessee
  should not sign the agreement before  he  or  she  reads  it  or  if  it
  contains  any  blank  space;  and  (ii)  the  lessee  is  entitled  to a
  completely filled in copy of the agreement when he or she  signs  it.  A
  notice  substantially  similar to the following notice complies with the
  requirements of this paragraph: "NOTICE TO THE LESSEE: 1.  Do  not  sign
  this agreement before you read it or if it contains any blank space.
    2.  You  are entitled to a completely filled in copy of this agreement
  when you sign it."
    3. The lessor shall deliver to the lessee, or mail to him  or  her  at
  his  or  her  address  shown  on  the agreement, a copy of the agreement
  signed by the lessor. Until the lessor does so, a  lessee  who  has  not
  received delivery of the motor vehicle shall have an unconditional right
  to  cancel  the  agreement  and  to  receive  an immediate refund of all
  payments made and redelivery of all goods traded-in  to  the  lessor  on
  account  of  or in contemplation of the agreement. Any acknowledgment by
  the lessee of delivery of a copy of the agreement shall  be  printed  or
  written  in  a  size  equal  to  at  least eight-point bold type and, if
  contained in the agreement,  shall  appear  directly  above  the  legend
  required  by  paragraph (a) of subdivision two of this section to appear
  directly above the space reserved for the signature of the lessee.
    4. The agreement shall contain the names of the lessor and the lessee,
  the place of business of the lessor, the residence or place of  business
  of  the lessee as specified by the lessee and a description of the motor
  vehicle including its make, year model, model and identification  number
  or marks.
    5. The agreement shall contain:
    (a) All items required to be disclosed by the act of Congress entitled
  "Consumer  Leasing  Act of 1976" and the regulations thereunder, as such
  act and regulations may from time to time be amended; provided, however,
  that the disclosures required by the  "Consumer  Leasing  Act  of  1976"
  shall  be  made  in  all  leasing  transactions  covered by this article
  regardless of the exemption in the "Consumer Leasing Act  of  1976"  for
  lease  transactions  in  which  the total contractual obligation exceeds
  twenty-five thousand dollars;
    (b) The capitalized cost, using the  term  "capitalized  cost"  and  a
  descriptive  explanation  such  as  "the sum of the adjusted capitalized
  cost and any capitalized cost reduction. The capitalized  cost  and  the
  amount of the rental payment may be negotiable";


   (c)  The  adjusted  capitalized  cost  of  the vehicle, using the term
  "adjusted capitalized cost", a  descriptive  explanation  such  as  "the
  amount  which is capitalized in connection with the lease and is used in
  determining  the  amount  of  your  periodic  payment"  and  immediately
  thereafter one of the following additional explanatory statements:
    (i)  In  the  case  of  an agreement which provides for an "additional
  early  termination  charge"  and  whose  early  termination   provisions
  expressly  refer  to  the  "adjusted capitalized cost," a statement that
  "this amount plus the additional early termination charge will  be  used
  in determining your early termination liability";
    (ii)  In  the  case  of an agreement which provides for an "additional
  early termination charge" and whose early termination provisions do  not
  expressly  refer  to  the  "adjusted capitalized cost," a statement that
  "this amount plus the additional early termination charge will  be  used
  in determining the legal limit on your early termination liability";
    (iii)  In  the  case  of  an  agreement  which does not provide for an
  "additional  early  termination  charge"  and  whose  early  termination
  provisions  expressly  refer  to  the  "adjusted  capitalized  cost,"  a
  statement that "this amount will  be  used  in  determining  your  early
  termination liability"; or
    (iv)  In  the  case  of  an  agreement  which  does not provide for an
  "additional  early  termination  charge"  and  whose  early  termination
  provisions  do not expressly refer to the "adjusted capitalized cost," a
  statement that "this amount will be used in determining the legal  limit
  on your early termination liability";
    (d)  The  amount,  if  any, included for insurance and other benefits,
  specifying and describing the coverages and the amount included for each
  type of coverage;
    (e) In close proximity to the  adjusted  capitalized  cost  disclosure
  required  by  paragraph  (c) of this subdivision and only as applicable,
  any  additional  early  termination  charge  provided  for   under   the
  agreement, using the term "additional early termination charge", and one
  of the following descriptive explanations:
    (i)  In  the  case  of an agreement whose early termination provisions
  expressly refer to the "adjusted additional early termination charge," a
  descriptive explanation such as "an additional  amount  the  unamortized
  portion  of  which  will  be  used in determining your early termination
  liability"; or
    (ii) In the case of an agreement whose  provisions  do  not  expressly
  refer  to  the  "additional  early  termination  charge,"  a descriptive
  explanation such as "an additional amount  the  unamortized  portion  of
  which  will  be  used  in  determining  the  legal  limit  on your early
  termination  liability";   and   immediately   after   the   descriptive
  explanation   additional   explanatory   statements  that  "this  amount
  represents the total costs and damages,  in  addition  to  the  adjusted
  capitalized  cost,  which  we  would  incur if this agreement were to be
  terminated before you had made any rental payments."
    (f)  In  close  proximity  to  the  "adjusted  capitalized  cost"  and
  "additional early termination charge" disclosures required by paragraphs
  (c) and (e) of this subdivision, one of the following statements:
    (i)  In  the  case  of  an agreement which provides for an "additional
  early termination charge" and whose early termination provisions do  not
  expressly  refer  to  either  the  "adjusted  capitalized  cost"  or the
  "additional early termination charge," a statement that  "although  they
  are  not  referred to in the early termination provisions of this lease,
  the 'adjusted capitalized cost' and the  'additional  early  termination
  charge'  may  be  used  to  compare  the early termination provisions of
  competing lessors";


   (ii) In the case of an agreement which  provides  for  an  "additional
  early  termination charge" and whose early termination provisions do not
  expressly  refer  to  the  "additional  early  termination  charge,"   a
  statement  that  "although  the 'additional early termination charge' is
  not  referred  to in the early termination provisions of this lease, the
  'additional early termination  charge'  and  the  'adjusted  capitalized
  cost'  may  be  used  to  compare  the  early  termination provisions of
  competing lessors";
    (iii) In the case of an agreement which provides  for  an  "additional
  early  termination charge" and whose early termination provisions do not
  expressly refer to the "adjusted capitalized  cost,"  a  statement  that
  "although  the  'adjusted  capitalized  cost'  is not referred to in the
  early termination provisions of this lease,  the  'adjusted  capitalized
  cost'  and  the  'additional  early  termination  charge' may be used to
  compare the early termination provisions of competing lessors";
    (iv) In the case of an agreement which  provides  for  an  "additional
  early   termination  charge"  and  whose  early  termination  provisions
  expressly refer  to  both  the  "adjusted  capitalized  cost,"  and  the
  "additional  early  termination charge," a statement that "the 'adjusted
  capitalized cost' and the 'additional early termination charge'  may  be
  used to compare the early termination provisions of competing lessors";
    (v)  In  the  case  of  an  agreement  which  does not provide for any
  "additional  early  termination  charge"  and  whose  early  termination
  provisions  do not expressly refer to the "adjusted capitalized cost," a
  statement that "although the 'adjusted capitalized cost' is not referred
  to in the early termination provisions  of  this  lease,  the  'adjusted
  capitalized   cost'  may  be  used  to  compare  the  early  termination
  provisions of competing lessors"; or
    (vi) In the case of an  agreement  which  does  not  provide  for  any
  "additional  early  termination  charge"  and  whose  early  termination
  provisions  expressly  refer  to  the  "adjusted  capitalized  cost,"  a
  statement  that  "the 'adjusted capitalized cost' may be used to compare
  the early termination provisions of competing lessors."
    (g) A statement in at least eight-point bold type informing the lessee
  that he or she has the right to terminate the agreement  voluntarily  at
  any  time  after  the  first fifty percent of the total number of months
  constituting the full scheduled lease term, or earlier if the  agreement
  so  provides,  if  he or she is in full compliance with the terms of the
  agreement and satisfies his or her early termination obligation;
    (h) A statement in at least eight-point bold type to the  effect  that
  "early termination may require you to pay a substantial charge";
    (i)  A  statement  in  at least eight-point bold type stating that the
  lessee shall not be liable for an early termination fee if he or she has
  deceased before the end of the lease;
    (j) A provision permitting a lessee whose default consists  solely  of
  the  failure  to  make timely rental payments to cure his or her default
  and reinstate the  agreement,  without  losing  any  rights  or  options
  previously  acquired  under the agreement, by paying all past due rental
  and  delinquency  charges  and,  if  the  agreement   so   provides,   a
  reinstatement  fee  not  to  exceed  ten  dollars  and  the  actual  and
  reasonable costs of repossession, storage, pickup and redelivery  within
  twenty-five  days  after the lessee is sent written notice of his or her
  reinstatement rights. The reinstatement right granted pursuant  to  this
  paragraph  may  be  restricted  to  a lessee who has not previously been
  afforded the opportunity to reinstate the  agreement.  For  purposes  of
  this  paragraph,  a  rental  charge is past due if it is not paid by its
  scheduled  due  date  or  within  any  grace  period  specified  in  the
  agreement;


   (k)  The  estimated  residual  value  of  the  vehicle, using the term
  "estimated residual value";
    * (l)  In  the case of an agreement which does not obligate the lessee
  upon a total loss of the vehicle occasioned by  its  theft  or  physical
  damage  for  any  of  the  items  specified in paragraphs (e) and (f) of
  subdivision one of section three hundred forty-one of  this  article,  a
  conspicuous notice that the lessee has no such obligation.
    * NB There are 2 par (l)'s
    * (l)  The  liability of the lessee in the case of a total loss of the
  vehicle or the vehicle is rendered inoperable. Disclosure  of  liability
  pursuant  to this paragraph shall include the financial liability of the
  lessee and the lessor's rules, policies and procedures in the event  the
  car  is  declared a total loss or rendered inoperable during the term of
  the lease.
    * NB There are 2 par (l)'s
    Nothing in this subdivision  prevents  a  holder  from  attempting  to
  repossess  a  vehicle,  accepting  its voluntary surrender or selling it
  during the reinstatement period,  but  such  a  repossession,  voluntary
  surrender,  or  sale  shall  not  affect  the reinstatement right of the
  lessee. Upon reinstatement, the holder shall provide the lessee with the
  same vehicle leased by the lessee prior to  reinstatement  or,  if  that
  vehicle  is  not  available,  a  substitute vehicle of comparable worth,
  quality and condition.
    6. (a) (i) The amount, if any, included  for  liability  insurance  or
  insurance  on  the vehicle, shall not exceed the premiums charged by the
  insurance company for  such  insurance.  The  holder,  if  the  cost  of
  liability  insurance  or insurance on the motor vehicle is included in a
  retail lease agreement and the policy or policies are delivered  to  the
  holder,  shall  within  thirty  days after execution of the retail lease
  agreement, send or cause to be sent to the lessee a copy of  the  policy
  or  policies  of insurance, issued by an insurance company authorized to
  do that kind of insurance business in this state, clearly setting  forth
  the  amount of the premium, the kind or kinds of insurance and the scope
  of the coverage and all the terms, exceptions, limitations, restrictions
  and conditions of the contract or contracts of insurance.
    (ii) The lessee of a motor vehicle  under  a  retail  lease  agreement
  shall  have  the privilege of purchasing such insurance from an agent or
  broker of his or her own selection and of selecting an insurance company
  acceptable to the lessor; provided, however, that the inclusion  of  the
  insurance  premium in the retail lease agreement when the lessee selects
  the agent, broker or company, shall be optional with the lessor  and  in
  such  case  the  lessor or assignee shall have no obligation to send, or
  cause to be sent, to the lessee a copy of the policy of insurance.
    (b) If any such policy of liability  insurance  or  insurance  on  the
  motor  vehicle  is  cancelled,  the  unearned  insurance  premium refund
  received or receivable by the holder of the agreement or, if the  amount
  included therefor in the agreement exceeds the cost to the holder of the
  agreement  for  such  insurance,  the  unearned portion of the amount so
  included, shall be  either:  (i)  refunded  to  the  lessee  within  ten
  business  days  after  it  is  received by the holder; or (ii) credited,
  together with the  unearned  portion  of  the  lease  charge  applicable
  thereto,  to the final maturing rental payments or, at the option of the
  holder, to the end of term obligations under the retail lease  agreement
  except  to  the  extent  applied  toward  payment  for similar insurance
  protecting the interests of the lessee and the holder of  the  agreement
  or  either  of them, provided that no such credit or refund need be made
  if the amount thereof would be less than one dollar.


   (c) The amount, if any, included for group  credit  insurance  or  for
  insurance  other than gap insurance, liability insurance or insurance on
  the motor vehicle shall not exceed the premiums charged by the insurance
  company for such insurance. If such group credit or other  insurance  is
  cancelled  the  refund  for  unearned  insurance  premiums  received  or
  receivable by the holder of the agreement, or the excess of  the  amount
  included  in  the agreement for group credit or other insurance over the
  premiums paid or payable by the holder of the agreement  therefor  shall
  be  either: (i) refunded to the lessee within ten business days after it
  is received by the holder; or (ii) credited, together  with,  in  either
  case,  the  unearned  portion of the lease charge applicable thereto, to
  the final maturing rental payments or, at the option of the  holder,  to
  the  end  of term obligations under the retail lease agreement, provided
  that no such credit or refund need be made if the amount  thereof  would
  be less than one dollar.
    (d)  The  amount  of  any separate charge included for a waiver by the
  lessor of its contractual right to hold the lessee liable  for  the  gap
  amount  shall  not  exceed the cost of lessor gap insurance covering the
  retail lease transaction.
    7. (a) If the lessee is obligated in  connection  with  the  lease  to
  maintain  liability  insurance or insurance on the motor vehicle that is
  the subject of the agreement and if subsequent to the execution  of  the
  agreement  the  lessee  fails  to  maintain  the required insurance, the
  holder may make advances to procure the equivalent limits  of  insurance
  for either the interests of the lessee and the holder or the interest of
  either of them, and any amount so advanced may be the subject of a lease
  charge as though such amount was part of the initial lease value.
    (b)  If  under subdivision two of section three hundred thirty-five of
  this article, the lessor waives its contractual right to hold the lessee
  liable for the gap amount, and lessor gap insurance coverage  which  the
  lessor   or   holder   purchased  in  connection  with  the  transaction
  subsequently is terminated prior to the filing of a  claim  due  to  the
  insolvency  of  the insurance company, notwithstanding the provisions of
  paragraph three of subsection (b) of section one  thousand  one  hundred
  one  of  the  insurance  law  the  holder may make an advance to procure
  equivalent limits of lessor gap insurance covering the  transaction  and
  any  amount  so  advanced may be the subject of a lease charge as though
  such amount was part of the capitalized cost.
    (c) Each amount so advanced shall be subject to the default provisions
  of the lease agreement if so provided in the agreement and if the holder
  notifies the lessee in writing of the advance of such amount and of  his
  or her option to repay such amount in any one of the following ways:
    (i)  Full  payment  within ten days from the date of giving or mailing
  the notice;
    (ii) Full amortization  during  the  term  of  the  insurance  or  the
  remaining term of the agreement, at the option of the holder;
    (iii) If offered by the holder, as a final balloon payment payable one
  month after the last scheduled payment under the agreement;
    (iv) If offered by the holder, full amortization after the term of the
  agreement,  to  be  made  in  periodic  payments which do not exceed the
  average periodic payment under the agreement; or
    (v) If offered by the holder, any other amortization plan.
    If the lessee neither pays in full the amount so advanced nor notifies
  the holder in writing of his or her choice  regarding  the  amortization
  options  before  the  expiration  of ten days from the date of giving or
  mailing the notice by the holder, the holder shall amortize  the  amount
  so  advanced  pursuant  to  subparagraph  (ii)  of paragraph (c) of this
  subdivision.


   8. (a) The holder of a retail lease agreement may, if the agreement so
  provides, collect a delinquency and collection  charge  on  each  rental
  payment  in default for a period not less than ten days in an amount not
  in excess of the amount or  amounts  agreed  to  in  the  agreement.  In
  addition  to  a  delinquency  and  collection  charge,  the retail lease
  agreement may provide for the payment of reasonable attorneys' fees  not
  exceeding  fifteen  percent  of  the  amount  due  and payable under the
  agreement where the agreement is referred to an attorney not a  salaried
  employee  of  the holder of the agreement for collection, plus the court
  costs.
    (b) The holder may not assess or collect a delinquency and  collection
  charge  under  paragraph  (a)  of  this subdivision on a rental payment,
  which payment is otherwise a full payment for the applicable period  and
  is  paid  within ten days after its scheduled or deferred due date, when
  the only delinquency  is  attributable  to  delinquency  and  collection
  charges assessed on an earlier rental payment or payments.
    9. No retail lease agreement shall be signed by any party thereto when
  it contains blank spaces to be filled in after it has been signed except
  that,  if  delivery  of the motor vehicle is not made at the time of the
  execution of the agreement, the identifying  numbers  or  marks  of  the
  motor  vehicle  or  similar  information  and  the due date of the first
  payment may be inserted  in  the  agreement  after  its  execution.  The
  lessee's  written  acknowledgment,  conforming  to  the  requirements of
  subdivision three of  this  section,  of  delivery  of  a  copy  of  the
  agreement  shall  be conclusive proof of such delivery and of compliance
  with this subdivision in any action  or  proceeding  by  or  against  an
  assignee  of  the agreement without knowledge to the contrary when he or
  she purchases the agreement.
    10. No retail lease agreement shall contain any provision by which the
  lessee agrees not to assert against a  holder  a  claim  or  defense  or
  require  or  entail  the execution of any note or series of notes which,
  when separately negotiated, will cut off as to third parties  any  right
  of  action  or defense which the lessee may have against the lessor. The
  holder of a retail lease agreement shall be subject to  all  claims  and
  defenses  of  the  lessee  against  the  lessor  arising  from the lease
  notwithstanding  any  agreement  to  the  contrary,  but  the   holder's
  liability  under  this  subdivision shall not exceed the amount owing to
  the holder at the time the claim or  defense  is  asserted  against  the
  holder.  The holder shall have recourse against the lessor to the extent
  of any liability incurred by the holder  pursuant  to  this  subdivision
  regardless  of  whether  the  assignment  of  the  agreement was with or
  without recourse.
    11. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this chapter,  the  lien
  law,  banking law or other law: (a) a person may purchase a retail lease
  agreement from a lessor on such terms and conditions and for such  price
  as  may be mutually agreed upon; and (b) no filing of the assignment, no
  notice to the lessee of the assignment,  and  no  requirement  that  the
  lessor  be deprived of dominion over payments upon the agreement or over
  the vehicle if repossessed by  or  returned  to  the  lessor,  shall  be
  necessary  to  the  validity  of  a written assignment of a retail lease
  agreement  as  against  creditors,  subsequent   purchasers,   pledgees,
  mortgagees or encumbrancers of the lessor.
    12. Unless the lessee has notice of actual or intended assignment of a
  retail  lease  agreement,  payment  thereunder made by the lessee to the
  last known holder of such agreement shall be binding upon all subsequent
  holders or assignees. A notification which does not reasonably  identify
  the  rights  assigned  is  ineffective.  If requested by the lessee, the
  assignee shall furnish reasonable proof that  the  assignment  has  been


 made  and  unless  he  or  she  does  so the lessee may pay the original
  lessor.
    13.  (a)  Upon written request from the lessee, the holder of a retail
  lease agreement shall give or forward to the lessee a written  statement
  of  the  dates  and  amounts  of the rental payments that have been made
  under the agreement  and  the  total  amount  of  the  remaining  rental
  payments. A lessee shall be given a written receipt for any payment when
  made in cash.
    (b)  Upon  written  request  from  a  lessee  who  is then entitled to
  terminate the agreement early, the holder of a  retail  lease  agreement
  shall  give  or  forward to the lessee a written statement of his or her
  gross early termination liability under the agreement.
    14. No retail lease agreement shall contain any  provision  applicable
  to  a natural person who leases a vehicle primarily for personal, family
  or household use by which:
    (a)  in  the  absence  of  the  lessee's  default,  the  holder   may,
  arbitrarily and without reasonable cause, accelerate the maturity of any
  part or all of the amount owing thereon;
    (b) a power of attorney is given to confess judgment, or an assignment
  of wages is given;
    (c)  the  lessor  or holder of the agreement or other person acting on
  his or her behalf is given authority to enter upon the lessee's premises
  unlawfully, or to commit any breach of the peace in the repossession  of
  the motor vehicle;
    (d) the lessee waives any right of action against the lessor or holder
  of  the  agreement, or other person acting on his or her behalf, for any
  illegal act committed in the collection of payments under the  agreement
  or in the repossession of the motor vehicle;
    (e)  the  lessee executes a power of attorney appointing the lessor or
  holder of the agreement, or other person acting on his or her behalf, as
  the lessee's agent in collection of payments under the agreement  or  in
  the  repossession  of  the  motor  vehicle; provided, however, that this
  paragraph shall not prohibit the inclusion in a retail  lease  agreement
  of a limited power of attorney or other provision authorizing the holder
  to  execute  in the name of the lessee any proofs of insurance claims or
  losses or to endorse the name of the lessee on any insurance  settlement
  draft or check;
    (f)  the  lessor is relieved from liability for any legal remedy which
  the lessee may have had against the lessor under the agreement,  or  any
  separate instrument executed in connection therewith;
    (g)  the  maturity  of  any part or all of the amount owing thereon is
  accelerated where, following a default consisting solely of the  failure
  to  make timely rental payments, a lessee who has the right to reinstate
  the agreement makes timely tender of an amount which would be sufficient
  to reinstate the agreement under paragraph (i) of  subdivision  five  of
  this section;
    (h)  the  lessee  waives any right to a trial by jury in any action or
  proceeding arising out of the agreement; or
    (i) a lessee who is not in default of his or her obligations under the
  agreement would be prohibited from terminating the agreement at any time
  after the expiration of the first fifty percent of the total  number  of
  months  of the lease term. The exercise of this right to terminate early
  voluntarily is contingent upon the lessee discharging fully his  or  her
  liability under the early termination provisions of the agreement.
    15.  Any  such  prohibited  provision  shall  be  void  but  shall not
  otherwise affect the validity of the agreement.
    16. Where necessary to ensure consistency with the  pronoun  usage  in
  the  underlying  agreement,  any language required by this article to be


 used in connection with a required disclosure may be modified  to  refer
  to the lessee in the first person and the holder in the second person.




   §  338. Security interest prohibited. 1. No retail lease agreement, or
  any other agreement executed by  the  lessee  in  connection  therewith,
  shall provide for the creation of a security interest in any personal or
  real  property  of  the lessee to secure the payment of the debt arising
  from the lease.  This prohibition shall not apply to: (a) the taking  of
  a security deposit, advance payment of rent or other prepayment by cash,
  check  or  similar  means;  (b)  the  retention or exercise by a banking
  organization of a right of set off; or (c) the retention of  a  security
  interest  in  the  proceeds, cancellation refunds or other rights of the
  lessee under any insurance, repair or service  contract  whose  cost  is
  included in the total monthly lease payment.
    2.  A  security  interest  taken in violation of this section shall be
  void but shall not otherwise affect  the  validity  of  a  retail  lease
  agreement.




   §  339.  Notice  of  lessee's reinstatement rights. After a lessee has
  been in default for ten days solely by reason of his or her  failure  to
  make  timely  rental  payments, the holder of any retail lease agreement
  shall mail or personally deliver to the lessee at his or her last  known
  address  a  written  notice conspicuously setting forth the right of the
  lessee to reinstate  the  agreement,  the  dollar  amount  necessary  to
  reinstate  the  agreement  and the name, address and telephone number of
  the holder  from  which  information  may  be  obtained  regarding  such
  reinstatement.  No notice of reinstatement need be given if:
    1.  The  holder does not declare the lessee to be in default under the
  agreement because of his or her failure to make timely rental  payments;
  or
    2. The lessee previously was afforded the opportunity to reinstate the
  agreement.




   §  340.  Establishment  of  realized  value  at lease termination when
  purchase option  not  exercised;  notice  of  intention  to  sell  motor
  vehicle.  1.  If an agreement is terminated early and there is no option
  to purchase the vehicle or the lessee does not exercise any option he or
  she may have to purchase the vehicle, or if the  lessee's  liability  at
  the scheduled end of the lease term is based upon the estimated residual
  value  of  the vehicle and the lessee does not exercise any option he or
  she may have to  purchase  the  vehicle,  the  holder  shall  act  in  a
  commercially   reasonable  manner  when  disposing  of  the  vehicle  or
  obtaining cash bids for the purpose of establishing the  realized  value
  of  the  vehicle,  which  may  be  its  value in the customary wholesale
  market. A  lessee  whose  agreement  is  terminated  early  without  the
  exercise of a purchase option or whose liability at the scheduled end of
  the lease term is based upon the estimated residual value of the vehicle
  may  obtain,  at  his  or  her  expense,  a professional appraisal by an
  independent third party agreed to by the lessee and the  holder  of  the
  wholesale  value  which could be realized at sale of the leased vehicle.
  If a professional appraisal is obtained by such a lessee, the  appraised
  value  shall  be final and binding upon the parties and shall be used as
  the realized value in determining the liability of the lessee  at  early
  termination or at the scheduled end of the lease term.
    2.  If  an  agreement  is  terminated  early and there is no option to
  purchase the vehicle or the lessee does not exercise any  option  he  or
  she  may  have  to purchase the vehicle, or if the lessee's liability at
  the scheduled end of the lease term is based upon the estimated residual
  value of the vehicle and the lessee does not exercise any option  he  or
  she  may  have to purchase the vehicle, the holder shall give the lessee
  at least ten days written notice of its  intention  to  sell  the  motor
  vehicle.  A notice of intention to sell the vehicle need not be given if
  the holder and lessee have agreed  in  writing  to  the  amount  of  the
  lessee's  liability  under  the  retail lease agreement after the lessee
  returns the vehicle to the holder or the lessee has fully satisfied  his
  or  her  obligations  under the agreement.  A holder gives notice to the
  lessee under this subdivision when he or she delivers the notice to  the
  lessee  or  mails  the  notice  to  him  or her at his or her last known
  address.
    3. The notice of  intention  to  sell  the  vehicle  shall  set  forth
  separately any charges or sums due under the agreement and shall clearly
  and  conspicuously  state  that  the  lessee  will  be  liable  for  the
  difference between the estimated residual value of the vehicle  and  its
  realized  value,  if  such liability exists. The notice also shall state
  that the lessee has the right to submit a cash bid for the  purchase  of
  the vehicle.




   §  341. Restriction on early termination liability. 1. If an agreement
  is terminated early and there is no option to purchase  the  vehicle  or
  the  lessee  does not exercise any option he or she may have to purchase
  the vehicle, the early termination obligation  of  the  lessee  may  not
  exceed an amount equal to the sum of:
    (a)  any unpaid rental payments that accrued through the date of early
  termination;
    (b) any other unpaid  charges,  other  than  excess  mileage  charges,
  arising from the failure of the lessee to fulfill his or her obligations
  under the agreement;
    (c)  any  official  fees  and  taxes  imposed in connection with lease
  termination;
    (d) a reasonable disposition fee or, in lieu thereof,  the  reasonable
  costs of retaking, storing, preparing for sale and selling the vehicle;
    (e)  the  difference,  if  any,  between: (i) the adjusted capitalized
  cost, and (ii) the sum of all depreciation amounts accrued  through  the
  date  of  early  termination, calculated in accordance with the constant
  yield method or any other generally accepted actuarial method,  and  the
  realized value of the vehicle; and
    (f)  an  additional  early  termination  charge which is reasonable in
  light of the anticipated or actual harm caused by the default  or  early
  termination,  the difficulties of proof of loss and the inconvenience or
  nonfeasibility of otherwise obtaining an adequate remedy.
    As an alternative to the constant yield and other  generally  accepted
  actuarial  methods  of  determining  the  depreciation  amounts  accrued
  through  the  date  of  early  termination  of   a   precomputed   lease
  transaction, those amounts may be determined under paragraph (e) of this
  subdivision  by  using  a  retail  lease agreement under which the lease
  charge is calculated on the  adjusted  capitalized  cost  for  the  time
  outstanding according to a generally accepted actuarial method.
    2.  This  section does not limit or restrict the manner of calculating
  the  early  termination  liability  of  a  lessee,  whether  by  way  of
  unamortized  capitalized  cost,  discounted  present  value of remaining
  rental payments, multiples of monthly payments or otherwise, so long  as
  the  early  termination  liability  of  the  lessee does not exceed that
  permitted by this section.
    3. Any refundable security deposit or advance rental payment  held  by
  the  holder  may be retained by the holder and shall be credited against
  the early termination obligation of the lessee.
    4. There shall be no early termination liability to the lessee  if  he
  or she has deceased before the end of such lease.




   § 342. Restriction on the reporting of early terminations.  The holder
  of  a  retail  lease  agreement  shall  not  report  the voluntary early
  termination of the agreement to a consumer reporting agency or any other
  person as a derogatory item of information unless the  lessee  fails  to
  satisfy his or her early termination obligations.




   §  343.  Assessment  of  excess wear and damage to the vehicle. 1. (a)
  Upon the scheduled termination of a retail lease agreement,  the  holder
  shall not charge, receive or collect a charge for excess wear and damage
  to the vehicle which exceeds: (i) the actual cost of repairs, reduced by
  all  discounts,  paid by the holder; or (ii) a true itemized estimate of
  the cost of such repairs by an appraiser licensed  pursuant  to  section
  three  hundred ninety-eight-d of the vehicle and traffic law selected by
  the holder, of the cost of such repairs.
    (b) Upon early termination of a retail  lease  agreement,  the  holder
  shall not charge, receive or collect a charge for excess wear and damage
  to the vehicle which exceeds the actual costs of repairs, reduced by all
  discounts, paid by the holder.
    2. In order for a holder to impose a charge for excess wear and damage
  to  a  vehicle subject to a retail lease agreement, such agreement shall
  contain a clause describing the excess wear and damage  to  the  vehicle
  for  which  the  lessee  may be liable. Such holder shall, not more than
  forty days nor less than twenty days prior to the scheduled  termination
  date,  or,  not  more  than ten business days after the date of an early
  termination of a lease agreement, mail or deliver to the lessee a notice
  advising the lessee of the  following  rights  and  obligations  of  the
  parties, herein granted and imposed:
    (a)  Such  notice  shall include the following statement, as set forth
  herein, at the beginning of the notice in at least ten-point bold type:
            "YOUR LEASE AGREEMENT ALLOWS (HOLDER)  TO  ASSESS  A
            CHARGE  FOR  EXCESS  WEAR AND DAMAGE TO THE VEHICLE.
            YOU SHOULD OBTAIN YOUR OWN EVIDENCE OF  THE  CURRENT
            CONDITION  OF  THE VEHICLE NOT MORE THAN TWENTY (20)
            DAYS PRIOR TO  THE  SCHEDULED  TERMINATION  OF  YOUR
            LEASE.  YOU  ALSO  WILL  HAVE  THE  RIGHT  TO SUBMIT
            DISPUTES  TO  THE  ALTERNATE  ARBITRATION  MECHANISM
            ESTABLISHED UNDER REGULATIONS PROMULGATED BY THE NEW
            YORK STATE ATTORNEY GENERAL."
    (b)  In  the case of a scheduled termination, of the lessee's right to
  turn the vehicle in with a copy of an itemized appraisal of excess  wear
  and  damage  to  the  vehicle  prepared  by  an appraiser licensed under
  section three hundred ninety-eight-d of the  vehicle  and  traffic  law,
  selected  by the lessee and conducted not more than twenty days prior to
  the scheduled termination date;
    (c) Of the right of the holder to, within thirty days after  the  date
  on  which  the  vehicle comes into the actual physical possession of the
  holder, obtain a written itemized appraisal of excessive wear and damage
  to the vehicle prepared by an appraiser  licensed  under  section  three
  hundred  ninety-eight-d  of  the vehicle and traffic law selected by the
  holder;
    (d) That if the lessee had not previously obtained  and  submitted  to
  the  holder  a  written itemized appraisal on the lessee's own behalf in
  accordance with paragraph (b) of this subdivision, the lessee will  have
  the  greater  of  ten  business  days  after  the lessee has received or
  fourteen  business  days  to  do  so  after  the  holder  has  sent,  in
  conformance with subdivision three of this section, an itemized bill for
  excess  wear and damage and a copy of the itemized appraisal prepared on
  behalf of the holder, unless the lessee does  not  dispute  any  of  the
  items  contained  therein. In the case where the holder bases the charge
  for excess wear and damage on the actual cost  of  repairs,  the  notice
  shall  also  inform  the lessee that should the lessee fail to obtain an
  itemized written appraisal, he  or  she  is  entitled  to  dispute  only
  whether any items claimed exist and/or are excess wear and damage to the
  vehicle, but not the actual cost of making the repairs;


   (e)  That  if  the  lessee  disputes that any of the items claimed for
  excess wear and damage to the vehicle exist or are excessive in  nature,
  the lessee may submit the dispute within sixty days of the date on which
  the  vehicle  comes into the actual physical possession of the holder to
  the holder's informal dispute settlement procedure, if any, or, upon the
  payment  of  the  prescribed  filing  fee  which  is  refundable  if the
  arbitrator finds in the lessee's favor, to  an  alternative  arbitration
  mechanism  established  under  regulations  promulgated  by the attorney
  general of the state of New York;
    (f) That if there exists a discrepancy between the itemized appraisals
  obtained by the holder and the lessee, if any, the holder  shall  submit
  the  dispute  within  sixty  days of the date on which the vehicle comes
  into the actual physical  possession  of  the  holder  to  the  holder's
  informal  dispute  settlement  procedure,  if  any,  unless  the  lessee
  exercises the option granted by paragraph (b)  of  subdivision  five  of
  this  section;  provided,  however,  that  in  the  event the holder has
  complied with the provisions of  this  subdivision,  a  lessee  who  has
  failed  to obtain an itemized appraisal of the excessive wear and damage
  to the vehicle in accordance with either paragraph (b) or  (c)  of  this
  subdivision  may  dispute  only the existence of any item or whether the
  wear is excessive in nature, but may not  dispute  the  actual  cost  of
  repairs.
    3.  (a)  Itemized  bill.  (i)  In  the event that the holder wishes to
  impose a charge for excess wear and damage to the  vehicle,  the  holder
  shall  send  by  registered  mail  or  hand-deliver to the lessee a bill
  containing an itemized list of the estimated or actual cost of repairing
  or replacing each item as to which an excess wear and damage  charge  is
  claimed and specifying the address to which any response must be mailed.
  The  bill  shall be mailed or hand-delivered to the lessee within thirty
  days after  the  date  on  which  the  vehicle  comes  into  the  actual
  possession of the holder.
    (ii)  The itemized bill shall include the following statements printed
  in at least ten-point type: "You  are  being  asked  to  pay  an  amount
  claimed  for  excess  wear  and  damage  to  the vehicle. If you wish to
  contest this amount, you must  obtain  an  itemized  appraisal  from  an
  appraiser  licensed  by the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles,
  and mail or deliver a copy of such appraisal to  (NAME  AND  ADDRESS  OF
  HOLDER)  within  the  greater  of  fourteen business days after (NAME OF
  HOLDER) has sent, or ten business days of receipt of this bill and (NAME
  OF HOLDER'S) itemized appraisal. If you fail to do so, you will  forfeit
  your right to contest in arbitration any actual repair costs incurred by
  the  (HOLDER)  for  excess  wear and damage; however, you do not forfeit
  your right to contest the existence of any item or whether the  wear  is
  excessive in nature."
    (iii)  The  itemized  bill shall also notify lessees of their material
  rights and obligations for dispute resolution in arbitration.
    (b) Itemized appraisal. (i) A holder who imposes a charge  for  excess
  wear  and  damage  to  the  vehicle  shall  send  by  registered mail or
  hand-deliver, within thirty days after the date  on  which  the  vehicle
  comes  into actual physical possession of the holder, a written itemized
  appraisal prepared by an appraiser licensed under section three  hundred
  ninety-eight-d  of  the  vehicle and traffic law. The appraisal shall be
  dated, signed by the holder or its agent, and identify by type each item
  of excess wear and damage.
    (ii) The following notice shall be included at the  beginning  of  the
  itemized appraisal prepared on behalf of the holder and furnished to the
  lessee,


           "ALL   ITEMS  OF  DAMAGE  FOR  WHICH  A  CHARGE  FOR
            EXCESSIVE WEAR OR DAMAGE  WILL  BE  CLAIMED  BY  THE
            HOLDER  MUST  BE  NOTED  IN  THIS  APPRAISAL. IF YOU
            DISPUTE THE EXISTENCE  OR  NATURE  OF  ANY  ITEM  OF
            DAMAGE IDENTIFIED IN THIS NOTICE, YOU MAY SUBMIT THE
            DISPUTE   TO  THE  ALTERNATE  ARBITRATION  MECHANISM
            ESTABLISHED UNDER REGULATIONS PROMULGATED BY THE NEW
            YORK STATE ATTORNEY GENERAL."
    4. (a) The itemized bill and appraisal required by  subdivision  three
  of   this   section  may  be  combined  into  a  single  document.  Mere
  acknowledgement by the  lessee  of  receipt  of  an  itemized  bill,  an
  appraisal, or a combination of the two shall not operate as an admission
  of the existence, nature or amount of any of the items therein.
    (b)  (i)  The holder shall grant the lessee access to the vehicle at a
  reasonable time and place in order for the lessee to obtain an  itemized
  appraisal  on the lessee's own behalf. The holder shall not be required,
  however, to deliver the  vehicle  to,  or  produce  the  vehicle  at,  a
  destination designated by the lessee for such purpose.
    (ii)  A  holder  may  not  fail to provide, either intentionally or by
  actions or omissions, reasonable access to the vehicle by  the  licensed
  appraiser  chosen  by the lessee within the period during which a lessee
  must obtain and submit an appraisal. If the holder fails to  so  provide
  reasonable  access  to  the  vehicle, the holder shall be deemed to have
  forfeited its contractual right to charge, receive or collect any charge
  for excessive wear and damage to the vehicle from the lessee.
    (c) A lessor or holder of a retail lease agreement shall not report an
  unsatisfied claim for excess wear  and  damage  to  a  credit  reporting
  agency  as a derogatory item of information until: (i) the expiration of
  the time granted under article seventy-five of the  civil  practice  law
  and  rules  for  the  filing  of  a  petition  to  vacate  or  modify an
  arbitrator's award; (ii) the  issue  has  been  a  subject  of  a  final
  judgment; or (iii) where the holder and the lessee execute a settlement,
  thirty  days  after the date a payment is due under the settlement if no
  payment has been made.
    5. (a) Arbitration and enforcement. If a  holder  has  established  or
  participates  in  an  informal  dispute  settlement  procedure  which is
  consistent in all respects with the provisions  of  part  seven  hundred
  three  of title sixteen of the code of federal regulations, any dispute,
  disparity or conflict  between  any  appraisal  report  prepared  by  an
  appraiser  licensed  by the state department of motor vehicles on behalf
  of the holder and one prepared on behalf of the lessee shall be  decided
  by   such  informal  dispute  settlement  procedure.  Holders  utilizing
  informal dispute settlement  procedures  pursuant  to  this  subdivision
  shall insure that the arbitrators participating in such informal dispute
  settlement procedures are familiar with the provisions of this section.
    (b) Upon the payment of a prescribed filing fee, a consumer shall have
  the  option  of  submitting any dispute arising under this section to an
  alternate arbitration mechanism established pursuant to  regulations  to
  be  promulgated  hereunder  by the attorney general. Upon application of
  the consumer and payment of the filing fee, the holder shall  submit  to
  such   alternate   arbitration.  Such  alternate  arbitration  shall  be
  conducted by a professional arbitrator or arbitration firm appointed  by
  and   under  regulations  established  by  the  attorney  general.  Such
  alternate arbitration mechanism shall ensure the personal objectivity of
  its arbitrators and the right of each party to present its case,  to  be
  in  attendance  during  any  presentation made by the other party and to
  rebut or refute such presentation. In all other respects, such alternate
  arbitration mechanism shall be governed by article seventy-five  of  the


 civil  practice  law  and rules. Holder or lessee shall have thirty days
  from the date of mailing of a copy of the arbitrator's decision to  such
  holder or lessee to comply with the terms of such decision.
    (c)  In  no event shall any person who has participated in an informal
  dispute settlement procedure be precluded from  seeking  the  rights  or
  remedies available to such person under applicable law.
    (d)  Nothing  in  this  section  shall  be deemed to prohibit: (i) the
  holder and the lessee from agreeing upon termination of the agreement to
  the payment by the lessee, in satisfaction  of  his  or  her  obligation
  under the provisions of the agreement, of an amount which the lessor and
  the  lessee agree is a reasonable figure to compensate for damage to the
  vehicle; (ii) the holder  from  retaining  any  portion  of  a  security
  deposit  in  satisfaction  of  amounts  owed  to the holder that are not
  attributable to excess wear and tear; or (iii) to restrict or  otherwise
  regulate the assessment of charges for excess mileage.




   §  344.  Cancellation  of agreement. After the payment of all sums for
  which the lessee is obligated under a retail lease agreement,  and  upon
  written  demand  made  by the lessee, the holder of such agreement shall
  mail to the lessee at his or her last known address good and  sufficient
  documentation  to indicate payment in full. This documentation shall not
  operate to release the lessee from liability for  events  discovered  by
  the holder subsequent to the mailing of such documentation.




   §  345.  Renegotiations  and  extensions.  1. A renegotiation is a new
  lease which is subject to the disclosure requirements of  section  three
  hundred thirty-seven of this article.
    2.  The  disclosure requirements of section three hundred thirty-seven
  of this article are not applicable to any extension of  a  retail  lease
  agreement.  An  extension of a retail lease agreement need not be signed
  contemporaneously by the holder and  the  lessee  if  the  extension  is
  transacted by mail, is for a period of twenty-four months or less and is
  first signed by the holder prior to signature by the lessee.




   §  346.  Penalties.  1.  A  lessee  who  has  suffered a loss due to a
  violation of any provision of this article by  a  lessor  or  holder  is
  entitled to recover his or her actual damages from the lessor or holder.
    2.  Any  lessor  who  fails  to  refund  any  payment made pending the
  execution of a retail  lease  agreement  within  the  time  required  by
  subdivision  one  of  section  three hundred thirty-four of this article
  shall be liable to the lessee for twice the amount of  the  payment  not
  refunded within the time required.
    3. Any lessor who fails to return a vehicle which the lessee left with
  the  lessor  pending  the  execution of a retail lease agreement, or who
  sells or  transfers  such  a  vehicle  contrary  to  the  provisions  of
  subdivision  three of section three hundred thirty-four of this article,
  shall be liable to the lessee for the value of the vehicle traded-in and
  all costs and expenses incurred by the lessee because of the loss of the
  vehicle.
    4. In an action in which it is determined that a lessor or holder  has
  violated  this  article,  the  court  shall  award to the lessee a civil
  penalty of one hundred dollars.
    5. (a) In an action in which it is determined that a lessor or  holder
  has  violated this article, the court also shall award to the lessee the
  costs of the action and to his or her attorneys their  reasonable  fees.
  In  determining the award of attorney's fees, the amount of the recovery
  on the behalf of the lessee is not controlling.
    (b) In an action for the recovery of an amount claimed for excess wear
  and tear, the court shall award to the lessee the costs  of  the  action
  and  to  his  or  her  attorneys  their reasonable fees if the holder is
  awarded an amount less than  an  amount  that  the  lessee  offered,  in
  writing  and  prior  to  the  institution  of  the  action,  to  pay  in
  satisfaction of the contested portion of the amount claimed  for  excess
  wear and tear.
    6.  A  violation  of  subdivision  fourteen  of  section three hundred
  thirty-seven of this article is a deceptive trade practice under section
  three hundred forty-nine of the general business law.
    7. Whenever there shall be a violation of this article an  application
  may  be  made  by  the attorney general in the name of the people of the
  state of New York to a court or justice having jurisdiction by a special
  proceeding to issue an injunction, and upon notice to the  defendant  of
  not  less than five days, to enjoin and restrain the continuance of such
  violations; and if it shall appear to the satisfaction of the  court  or
  justice  that  the  defendant  has,  in  fact, violated this section, an
  injunction may  be  issued  by  the  court  or  justice,  enjoining  and
  restraining  any  further  violations,  without requiring proof that any
  person has, in fact, been  injured  or  damaged  thereby.  In  any  such
  proceeding,  the  court  may  make allowances to the attorney general as
  provided in paragraph six of subdivision  (a)  of  section  eighty-three
  hundred   three  of  the  civil  practice  law  and  rules,  and  direct
  restitution. Whenever the court shall determine in any  such  proceeding
  that  a  violation  of this section has occurred, the court may impose a
  civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars for each  violation.
  In connection with any such proposed application the attorney general is
  authorized  to take proof and make a determination of the relevant facts
  and to issue subpoenas in accordance with the  civil  practice  law  and
  rules.
    8.  (a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, and except as
  provided in subdivisions two and three of this section, any  failure  to
  comply  with the substantive provisions of this article may be corrected
  within sixty days after the holder is notified thereof in writing by the
  lessee or, in the absence of such  notice,  the  lessor  or  holder  may


 voluntarily  correct  any  such  failure to comply and, if so corrected,
  neither the lessor nor the holder shall be liable to a  lessee  for  any
  penalty  under  this  section.  Within  sixty  days  after discovering a
  violation of the disclosure provisions of this article, and prior to the
  institution  of  an  action under this section or the receipt of written
  notice of the violation from  the  lessee,  the  lessor  or  holder  may
  correct  the  disclosure  violation  and,  if  so corrected, neither the
  lessor nor the holder  shall  be  subject  to  any  penalty  under  this
  section.
    (b) Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed so as to nullify or
  impair  the  right of the attorney general to proceed, under subdivision
  seven of this section or subdivision twelve of  section  sixty-three  of
  the  executive  law,  against  a  lessor or holder who has violated this
  article.
    9. A lessor or holder may not be held  liable  in  an  action  brought
  under   this   article   for  a  violation  of  this  article  that  was
  unintentional and resulted from a bona fide  error  notwithstanding  the
  maintenance  of  procedures  reasonably adapted to avoid any such error.
  Examples of a bona fide error include, but are not limited to, clerical,
  calculation, computer malfunction and programming, and printing  errors,
  except  that  an  error  of  legal  judgment  with respect to a person's
  obligations under this article is not a bona fide error.
    10. An action shall not be brought under this article more  than  four
  years  after  the occurrence of the act, method or practice which is the
  subject of the action or more than one year after the last payment in  a
  transaction  involving  the method, act or practice which is the subject
  of the action, whichever is later.




   §  347.  Liability  of  assignees.    Except  where  the assignment is
  involuntary or as otherwise specifically provided in this  article,  any
  civil  action  for  a  violation  of  this  article which may be brought
  against a lessor may be maintained against any  subsequent  assignee  of
  the  lessor  only if the violation for which the action or proceeding is
  brought is apparent on the face of the lease application or  the  retail
  lease  agreement.  For purposes of this section, a violation is apparent
  on the face of these documents if:
    1. The agreement contains a disclosure which can be determined  to  be
  incomplete  or  inaccurate  from  the  face  of  the  agreement or other
  documents assigned; or
    2. The agreement or application either contains a prohibited provision
  or does not contain the  notices,  legend  or  items  required  by  this
  article.




   §  348.  Transactions  subject  to article by agreement.  Parties to a
  motor vehicle lease agreement that is not a retail lease  agreement,  as
  defined  in subdivision five of section three hundred thirty-one of this
  article, because the vehicle is not being leased  by  a  natural  person
  primarily  for  personal, family or household use may agree in a writing
  signed by them that the agreement is subject to  this  article.  If  the
  parties  so  agree,  the  agreement  is a retail lease agreement for the
  purposes of this article.




   § 349. Applicability of certain provisions hereof to retail lease of a
  motor vehicle for any use.  The provisions of subdivision one of section
  three   hundred   thirty-five,  section  three  hundred  thirty-six  and
  subdivision eleven of section three hundred thirty-seven of this article
  shall apply to a retail lease of a single motor vehicle for any use.




   §  350.  Waiver  void. Any waiver of the provisions of this article by
  the lessee shall be unenforceable and void.




   §  351.  Supplementary  general  principles of law applicable.  Unless
  displaced by the particular provisions of this article,  other  statutes
  of  this state applicable to personal property leases and the principles
  of law and equity, including the law relative to capacity  to  contract,
  principal   and   agent,  estoppel,  fraud,  misrepresentation,  duress,
  coercion, mistake, bankruptcy, or other validating or invalidating cause
  supplement its provisions. In the  event  of  an  inconsistency  between
  another statute of this state applicable to personal property leases and
  this article, the provisions of this article shall control.




   §  352.  Construction  against  implicit  repeal. This article being a
  general act intended as a unified coverage of  its  subject  matter,  no
  part  of  it  shall  be construed to be impliedly repealed by subsequent
  legislation if that construction can reasonably be avoided.




   §  353.  Severability.  If  any  provision  of  this  article  or  the
  application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid,  the
  invalidity  does  not  affect  other  provisions or applications of this
  article which can be given  effect  without  the  invalid  provision  or
  application,  and  to  this  end  the  provisions  of  this  article are
  severable.




   §  401.  Definitions.  In  this article, unless the context or subject
  matter otherwise requires:
    1. "Goods" means all chattels personal, other than things in action or
  money, sold for other than a commercial or business use or  for  purpose
  of  resale.  The  term  includes goods which, at the time of the sale or
  subsequently, are to be so affixed to realty as to become a part thereof
  whether or not severable therefrom, but does not include a motor vehicle
  as defined in article nine or nine-A of this chapter, nor any goods sold
  or leased with such a vehicle if they are sold under a retail instalment
  contract governed by article nine of this  chapter  or  leased  under  a
  retail lease agreement governed by article nine-A of this chapter.
    In  the  case  of  a retail instalment credit agreement, the term also
  includes all chattels personal, other than things in  action  or  money,
  sold for a commercial or business use.
    2.  "Services" means: (a) In the case of a retail instalment contract,
  work, labor and services furnished, or agreed to be furnished, for other
  than a commercial  or  business  use,  in  the  delivery,  installation,
  servicing,  repair  or  improvement  of goods or repairs, alterations or
  improvements upon or in connection with real property, except that  such
  services  shall not mean or include any services sold in connection with
  the sale or lease of a motor vehicle which  is  evidenced  by  a  retail
  instalment contract governed by article nine of this chapter or a retail
  lease agreement governed by article nine-A of this chapter;
    (b)  In  the  case  of a retail instalment obligation, services of any
  kind furnished or rendered or agreed to be furnished  or  rendered,  for
  other than a commercial or business use, except that such services shall
  not  mean  nor  include (1) services for which the tariffs or the rates,
  charges, cost or expense  is  required  by  law  to  be  filed  with  or
  determined  or  approved  by  the  state  or  federal  government or any
  official department, division, commission or agency of the state of  New
  York  or  of the United States, or (2) services by an institution of the
  university of the state of New York, an elementary school which provides
  the education required by the state of New York, a nursery school  or  a
  kindergarten; and
    (c)  In  the case of a retail instalment credit agreement, services of
  any kind rendered or furnished or agreed to be rendered or furnished  by
  a  retail  seller;  and,  in  the  case  of  a  retail instalment credit
  agreement entered into under paragraph  (b)  of  subdivision  eleven  of
  section  four  hundred thirteen of this chapter, a contract or contracts
  of insurance issued to a retail buyer.
    3. "Retail seller" or "seller" means  a  person  who  sells  goods  or
  furnishes or renders or agrees to furnish or render services to a retail
  buyer.  The  term includes the lessor under a lease of a department in a
  shop, store or other establishment if the lessor is liable to  customers
  in respect to goods sold or services furnished or rendered by the leased
  department and the other operations thereof.
    4.  "Retail buyer" or "buyer" means a person who buys goods or obtains
  services from a retail  seller.  When  used  in  subdivision  eleven  of
  section  four  hundred thirteen of this chapter, the term also means any
  person who is liable for the payment of  a  fine,  tax,  civil  penalty,
  rent,  rate, fee, charge, revenue, financial obligation or other amount,
  including a penalty, special assessment  or  interest,  to  a  municipal
  corporation  or  the  New  York  city water board, and any person who is
  liable for the payment of any fee, rate, rent or  other  charge  of  the
  White Plains parking authority.
    5.  "Retail  instalment  sale" or "sale" means a sale of goods, or the
  furnishing or rendering of services,  or  an  agreement  to  furnish  or


 render  services,  by  a retail seller to a retail buyer for a time sale
  price payable in instalments.
    6.  "Retail  instalment  contract"  or  "contract"  means an agreement
  entered into in this state, pursuant to which the title to, the property
  or a security interest in or a lien upon goods, which  are  the  subject
  matter  of  a  retail  instalment sale, is retained or taken by a retail
  seller from a retail buyer as security, in whole or  in  part,  for  the
  buyer's obligation. The term includes such an agreement wherever entered
  into  if  executed by the buyer in this state and if solicited in person
  by a salesman or other person acting on his own behalf or  that  of  the
  seller.    The term also includes a contract whereby a security interest
  in favor of the seller is created or retained and  a  contract  for  the
  bailment  or leasing of goods by which the bailee or lessee contracts to
  pay as compensation for their use a sum substantially equivalent  to  or
  in  excess  of  their value and by which it is agreed that the bailee or
  lessee is bound to become, or has the option of becoming, the  owner  of
  the  goods upon full compliance with the terms of the contract. The term
  does not include a contract which is intended to be  and  is  ultimately
  insured  or guaranteed under title three of the act of Congress entitled
  "Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944".
    7. "Retail instalment obligation" or "obligation" means an  agreement,
  entered into in this state, pursuant to which the buyer promises to pay,
  in  instalments, the time sale price or prices of goods and/or services,
  or any part thereof.  The  term  includes  such  an  agreement  wherever
  entered  into if executed by the buyer in this state and if solicited in
  person by a salesman or other person acting on his own behalf or that of
  the seller. The term does not include (a) a retail instalment  contract,
  (b)  a retail instalment credit agreement, or (c) an obligation which is
  intended to be and is ultimately insured or guaranteed until title three
  of the act of Congress entitled "Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944".
    8. "Retail instalment credit agreement" or "credit agreement" means an
  agreement entered into in  this  state,  pursuant  to  which  the  buyer
  promises  to pay, in instalments, his outstanding indebtedness from time
  to time to a  retail  seller,  not  evidenced  by  a  retail  instalment
  contract  or  obligation, for one or more items of goods or services, or
  merchandise certificates to be used solely in  exchange  for  goods  and
  services  with a cash sale price in the face amount of such certificates
  and not redeemable  in  cash,  whenever  purchased  or  obtained,  which
  provides  for a service charge and under which instalment payments apply
  to his outstanding indebtedness from time to  time.  The  term  includes
  such an agreement wherever entered into if executed by the buyer in this
  state and if solicited in person by a salesman or other person acting on
  his  own  behalf  or that of the seller. The term also includes a retail
  instalment credit agreement entered into by a financing  agency  with  a
  retail  buyer  as provided in subdivision eleven of section four hundred
  thirteen of this article.
    8-a. "Retail instalment  note"  or  "note"  means  a  promissory  note
  required  by  the  provision  of  a  retail  instalment  obligation  and
  conforming to the  requirements  of  subdivision  two  of  section  four
  hundred three of this article.
    9.  "Cash  sale  price"  means  the cash sale price stated in a retail
  instalment contract or obligation for which the  seller  would  sell  or
  furnish  to  the buyer and the buyer would buy or obtain from the seller
  the goods  or  services  which  are  the  subject  matter  of  a  retail
  instalment  contract  or  obligation  if  the  sale were a sale for cash
  instead of a retail instalment sale. The cash sale price may include any
  taxes and cash  sale  prices  for  accessories  and  services,  if  any,
  included in a retail instalment sale.


   10.  "Time  sale  price" means the total of the cash sale price of the
  goods or services and the  amounts,  if  any,  included  for  insurance,
  official fees and credit service charge.
    11.  "Credit  service  charge"  means  that  part of the entire amount
  agreed to be paid for the goods or services which exceeds the  aggregate
  of  the  cash  sale price thereof and the amounts, if any, included in a
  retail instalment sale for insurance and official fees.
    12. "Service charge" means all charges incident to  investigating  and
  making  a  retail  instalment  credit agreement and for the extension of
  credit thereunder.
    13. "Principal balance" means the cash sale  price  of  the  goods  or
  services  which  are  the  subject matter of the retail instalment sale,
  plus the amounts, if any, included  in  a  retail  instalment  sale  for
  insurance   and   official   fees,  minus  the  amount  of  the  buyer's
  down-payment in money or goods.
    14. "Time balance" means the total of the principal  balance  and  the
  amount of the credit service charge, if any.
    15.  "Holder" means the retail seller who acquires a retail instalment
  contract, obligation or credit agreement, or note, executed, incurred or
  entered into by a retail buyer, or if the contract,  obligation,  credit
  agreement  or  note is purchased by a financing agency or other assignee
  or endorsee, the financing agency or other assignee or endorsee.
    16. "Official fees" means the  fees  or  taxes  required  by  law  and
  actually  to  be  paid  to the appropriate public officer to perfect the
  lien or other security interest, on or in goods, retained or taken by  a
  seller  under  a  retail  instalment contract or to record a mortgage on
  real property taken by a seller or holder to secure a retail  instalment
  contract or obligation or note.
    17.   "Person"   means   an   individual,   partnership,  corporation,
  association or other group, however organized.
    18. "Financing agency" means a person engaged in this state, in  whole
  or  in  part, in the business of purchasing retail instalment contracts,
  obligations or credit agreements or indebtedness of buyers under  credit
  agreements  from  one  or  more  retail  sellers or entering into credit
  agreements with retail buyers  as  provided  in  subdivision  eleven  of
  section  four  hundred  thirteen of this article but shall not include a
  retail seller. The term includes but is not limited  to  a  bank,  trust
  company,  savings  bank, savings and loan association, private banker or
  investment company, if so  engaged,  but  shall  not  include  a  retail
  seller.
    19. Words in the singular include the plural and vice versa.
    20.  "Boat"  shall  mean  any  vessel  or  craft designed to transport
  persons or cargo on the water surface.
    21. "New York city water board" means the public  benefit  corporation
  established  pursuant  to  section  one thousand forty-six of the public
  authorities law.
    22. "Municipal corporation" means a local government, as that term  is
  defined in section ten of the general municipal law.
    23.  "White Plains parking authority" means the corporation created by
  section one thousand four hundred twenty-seven of the public authorities
  law.




   § 402. Provisions of retail instalment contracts and obligations. 1. A
  retail  instalment contract or obligation shall be dated and in writing;
  the printed portion thereof shall be in at least eight point type.
    2. A contract or obligation shall contain the entire agreement of  the
  parties  with  respect to the goods and services, including any promise,
  whether made in writing or orally, by the seller, made as an  inducement
  to  the  buyer to become a party to the contract or which is part of the
  contract or which is made incidental to negotiations between the  seller
  and the buyer with respect to the sale of the goods or services that are
  the  subject  of the contract, that the seller will compensate the buyer
  for referring customers or prospective customers to the seller for goods
  or services which the seller has for sale or for referring the seller to
  such customers or prospective customers. In any case in which,  pursuant
  to  the  preceding  provisions,  the  contract  contains  a  promise  to
  compensate the buyer for referring customers or prospective customers to
  the seller or the seller to such customers, the contract must contain  a
  provision  to  the  effect  that  the  amount  otherwise owing under the
  contract at any time is reduced by  the  amount  of  compensation  owing
  pursuant to such promise, and:
    (a)  Both  at the top of the contract or obligation and directly above
  the space reserved for the signature of  the  buyer,  the  words  RETAIL
  INSTALMENT CONTRACT or RETAIL INSTALMENT OBLIGATION, as the case may be,
  in at least ten point bold type; and
    (b)  Either  a  notice  in  at  least eight point bold type reading as
  follows: NOTICE TO THE BUYER: 1. Do not sign this agreement  before  you
  read  it  or  if  it  contains any blank space. 2. You are entitled to a
  completely filled in copy of this agreement. 3. Under the law, you  have
  the  right  to  pay off in advance the full amount due and under certain
  conditions to obtain a partial refund of the credit service charge or  a
  notice  in  at least eight point bold type reading as follows: NOTICE TO
  THE BUYER: 1. Do not sign this agreement before you read  it  or  if  it
  contains  any blank space. 2. You are entitled to a completely filled in
  copy of this agreement. 3. Under the law, you have the right to pay  off
  in  advance the full amount due. If you do so, you may, depending on the
  nature of the credit service charge, either: (a) prepay without penalty,
  or (b) under certain circumstances obtain a rebate of the credit service
  charge.
    3. A contract or obligation shall:
    (a) Contain the names of the  seller  and  the  buyer,  the  place  of
  business  of the seller, the residence or place of business of the buyer
  as specified by the buyer and an adequate description  of  the  services
  and  goods  (including  the make and model, if any, in the case of goods
  customarily sold by make and model); and
    (b) Set forth the following items:
    (1) All items required to be disclosed by the act of congress entitled
  "Truth in Lending Act" and the regulations thereunder, as such  act  and
  regulations may from time to time be amended;
    (2)  If  any  instalment  substantially  exceeds  in  amount any prior
  instalment other than the down-payment,  contain  the  following  legend
  printed  in  ten  point  bold  type or typewritten: THIS CONTRACT IS NOT
  PAYABLE IN INSTALMENTS OF EQUAL AMOUNTS: followed, if there be  but  one
  larger  instalment,  by:  AN  INSTALMENT  OF  $..........WILL  BE DUE ON
  .........or, if there be more than one  larger  instalment,  by:  LARGER
  INSTALMENTS WILL BE DUE AS FOLLOWS.........(insert the amount or amounts
  of  every  larger  instalment and its due date.) In the case of a retail
  instalment obligation, OBLIGATION shall be substituted for  CONTRACT  in
  the  required  legend.  If the credit service charge with respect to the
  contract or obligation is calculated pursuant  to  subdivision  four  of


 section  four  hundred four of this article, the disclosure provided for
  in this subparagraph may be omitted.
    4.  No  contract  or  obligation  shall be signed by the buyer when it
  contains blank spaces to be filled in after it has been signed; however,
  if delivery of the goods is not made at the time of the execution of the
  contract or obligation and it so provides, the  identifying  numbers  or
  marks  of the goods and the due date of the first instalment may be left
  blank and later inserted by the seller in the  seller's  counterpart  of
  the contract or obligation after it has been signed by the buyer.
    5.  If the cost of any credit unemployment, group credit life or other
  insurance is included in the  contract  or  obligation  and  a  separate
  charge is made to the buyer for such insurance:
    (a) The contract or obligation shall state whether the insurance is to
  be procured by the buyer or the seller;
    (b)  The  amount,  if  any,  so included for such insurance, shall not
  exceed the premiums chargeable in accordance with rate filings made with
  the superintendent of financial  services  for  such  insurance  by  the
  insurer; and, if such group credit life or other insurance is cancelled,
  the refund for unearned insurance premiums received or receivable by the
  holder  of  the  contract,  or  the excess of the amount included in the
  contract for group credit life  insurance  over  the  premiums  paid  or
  payable by the holder of the contract therefor, together with, in either
  case,  the  unearned  portion  of  the  credit service charge applicable
  thereto, shall be credited to the  final  maturing  instalments  of  the
  retail instalment contract, provided that no such credit need be made if
  the amount thereof would be less than one dollar; and
    (c)  If  the  insurance  is to be procured by the seller or holder, he
  shall, within thirty days after delivery of the goods or  furnishing  of
  the services under the contract or obligation, deliver, mail or cause to
  be  mailed  to the buyer, at his address as specified in the contract or
  obligation, a notice thereof or a copy of  the  policy  or  policies  of
  insurance or a certificate or certificates of the insurance so procured.
    6.  A  contract or obligation may provide for the payment by the buyer
  of a delinquency and collection charge on each instalment in default for
  a period of not less than ten days in an amount not  in  excess  of  the
  rate  provided  for  in  the  contract  or obligation on such instalment
  provided that only one such delinquency and  collection  charge  may  be
  collected  on  any such instalment regardless of the period during which
  it remains in default.
    6-a. A provision in a contract or obligation which  provides  for  the
  payment  of attorney's fees or the costs of attorney's services incurred
  in a legal action or proceeding for collection shall be null and void.
    6-b. A provision in a contract or obligation which provides for waiver
  of the right to impose any counterclaim  or  offset  arising  out  of  a
  breach  of  that  contract or obligation by the seller shall be void and
  unenforceable.
    7. All of the terms of an obligation need not be contained in a single
  document but if they are not then there shall be  an  original  document
  executed  by  the  parties containing provisions making it applicable to
  purchases of goods or services, which may not exceed a cash  sale  price
  of  one hundred seventy-five dollars on each purchase, to be made by the
  buyer from time to time from a retail seller, which  document,  together
  with  other  written  statements  relating  to the sale of such goods or
  services shall constitute  a  retail  instalment  obligation  and  shall
  contain the entire agreement of the parties. In such cases, the original
  document  shall  contain those items required to be disclosed by the act
  of  congress  entitled  "Truth  in  Lending  Act"  and  the  regulations


 thereunder, as such act and regulations may from time to time be amended
  and shall further contain:
    (i) a legend as provided in paragraph (a) of subdivision two hereof,
    (ii) a notice to the buyer as provided in paragraph (b) of subdivision
  two hereof,
    (iii) the names of the seller and the buyer,
    (iv) the place of business of the seller and the residence or place of
  business of the buyer as specified by the buyer,
    (v) the number of instalment payments, and
    (vi)  the  amount  or  rate of the credit service charge applicable to
  purchases thereunder.
    At the time of each purchase under such  document,  the  seller  shall
  give  the  buyer  statements  which  shall  contain at the top thereof a
  legend in at least eight-point bold type: PART OF  A  RETAIL  INSTALMENT
  OBLIGATION  and  an  adequate  description of the goods, accessories and
  services sold or furnished (including the make and model, if any, in the
  case of goods customarily sold by make  and  model)  and  shall  further
  contain  those  items  required  to  be disclosed by the act of congress
  entitled "Truth in Lending Act" and the regulations thereunder, as  such
  act and regulations may from time to time be amended. If the seller does
  not  deliver  to  the  buyer  at  the  time  of each purchase under such
  original document a statement in compliance with  the  act  of  congress
  entitled  "Truth in Lending Act" and the regulations thereunder, as such
  act and regulations may from time to time be amended, the  seller  shall
  promptly  thereafter,  and in any event within ten days from the date of
  such purchase, deliver, mail or cause to be mailed to the buyer  at  his
  address shown on the seller's records, such statement. Unless the seller
  does  so,  the  buyer  shall  have an unconditional right to cancel such
  purchase and to receive an immediate refund of  any  payments  made  and
  re-delivery  of  all  goods  traded in to the seller on account of or in
  contemplation of such purchase; upon the written request  of  the  buyer
  the  seller  shall  prove  the  accuracy  of  the  calculations  in such
  statement.
    Such statement with respect to the first such purchase shall, combined
  with the original document, constitute the obligation for such purchase;
  and, on each succeeding purchase pursuant to such original document, the
  obligation therefor as represented by such original  document  and  such
  statement  shall  constitute  a subsequent obligation under section four
  hundred ten.




   §  402A.  Merchandise  certificates  and  obligations therefor.   1. A
  retail seller may issue merchandise certificates to a retail  buyer,  to
  be  paid  for in instalments and to be used solely in exchange for goods
  and services with  a  cash  sale  price  in  the  face  amount  of  such
  certificates and not redeemable in cash, pursuant to a document executed
  by  the parties as hereinafter provided, which document, notwithstanding
  the definition of obligations contained in subdivision seven of  section
  four  hundred  one,  shall constitute a retail instalment obligation for
  the purpose of this article, shall contain the entire agreement  of  the
  parties,  and shall be subject to all of the provisions of sections four
  hundred three to four hundred twelve, inclusive, except  the  provisions
  of the second sentence of section four hundred five.
    2.  On each issue of merchandise certificates, the document evidencing
  the obligation  therefor  shall  set  forth  a  legend  as  provided  in
  paragraph  (a)  of subdivision two of section four hundred two, a notice
  to the buyer as provided in paragraph (b) of subdivision two of  section
  four  hundred  two, the names of the seller and the buyer, the residence
  or place of business of the buyer as specified by the  buyer,  the  face
  amount of the merchandise certificates issued, and all items required to
  be  disclosed by the act of congress entitled "Truth in Lending Act" and
  the regulations thereunder, as such act and regulations may from time to
  time be amended.
    3. A seller  may,  in  such  a  document,  contract  for  and,  if  so
  contracted  for  charge,  receive and collect a credit service charge at
  rates not exceeding those provided under section four  hundred  four  of
  this  article.  Such credit service charge shall be computed on the face
  amount  of  merchandise  certificates  issued   to   the   buyer,   less
  down-payment, if any.
    4.  The buyer shall have the right to return to the seller at any time
  all merchandise certificates which have not been exchanged for goods and
  services, and the seller shall thereupon credit the buyer with the  full
  face  amount  of  such  unused merchandise certificates returned and the
  amount of the pro rata credit service charge  thereon,  which  shall  be
  computed  as  of the date of issuance of the merchandise certificates so
  returned. Where the amount of the refund of such credit charge  is  less
  than one dollar no refund need be made.
    5. (a) Merchandise certificates issued under this section or the cover
  of the booklet in which they are bound, shall bear:
    (i)  A legend in at least eight-point bold type stating that the buyer
  may return unused merchandise certificates so purchased at any time  and
  that  the  seller will give the buyer credit for the full face amount of
  any certificates so returned and credit for the pro rata credit  service
  charge if the same is one dollar or more;
    (ii)  A legend in at least eight point bold type reading substantially
  as follows: If you wish to purchase,  with  merchandise  certificates  a
  single  item  of goods or services of greater value than the merchandise
  certificates you now  hold,  you  may  save  credit  service  charge  by
  returning your unused merchandise certificates for credit and purchasing
  new certificates; and
    (iii)  In  the  event the statements required by subparagraphs (i) and
  (ii) hereof are set forth on  the  cover  of  a  booklet  in  which  the
  merchandise  certificates  are  bound,  each  certificate  shall  bear a
  notice, "NOT GOOD IF DETACHED".
    (b) If a retail seller  issues  merchandise  gift  certificates  to  a
  retail buyer to be paid for in instalments (1) in good faith, and (2) in
  reliance  upon  a  retail  buyers  statement  that  the buyer intends to
  transfer it to another as a gift, then such  certificate  need  not  set
  forth the legends required by subparagraphs (i) and (ii) above; provided


 the  certificate shall bear the legend "GIFT CERTIFICATE" and the seller
  shall give the buyer at the time  of  issuance  of  such  certificate  a
  statement,  or  facsimile of such certificate, which shall identify such
  certificate,  and shall contain the legend required by subparagraphs (i)
  and (ii) above.
    6. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision three of section four
  hundred three of this article, the buyer shall have the right to  return
  to  the  holder  of  a retail instalment obligation executed on or after
  October first, nineteen hundred sixty-two, for merchandise certificates,
  at any time all merchandise certificates which have not  been  exchanged
  for  goods  and  services,  and the holder shall thereupon credit to the
  obligation to the extent of the amount owing by the  buyer  thereon  the
  full  face  amount  of such unused merchandise certificates returned and
  the amount of the pro rata credit service charge thereon, which shall be
  computed as of the date of issuance of the merchandise  certificates  so
  returned.  Where  the amount of the refund of such credit service charge
  is less than one dollar no refund need be made.




   §  402B.  Total  loss  notice  and waiver of the gap amount. 1. If the
  retail instalment contract provides that the buyer shall be  responsible
  upon  a  total  loss  of  the goods occasioned by theft, confiscation or
  physical damage for the gap amount as defined in paragraph fifty-two  of
  subsection  (a)  of  section one hundred seven of the insurance law, the
  holder, prior to the execution of the contract, shall by a notice  on  a
  separate  document  conspicuously disclose that fact and the obligations
  for which the buyer would  remain  liable  in  the  event  of  a  theft,
  confiscation or total loss of the goods. If the holder is required under
  subdivision  two of this section to offer to waive its contractual right
  to hold the buyer liable for the gap amount in the event of a total loss
  of the goods occasioned by theft or physical damage,  the  notice  shall
  also:  (a)  state that for a separate charge disclosed in the notice the
  holder will waive its contractual right to hold the buyer liable for the
  gap amount in the event of a total loss of the goods occasioned by theft
  or physical damage; (b) contain a provision informing the buyer that  he
  or  she  may,  as  an  alternative  to  purchasing  a waiver, be able to
  purchase insurance covering the gap amount  from  an  insurance  company
  which  has  been licensed by the superintendent of financial services to
  write non-motor vehicle debtor gap insurance  in  this  state;  and  (c)
  contain  a  provision permitting the buyer to indicate whether he or she
  wants the holder to waive its contractual right to hold the buyer liable
  for the gap amount in the event of a total loss of the goods  occasioned
  by  theft  or  physical damage. The notice shall be signed by the buyer.
  The holder shall provide a copy of the signed notice to  the  buyer  and
  shall maintain a copy in the holder's files for at least the term of the
  contract.  Failure  to  provide  the  notice  and  to obtain the buyer's
  signature as required by this subdivision shall invalidate any provision
  of the agreement which otherwise would obligate a buyer to  pay  to  the
  holder,   after   a  total  loss  of  the  goods  occasioned  by  theft,
  confiscation or physical damage, the gap amount.  No  retail  instalment
  contract  shall  be  conditioned upon the buyer's obtaining of non-motor
  vehicle debtor gap  insurance  as  set  forth  in  subparagraph  (D)  of
  paragraph  twenty-six  of  subsection  (a)  of  section one thousand one
  hundred thirteen of the insurance law.
    2. If the retail instalment contract provides that the buyer shall  be
  responsible  upon  a  total  loss  of  the  goods occasioned by theft or
  physical damage for the gap amount, the holder, prior to  the  execution
  of  the contract, shall offer to waive its contractual right to hold the
  buyer liable for the gap amount in the event of  a  total  loss  of  the
  goods  occasioned by theft or physical damage, only if non-motor vehicle
  creditor gap insurance coverage is available  to  the  holder  and  such
  coverage  is  obtained from a property/casualty insurance company, which
  has been licensed by the superintendent of financial  services  of  this
  state  to  write non-motor vehicle creditor gap insurance in this state.
  This offer may be made contingent upon the payment by  the  buyer  of  a
  separate  charge  that  shall  not  exceed the cost of non-motor vehicle
  creditor gap insurance covering the retail instalment contract.  Nothing
  contained  in  this section shall be construed to authorize a waiver, in
  connection with a transaction with respect to  which  non-motor  vehicle
  creditor  gap insurance has not been obtained, of a contractual right to
  hold the buyer liable for the gap amount in the event of a total loss of
  the goods occasioned by theft or physical damage.
    3. A holder shall not be  obligated  under  subdivision  two  of  this
  section to offer to waive its contractual right to hold the buyer liable
  for  the  gap  amount if, during the current calendar year or during the
  odd-numbered calendar year immediately preceding the  calendar  year  in
  which  the  agreement is entered into, the holder has received non-motor


 vehicle creditor gap insurance declination notices or other evidence  of
  unavailability  from  every  insurance company whose name appears on the
  department of financial  services  compilation  of  insurance  companies
  which  during  that  calendar  year  were  authorized to write non-motor
  vehicle  creditor  gap  insurance  in  this  state.  Evidence  of  these
  declinations  shall  be  retained  by  such a holder for a period of six
  years after the expiration of the  calendar  year  in  which  they  were
  issued.
    4.  In order to enable holders to comply with the requirements imposed
  by subdivision two of this  section,  the  superintendent  of  financial
  services shall compile and make available a periodically updated list of
  those  insurance  companies  which  are  authorized  to  write non-motor
  vehicle creditor gap insurance coverage in this state.
    5. Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to  the  holder
  under  a  retail instalment contract under which the buyer is not liable
  upon a total loss of the goods  occasioned  by  theft,  confiscation  or
  physical damage for the gap amount.




   §  403.  Restrictions  on retail instalment contracts and obligations.
  1. No contract or obligation shall require or entail  the  execution  of
  any  note  or  series  of  notes  by  the  buyer,  which when separately
  negotiated, will cut off as to third parties  any  right  of  action  or
  defense which the buyer may have against the seller.
    2. No contract or obligation shall contain any provision by which:
    (a)  The  buyer  agrees  not  to assert against an assignee a claim or
  defense arising out of the sale, but it may contain such a provision  as
  to  an assignee who acquires the contract or obligation on the sale of a
  boat, where the principal balance at  the  time  of  sale  exceeds  five
  thousand dollars, and to whom the buyer has not mailed written notice of
  the facts giving rise to the claim or defense within ten days after such
  assignee  mails  to  the  buyer, at his address shown on the contract or
  obligation, notice of the assignment, indicating or  containing  in  the
  notice  or  in an enclosure with the notice: the name and address of the
  assignee, the names of the seller and the buyer and a description of the
  boat  which  is  the  subject  matter  of  the  contract  or  obligation
  (including  the  make  and model), the time balance of the contract, the
  number and amount of installments in which the time balance  is  payable
  and  the  due date or period thereof, together with the following legend
  printed or typewritten in a size equal to  at  least  eight  point  bold
  type:
    NOTICE:
    1.  IF THE WITHIN STATEMENT OF YOUR TRANSACTION WITH THE SELLER IS NOT
  CORRECT IN EVERY RESPECT, OR
    2. IF THE BOAT DESCRIBED IN OR IN AN ENCLOSURE WITH  THIS  NOTICE  HAS
  NOT  BEEN  DELIVERED  TO  YOU  BY  THE  SELLER  OR  IS  NOT  NOW IN YOUR
  POSSESSION, OR
    3. IF THE SELLER HAS NOT FULLY PERFORMED ALL OF  HIS  AGREEMENTS  WITH
  YOU:   YOU MUST NOTIFY THE ASSIGNEES IN WRITING AT THE ADDRESS INDICATED
  IN OR IN AN ENCLOSURE WITH THIS NOTICE WITHIN TEN DAYS FROM THE DATE  OF
  THE  MAILING  OF  THIS  NOTICE,  OTHERWISE,  YOU WILL LOSE YOUR RIGHT TO
  ASSERT AGAINST THE ASSIGNEE ANY RIGHT OF ACTION OR DEFENSE  ARISING  OUT
  OF THE SALE WHICH YOU MIGHT OTHERWISE HAVE AGAINST THE SELLER.
    (b) In the absence of the buyer's default, the holder may, arbitrarily
  and without reasonable cause, accelerate the maturity of any part or all
  of the amount owing thereunder.
    (c) A power-of-attorney is given to confess judgment in this state, or
  an assignment of wages is given.
    (d) The seller or holder of the contract or obligation or other person
  acting  on  his  behalf  is  given  authority  to enter upon the buyer's
  premises unlawfully or  to  commit  any  breach  of  the  peace  in  the
  repossession of goods.
    (e)  The buyer waives any right of action against the seller or holder
  of the contract or obligation, or other person acting on his behalf, for
  any illegal act committed  in  the  collection  of  payments  under  the
  contract or obligation or in the repossession of goods.
    (f)  The  buyer  executes a power-of-attorney appointing the seller or
  holder of the contract or obligation, or  other  person  acting  on  his
  behalf,  as  the  buyer's  agent  in  collection  of  payments under the
  contract or obligation  or  in  the  repossession  of  goods;  provided,
  however,  that  this  paragraph  shall  not  prohibit the inclusion in a
  contract or obligation of a limited power of attorney or other provision
  authorizing the holder to execute in the name of the buyer any proofs of
  insurance claims or losses or to endorse the name of the  buyer  on  any
  insurance settlement draft or check.
    (g)  The  buyer  relieves  the  seller  from  liability  for any legal
  remedies which the buyer may have against the seller under the  contract


 or   obligation  or  any  separate  instrument  executed  in  connection
  therewith.
    (h)  The  buyer  waives  any right to a trial by jury in any action or
  proceeding arising out of the contract or obligation.
    Any such prohibited provision shall be void but  shall  not  otherwise
  affect the validity of the contract or obligation.
    3.  No retail instalment contract shall contain any provision by which
  the maturity of  any  part  or  all  of  the  amount  owing  thereon  is
  accelerated  where, following a default consisting solely of the failure
  to make timely instalment payments and the  subsequent  repossession  of
  the  goods,  the  buyer  makes timely tender of an amount which would be
  sufficient to redeem the goods in the absence of such provision.
    4. Except as provided in paragraph (a)  of  subdivision  two  of  this
  section,  the  assignee  of  a retail installment contract or obligation
  shall be subject to all claims and defenses of  the  buyer  against  the
  seller  arising  from  the  sale  notwithstanding  any  agreement to the
  contrary, but the assignee's liability under this subdivision shall  not
  exceed the amount owing to the assignee at the time the claim or defense
  is asserted against the assignee.






	   §  404. Credit service charge limitation. 1. A seller may, in a retail
  instalment contract or obligation, contract for and,  if  so  contracted
  for, the holder thereof may charge, receive and collect a credit service
  charge  computed  on the principal balance of the contract or obligation
  from the  date  thereof  to  and  including  the  date  when  the  final
  instalment is payable, at the rate or rates agreed to by the buyer.
    2.  Except  as  provided  in  subdivision  three of this section, such
  credit service charge shall be computed  on  the  principal  balance  on
  contracts  or  obligations  payable  in  successive  monthly instalments
  substantially equal in amount for a period of one year. On contracts  or
  obligations  providing  for instalments extending for a period less than
  or greater than one year, the credit service charge  shall  be  computed
  proportionately.
    3.  When  a  retail  instalment  contract  or  obligation provides for
  unequal or irregular instalments, the credit service charge shall be  at
  the  effective  rate  provided  for  in subdivision one of this section,
  having due regard for the schedule of instalments.
    4. As an alternative to the credit service charge provided for  above,
  a  seller  may,  in a retail instalment contract or obligation, contract
  for and, if so contracted  for,  the  holder  may  charge,  receive  and
  collect  a  credit  service  charge  calculated  on the unpaid principal
  balances of the contract for the time each is outstanding, according  to
  a  generally  accepted actuarial method at rates that may vary from time
  to time and in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  contract  or
  obligation.  On  any  contract or obligation with a variable rate credit
  service charge made pursuant to this subdivision,  each  rate  shall  be
  determined  at  regular  intervals  as  set  forth  in  the  contract or
  obligation and in accordance with such regulations as the superintendent
  of financial services shall prescribe but said rate shall not vary  more
  often  than  once  in  any  three  month  period and shall be based on a
  published  index  that  is  (a)  readily  available,  (b)  independently
  verifiable,  (c)  beyond  the control of the holder, and (d) approved by
  the superintendent.
    The superintendent of financial services shall adopt regulations  with
  respect  to retail installment contracts or obligations that provide for
  a variable rate of credit service charge, including but not limited  to:
  (a)  providing  for  disclosure  to  the  buyer  by  the  holder  of the
  circumstances under which the rate may increase, any limitations on  the
  increase,  the effect of an increase and an example of the payment terms
  that would result from an increase; (b) providing for disclosure to  the
  buyer by the holder of a history of the fluctuations of the index over a
  reasonable  period  of  time;  and (c) providing for notice to the buyer
  from the holder prior to any rate increase or change  in  the  terms  of
  payment.
    5.  The  credit  service  charge  shall  be  inclusive  of all charges
  incident to investigating and making the contract or obligation, and for
  the extension of the credit provided for in the contract or  obligation,
  and no fee, expense or other charge whatsoever shall be taken, received,
  reserved or contracted for except as otherwise provided in this article.




   §   405.   Delivery   of  copy  of  contract  or  obligation;  buyer's
  acknowledgment.  The seller shall deliver to the buyer, or mail  to  him
  at  his  address  shown  on the contract or obligation, an executed copy
  thereof.  Until the seller does so, a buyer who  has  not  received  the
  goods  or  services  shall  have  an  unconditional  right to cancel the
  contract or obligation and to receive immediate refund of  all  payments
  made  and  redelivery of all goods traded-in to the seller on account of
  or in contemplation of the contract or obligation. Any acknowledgment by
  the buyer of delivery of a copy of the contract or obligation  shall  be
  printed  or written in a size equal to at least ten point bold type and,
  if contained in the contract or obligation, shall also  appear  directly
  above  the space reserved for the buyer's signature. The buyer's written
  acknowledgment, conforming to  the  requirements  of  this  section,  of
  delivery  of  a  copy  of  a contract or obligation shall be presumptive
  evidence of such delivery  and  of  compliance  with  this  section  and
  subdivision four of section four hundred two in any action or proceeding
  by  or  against  an  assignee  of  the  contract  or  obligation without
  knowledge to the contrary when he purchases the contract or obligation.




   §  406. Notice of assignment; payments. Unless the buyer has notice of
  actual or intended assignment  of  a  contract,  obligation,  or  credit
  agreement  payment thereunder made by the buyer to the last known holder
  of such contract, obligation or credit agreement shall be  binding  upon
  all subsequent holders or assignees.




   §  407.  Statements  of  account;  receipts.  At  any  time  after its
  execution,  but  not  later  than  one  year  after  the  last   payment
  thereunder,  the  holder of a contract or obligation shall, upon written
  request of the buyer, give or forward to the buyer a  written  statement
  of  the  dates  and  amounts  of  payments and the total amount, if any,
  unpaid thereunder. Such a statement shall be supplied by the holder once
  each year without charge; if any additional statement  is  requested  by
  the  buyer,  the  holder  shall  supply such statement to the buyer at a
  charge not exceeding one dollar for each additional  statement  supplied
  to the buyer. A buyer shall be given a receipt for any payment when made
  in cash.




   §  408.  Credit  upon anticipation of payments. 1. Notwithstanding the
  provisions of any contract or obligation to the contrary, any buyer  may
  pay  it  in full at any time before the maturity of the final instalment
  of the time balance thereof and if he  does  so  shall  receive  and  be
  entitled  to  receive  a  refund  credit  thereon and if the contract or
  obligation included an amount for group credit life insurance a  further
  refund credit thereon for such anticipation, whether or not the maturity
  of  the  time  balance  of the contract was accelerated by the holder by
  reason of the buyer's default.
    2. The amount of any such refund credit shall be determined  according
  to a generally acceptable actuarial method.
    If the credit service charge imposed on the retail instalment contract
  or  obligation  is computed pursuant to subdivision four of section four
  hundred four of this article, the contract or obligation may be  prepaid
  in full without penalty.
    3.  Where the amount of the credit for anticipation of payment is less
  than one dollar no refund need be made. Where the earned credit  service
  charge  amounts  to  less,  there may be retained an amount equal to the
  minimum credit service charge applicable.
    4. The amount of the further  refund  credit  for  group  credit  life
  insurance  shall  be  equal  to the excess of the amount included in the
  contract for group credit life  insurance  over  the  premiums  paid  or
  payable  by  the  holder  of  the  contract  for such insurance, if such
  premiums were paid or payable periodically, or the refund  for  unearned
  group  credit  life  insurance  premium  paid  or payable in a lump sum,
  provided that no such further refund credit need be made if  the  amount
  thereof would be less than one dollar.
    5.  In  the  event  (i)  the  maturity  of a contract or obligation is
  accelerated due to the default of the buyer or otherwise and judgment is
  obtained, or (ii) repayment  is  made  pursuant  to  group  credit  life
  insurance,  the  buyer  or his legal representative, as the case may be,
  shall be entitled to the same refund credits as if the contract had been
  prepaid in full on the date of acceleration or repayment.




   §  409.  Refinancing. 1. The holder of a retail instalment contract or
  obligation or note may,  upon  agreement  with  the  buyer,  extend  the
  scheduled  due date or defer the scheduled payment of all or of any part
  of any instalment or instalments payable thereunder. The  agreement  for
  such extension or deferment must be in writing and signed by the parties
  thereto.  The  holder  may  charge  and  contract  for the payment of an
  extension or deferral charge by the buyer and collect  and  receive  the
  same,  at  the  rate  or  rates agreed to by holder and the buyer on the
  amount of the instalment or instalments, or part  thereof,  extended  or
  deferred for the period of extension or deferral.  Such period shall not
  exceed  the  period  from  the  date  when  such  extended  or  deferred
  instalment or instalments, or part thereof, would have been  payable  in
  the  absence  of  such  extension  or  deferral,  to  the date when such
  instalment or instalments, or part thereof, are made payable  under  the
  agreement of extension or deferment; except that a minimum charge of one
  dollar  for  the period of extension or deferral may be made in any case
  where the extension or deferral charge,  when  computed  at  such  rate,
  amounts to less than one dollar. Such agreement may also provide for the
  payment  by  the  buyer  of  the  additional  cost  to the holder of the
  contract or obligation or note of  premiums  for  continuing  in  force,
  until  the  end  of  such period of extension or deferral, any insurance
  coverages provided for in the contract or  obligation,  subject  to  the
  provisions of subdivision five of section four hundred two.
    2.  The  holder  of a retail instalment contract or obligation or note
  may, upon agreement in writing with the buyer, refinance the payment  of
  the  unpaid  time  balance  of  the  contract  or  obligation or note by
  providing for a new schedule of  instalment  payments.  The  holder  may
  charge  and  contract for the payment of a refinance charge by the buyer
  and collect and receive the same, but such refinance charge (1) shall be
  based upon the amount refinanced, plus any additional cost of  insurance
  and  of  official fees incident to such refinancing, after the deduction
  of a refund credit in an amount equal to that to which the  buyer  would
  have been entitled under section four hundred eight if he had prepaid in
  full  his  obligations  under the contract or obligation or note, but in
  computing such refund credit there shall  not  be  allowed  the  minimum
  earned  credit service charge as authorized by such section, and (2) may
  not exceed the rate of credit service charge provided under section four
  hundred four of this chapter. Such agreement for  refinancing  may  also
  provide  for  the  payment  by  the  buyer of the additional cost to the
  holder of the contract or obligation or note of premiums for  continuing
  in  force,  until  the maturity of the contract or obligation or note as
  refinanced, any insurance coverages provided for therein, subject to the
  provisions of subdivision five of  section  four  hundred  two  of  this
  chapter. The refinancing agreement shall set forth all items required to
  be  disclosed by the act of congress entitled "Truth in Lending Act" and
  the regulations thereunder, as such act and regulations may from time to
  time be amended.




   §  410.  Add-ons  to and consolidations of retail instalment contracts
  and obligations. 1. A retail instalment  contract  or  obligation  which
  otherwise  conforms  to the requirements of this article may contain the
  promise or agreement of the buyer to pay in substantially equal periodic
  instalments the consolidated total of the principal balance thereof  and
  the unpaid time balance or balances owing by the buyer under one or more
  previous  contracts  or  obligations,  together  with  a  credit service
  charge; if it does so:
    (a) The contract or obligation shall set forth all items  required  to
  be  disclosed by the act of congress entitled "Truth in Lending Act" and
  the regulations thereunder, as such act and regulations may from time to
  time be amended.
    (b) Subject to the provisions of section four hundred four and to  the
  provisions  of  paragraph  (c)  of  this subdivision, the credit service
  charge to be included in such consolidated total may equal but shall not
  exceed the larger of the  amounts  determined  by  applying  the  credit
  service charge at the rate or rates agreed to by the buyer:
    (1)  to  the total of the principal balance of the subsequent contract
  or obligation and the principal balance  of  any  previous  contract  or
  obligation  included  in  the consolidated total determined by deducting
  from the then unpaid time  balance  thereof  any  then  unearned  credit
  service  charge  in  an  amount  not  less  than  the  refund credit for
  anticipation provided for  in  section  four  hundred  eight  (computed,
  however,  without  the  allowance  of  any minimum earned credit service
  charge), for the period from the date thereof to and including the  date
  when the final instalment of such consolidated total is payable; or
    (2)  to the principal balance of the subsequent contract or obligation
  for the period from the date thereof to and including the date when  the
  final  instalment  of such consolidated total is payable and, if the due
  date of the final instalment of such consolidated total  is  later  than
  the  due  date  of  the  final  instalment  of  any previous contract or
  obligation included in the consolidated total, on the time balance  then
  unpaid  on  such  previous contract or obligation from the date when the
  final instalment  thereof  was  payable  to  the  date  when  the  final
  instalment of such consolidated total is payable.
    (c)  A  consolidation  of  a  retail instalment contract or obligation
  entered into after the effective date of this paragraph  with  a  retail
  instalment  contract  or  obligation entered into prior to the effective
  date of this paragraph shall be governed by the limitations  on  maximum
  credit  service charges contained in subdivision one of this section and
  section four hundred four as they were in effect  immediately  prior  to
  the effective date of this paragraph.
    2.  Where  a  buyer  makes  any  subsequent  purchase of goods under a
  contract from a seller from whom he had previously purchased goods under
  one or more contracts and the amounts due under such  previous  contract
  or  contracts  have not been fully paid, and where the total of the time
  balance of the subsequent contract and the unpaid time balances owing by
  the buyer under the previous contracts does not  exceed  three  thousand
  dollars,  such contract, if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of
  this article, may provide that the goods purchased  under  the  previous
  contract  or  contracts  shall be security for the goods purchased under
  the subsequent contract but only until such time  as  (a)  the  purchase
  price  under  the  previous  contract or contracts is fully paid, or (b)
  twenty per centum of the time sale price of the  goods  purchased  under
  the subsequent contract has been paid, whichever event first occurs.
    3.  When  such  subsequent  purchase is made, the entire amount of all
  payments made previous thereto shall be  deemed  to  have  been  applied
  toward  the  payment of the previous purchase or purchases. Each payment


 thereafter received shall be deemed  to  be  allocated  to  all  of  the
  various  purchases  in the same proportion or ratio as the original cash
  sale prices of the various purchases bear  to  one  another;  where  the
  amount  of  each  instalment payment is increased in connection with the
  subsequent purchase, the subsequent payments (at the seller's  election)
  may  be  deemed  to  be  allocated  as  follows:  an amount equal to the
  original rate, to the previous purchase, and  an  amount  equal  to  the
  increase,  to the subsequent purchase. However the amount of any initial
  or down-payment on  the  subsequent  purchase  shall  be  deemed  to  be
  allocated   in   its  entirety  to  such  purchase.  The  provisions  of
  subdivisions two and three of this section  shall  not  apply  to  cases
  involving  equipment,  parts or other merchandise attached or affixed to
  goods previously purchased or repairs or services rendered by the seller
  in connection therewith at the buyer's request.




   §  411.  Terms  of  purchase  by financing agency. Notwithstanding any
  contrary provision of the personal property law, lien law,  banking  law
  or other law:
    1.  A  financing  agency  may  purchase  a retail instalment contract,
  obligation or credit agreement, or indebtedness of a buyer  to  be  paid
  under a credit agreement, from a seller on such terms and conditions and
  for such price as may be mutually agreed upon; and
    2.  No filing of the assignment, no filing of any financing statement,
  no notice to the buyer of the assignment, and no  requirement  that  the
  seller  be  deprived  of  dominion  over  payments  upon  the  contract,
  obligation or credit agreement or over the goods if  repossessed  by  or
  returned  to the seller, shall be necessary to the validity of a written
  assignment  of  a  contract,  obligation   or   credit   agreement,   or
  indebtedness  to be paid under a credit agreement, as against creditors,
  subsequent purchasers, pledgees,  mortgagees  or  encumbrancers  of  the
  seller.




   § 412. Cancellation. After the payment of all sums for which the buyer
  is  obligated  under  a  contract or obligation, and upon written demand
  made by the buyer, the holder shall deliver, or mail to the buyer at his
  last known address, such one or more good and sufficient instruments  as
  may  be  necessary  to  acknowledge  payment  in full and to release all
  security in the goods. This section does not repeal section  seventy-two
  of this chapter or section two hundred thirty-eight of the lien law.




   §  412-a.  Cancellation of contracts for future consumer services.  1.
  Contract for future consumer services. As referred to in  this  section,
  the term "contract for future consumer services" shall mean any contract
  entered  into  for  consumer services to be performed in the future on a
  lesson-by-lesson or class-by-class basis and offered, sold  or  provided
  by  correspondence  schools which for the purposes of this section shall
  mean any plan or method used by any person or persons, firm, corporation
  or other organization for giving instruction in any form  or  manner  by
  correspondence under contract.
    2.  No person, including any business entity, may contract to receive,
  or demand, in the  event  of  cancellation  of  a  contract  for  future
  services, more than the total of:
    (a)  five  percent of the cash price, but not to exceed fifty dollars,
  and
    (b) a pro rata portion of the total price, representing the proportion
  of services used or completed.
    In addition, the  seller  may  receive  or  demand  the  cost  of  any
  ancillary  goods  which the buyer has consumed or wishes to retain after
  cancellation of the contract.  In no instance shall the  seller  collect
  more than the full contract price from the buyer.
    3.  Within  ten days after a contract for future consumer services has
  been cancelled, the seller shall tender to the buyer any  payments  made
  in   excess  of  the  amounts  permitted  to  be  retained  pursuant  to
  subdivision two of this section.
    4. Cancellation. Cancellation shall occur:
    (a) when the buyer mails to the seller notice of his intent to cancel,
  or
    (b) where the seller has actual notice of  the  buyer's  intention  to
  cancel, or
    (c)  where  the buyer fails to attend consecutive scheduled classes or
  lessons constituting at least twenty-five percent of the  total  lessons
  or  time contracted for, without informing the seller in writing that he
  intends to remain enrolled.
    5. The contract forms used by the seller shall conspicuously  disclose
  the  seller's  cancellation  provisions  in compliance with subdivisions
  two, three, and four of this section and  shall  contain  the  following
  notice in ten point bold face type:
    If you cancel this contract (the seller) may keep only five percent of
  the  cash  price,  but not to exceed fifty dollars, and a portion of the
  contract price based upon the lessons or services you have used. You may
  notify the seller of your intent to cancel by mail,  addressed  to  (the
  seller) at (seller's address).
    6.  Nothing  in  this  section  shall be construed so as to nullify or
  impair any right or rights which a buyer may have against  a  seller  at
  common law, by statute, or otherwise.




   § 413. Retail instalment credit agreements. 1. (a) A retail instalment
  credit  agreement  shall be dated and in writing and the printed portion
  thereof shall be in at least eight  point  type.  No  retail  instalment
  credit  agreement  shall  be  signed by the buyer when it contains blank
  spaces to be filled in after it  has  been  signed  by  the  buyer.  The
  seller, before he shall be able to avail himself of the rates authorized
  by  subdivision three of this section, shall deliver to the buyer a copy
  of the credit agreement executed by the seller.
    (b) Provided that the retail installment credit agreement complies  in
  all  other respects with the provisions of this section, a single credit
  agreement may provide for a retail seller to acquire indebtedness  of  a
  retail  buyer  under  a  sales slip or memorandum evidencing a purchase.
  Where a retail seller enters into a credit agreement with a retail buyer
  the credit agreement may consist of an agreement complying in all  other
  respects  with  the provisions of this section, but executed only by the
  retail seller, together with a credit card issued by it  to  the  retail
  buyer.  The  credit  agreement, however, must then provide that it shall
  not become effective unless and until  the  retail  buyer  or  a  person
  authorized by him signs a sales slip or memorandum evidencing a purchase
  or  lease  of  property  or  services by use of the credit card and that
  prior thereto the retail buyer shall not be responsible for any purchase
  or lease of property or services by use of the  credit  card  after  its
  loss or theft.
    2. Every retail instalment credit agreement shall contain:
    (a)  The  entire  agreement  of  the buyer with respect to the subject
  matter of the credit agreement;
    (b) The names of the seller and of the buyer, the place of business of
  the seller and the residence or  place  of  business  of  the  buyer  as
  specified by the buyer;
    (c)  Both at the top thereof and directly above the space reserved for
  the signature of the buyer, the words RETAIL INSTALMENT CREDIT AGREEMENT
  in at least ten point bold type;
    (d) A provision in at least eight point bold type to the  effect  that
  the buyer may at any time pay his total indebtedness; and
    (e)  A  notice  in  at least eight point bold type reading as follows:
  NOTICE TO THE BUYER: 1. Do not sign this  credit  agreement  before  you
  read  it  or  if  it  contains any blank space. 2. You are entitled to a
  completely filled in copy of this credit agreement.
    3. (a) A seller may, in a retail instalment credit agreement, contract
  for and, if so contracted for, the seller or holder thereof may  charge,
  receive and collect the service charge authorized by this article, which
  service  charge  shall  not  exceed the rate or rates agreed upon by the
  seller and the buyer, including, in accordance with  the  provisions  of
  the  credit  agreement, rates that may vary, from time to time computed,
  for the purposes of this section, on the outstanding  indebtedness  from
  month  to  month,  or  if  the  service  charge so computed is less than
  seventy cents for any month, seventy  cents.  If  the  credit  agreement
  provides  for  a  variable  rate  of  service charge, such rate shall be
  determined at regular intervals as set forth in the credit agreement and
  in accordance with such regulations as the superintendent  of  financial
  services  shall  prescribe  but said rate shall not vary more often than
  once in any three month period and shall be based on a  published  index
  that  is (a) readily available, (b) independently verifiable, (c) beyond
  the control of the seller and (d) approved by  the  superintendent,  (e)
  such charges in credit agreements shall be based on the index values, or
  the  index  numbers plus or minus additional percentage points provided,
  however, that variations in the charge must correspond directly  to  the
  movements of the index values plus or minus additional percentage points


 only. Once such charge is established no lending institution may add any
  factors  to increase the charge other than variations in the established
  index without the prior approval  of  the  superintendent  of  financial
  services.
    The  superintendent of financial services shall adopt regulations with
  respect to credit agreements that provide for a variable rate of service
  charge, including but not limited to: (a) providing  for  disclosure  to
  the  buyer  by  the seller of the circumstances under which the rate may
  increase, any limitations on the increase, the effect of an increase and
  an example of the payment terms that would result from an increase;  (b)
  providing  for disclosure to the buyer by the seller of a history of the
  fluctuations of the index over a reasonable  period  of  time;  and  (c)
  providing  for  notice  to  the  buyer  by  the seller prior to any rate
  increase or change in the terms of payment. The regulations shall  allow
  a seller, holder or financing agency after choosing an approved index to
  choose  a spread and a minimum and maximum rate of service charge at its
  discretion. A retail instalment credit agreement,  whether  it  provides
  for  a fixed or variable service charge, may provide for an introductory
  rate of service charge at either a fixed or variable rate, provided that
  the terms of such introductory rate, including, if applicable, the  date
  on  which  the  introductory  rate shall terminate, are disclosed to the
  buyer. Such disclosure shall be contained  on  an  application  form  or
  pre-approved  written solicitation as specified pursuant to subdivisions
  one and one-a of section five hundred twenty  of  the  general  business
  law.  A  change  in  the  service  charge  rate  upon  expiration  of an
  introductory rate shall not be considered a variable rate or a change in
  terms. The  service  charge  rate  in  effect  after  expiration  of  an
  introductory  rate  may  apply  to  all  amounts  due  under  the credit
  agreement regardless of when incurred, and disclosure of the same  shall
  be provided to the buyer in the written agreement.
    (b)  If  the  credit  agreement so provides, the service charge may be
  computed on a schedule of fixed amounts if as so computed it is  applied
  to all amounts of outstanding balances equal to the fixed amount minus a
  differential  of  not  more  than five dollars, provided that it is also
  applied to all amounts of outstanding balances equal to the fixed amount
  plus at least the same differential.
    (c) (i) For the purposes of this  subdivision  the  term  "outstanding
  indebtedness  from  month  to  month" shall mean, at the election of the
  seller, holder or financing agency either:
    (a) the amount unpaid at the beginning of the monthly billing  period,
  including unpaid service charges, less all payments received and credits
  issued  during  the  billing  period, except for credits attributable to
  amounts not included in the previous balance; or
    (b) an amount not to  exceed  the  amount  calculated  by  adding  the
  amounts  unpaid  for  each  day of the monthly billing period, including
  unpaid service charges, after  reflecting  that  day's  purchases  made,
  payments  received,  credits  issued and other adjustments, and dividing
  such sum by the number of days in the billing period.
    (ii) A credit agreement may  not  provide  for  the  imposition  of  a
  service  charge  for  any  monthly  billing  period in which there is no
  previous balance or during which the sum of the  payments  received  and
  other  credits  issued which are attributable to amounts included in the
  previous balance is equal to or exceeds  the  amount  of  such  previous
  balance  unless  the  same  seller  also offers a credit agreement which
  provides that no service charge will be imposed for any monthly  billing
  period  in which there is no previous balance or during which the sum of
  the payments received and other credits issued which are attributable to


 amounts included in the previous balance is  equal  to  or  exceeds  the
  amount of such previous balance.
    (iii) The term "billing period" as used in this subdivision shall mean
  the   time  interval  between  periodic  statement  dates,  pursuant  to
  subdivision four of this section. A billing period shall  be  considered
  to  be  a "month" or "monthly" if the last day of each billing period is
  on the same day of each month or does not vary by more  than  four  days
  therefrom.
    (d) Where a retail instalment credit agreement provides that the buyer
  has  the  option  of  avoiding  the  imposition of an additional service
  charge by paying the outstanding indebtedness  or  any  portion  thereof
  within a specified period of time, the additional service charge may not
  be  imposed  unless  the  monthly  statement  showing  such  outstanding
  indebtedness or portion thereof is mailed at least fifteen days prior to
  the date by which payment must be received to avoid that service charge.
  A seller or holder shall not  be  prohibited  from  imposing  a  service
  charge,  or  required  to  refund a service charge, if failure to comply
  with the provisions of this paragraph resulted from circumstances beyond
  the  control  of  the  seller  or  holder,  notwithstanding   reasonable
  procedures to insure compliance with this paragraph.
    (e)  No  change  in  the terms of a retail instalment credit agreement
  shall take effect unless at least 30 days prior to the effective date of
  such change, a written notice has been mailed or delivered to the  buyer
  that   clearly   and   conspicuously   describes  such  change  and  the
  indebtedness to which it applies, and if the change has  the  effect  of
  increasing the rate of service charge, either (a) the notice states that
  the  incurrence  by the buyer or another person authorized by him of any
  further indebtedness under the plan to which the agreement relates on or
  after the effective date of such change specified in  the  notice  shall
  constitute  acceptance  of  such  change, and either the buyer agrees in
  writing to such change or the buyer or another person authorized by  him
  incurs  such  further indebtedness on or after the effective date of the
  change stated in the notice, or (b) the notice advises the buyer that he
  has thirty days from the earlier of  the  mailing  or  delivery  of  the
  notice  to  advise  the  seller  under or holder of a retail installment
  credit agreement in  writing  that  he  does  not  accept  such  change,
  provided  that  such  notice  contains an address to which the buyer may
  send notice of his election not to accept the change and  also  provided
  that  the  notice  specifies  that  the  change  will take effect absent
  receipt of the buyer's written objection to the change.  Any  buyer  who
  has  received  a  notice  pursuant  to  clause (a) who does not agree in
  writing to the change and no further indebtedness is incurred under  the
  plan  to  which  the agreement relates, and any buyer who gives a timely
  notice, pursuant to clause (b), electing not to accept the change  shall
  be  permitted to pay his outstanding indebtedness in accordance with the
  terms of the retail installment  credit  agreement  but  the  seller  or
  holder may terminate the amount of credit available to the buyer and may
  require the buyer to return all credit cards issued in connection with a
  retail installment credit agreement. If such a buyer subsequently uses a
  credit   card  to  obtain  credit  under  a  retail  installment  credit
  agreement, such use shall constitute acceptance of the change  of  terms
  and  shall be deemed to have been accepted and shall become effective as
  to the buyer as of the date such change would have become effective  but
  for  the  giving  of notice by the buyer. If notice is given pursuant to
  clause (b) and the buyer does  not  timely  object  in  writing  to  the
  change, such change shall become effective without action on the part of
  the  buyer;  provided that in no event shall any such change take effect
  with respect to (i) that portion of the  outstanding  indebtedness  from


 month  to  month  which  represents  indebtedness  outstanding  prior to
  January 1, 1981, and (ii) that portion of the  outstanding  indebtedness
  from  month  to  month  which represents indebtedness incurred, under or
  pursuant  to an agreement in effect on December 1, 1980, between January
  1, 1981, and the effective date of such change specified  in  the  first
  notice   mailed  or  delivered  pursuant  to  clause  (a).  Indebtedness
  outstanding prior to January 1, 1981 for purpose of clause (i) above and
  indebtedness outstanding prior to the effective date  of  a  change  for
  purposes  of  clause  (ii)  above  shall  be  determined on the basis of
  crediting payments and other credits first to that portion of  any  such
  indebtedness  representing  any service charges and then to that portion
  of such indebtedness representing purchases  and  other  debits  in  the
  order  in  which  made.  An  amendment  to a credit agreement deleting a
  provision that the rate of service charge may vary from time to time may
  not become effective within one year from the  later  of  the  effective
  date  of  the  credit agreement or the effective date of an amendment to
  the credit agreement adding a variable rate provision. For  purposes  of
  this  paragraph,  an  adjustment  in the rate of the service charge as a
  consequence of the movement in the selected index shall not constitute a
  change in the terms of that agreement. A reduction in the  grace  period
  for  the assessment of a fee on any installment not paid when due, shall
  be considered an  amendment  to  an  agreement  as  set  forth  in  this
  paragraph.  The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply in the case
  of an agreement which expressly prohibits changing  of  terms  or  which
  provides  limitations  on  changing  of terms which are more restrictive
  than the requirements of this paragraph.
    Any service charge, whether assessed by a fixed or variable rate,  may
  be  reduced on such terms as the seller may determine, provided that the
  terms of such reduction, including, if applicable, the date on which the
  reduction will terminate, are disclosed to  the  buyer  on  the  written
  notice  announcing  the  reduction,  prior  to the effective date of the
  reduction. A new method of determining a service charge is  a  reduction
  in  the  service  charge  if  the charge determined under the new method
  never exceeds the charge under the original method. The original service
  charge or original method of  determining  the  service  charge  may  be
  applied after the reduction ends to the entire outstanding indebtedness,
  including  any  indebtedness  incurred  when  the reduced service charge
  applied, and disclosure of the same shall be provided to  the  buyer  in
  the  written  notice  announcing the reduction. A reduction to a service
  charge, including the resumption of the original service charge  or  the
  original  method  of  determining  the  service  charge,  shall  not  be
  considered a change in terms for purposes of this paragraph.
    3-a. No retail instalment credit agreement or guarantee  of  a  retail
  instalment credit agreement shall provide for a security interest in any
  investment  property,  as  defined in paragraph forty-nine of subsection
  (a) of section 9--102 of the uniform commercial code, that is pledged as
  collateral, unless (a) the contract either specifically  identifies  the
  investment  property  as  collateral  or  (b)  the  secured  party  is a
  securities intermediary, as defined in paragraph fourteen of  subsection
  (a)  of  section  8-102  of  the  uniform  commercial code, or commodity
  intermediary, as defined in paragraph seventeen  of  subsection  (a)  of
  section  9--102  of  the  uniform  commercial  code, with respect to the
  investment property. The identification of an account shall include  the
  name  of  the holder, account number, and name of the entity holding the
  investment property. In  the  event  that  a  retail  instalment  credit
  agreement  or  guarantee does not comply with this section, the security
  interest in the investment property is void.


   4. The seller or holder under a  retail  instalment  credit  agreement
  shall promptly provide the buyer under the agreement with a statement as
  of  the  end of each monthly period (which need not be a calendar month)
  containing
    (a) The items required to be set forth pursuant to the act of congress
  entitled  "Truth in Lending Act" and the regulations thereunder, as such
  act and regulations may from time to time be amended; and
    (b) A legend to the effect that the buyer may  at  any  time  pay  his
  total indebtedness.
    5.  (a)  The  fees  and  charges  authorized  by  this subdivision and
  subdivision three of this section shall  be  inclusive  of  all  charges
  incident  to  investigating  and  making  the  retail  instalment credit
  agreement and for the extension of credit thereunder. No  fee,  expense,
  delinquency,  collection  or  other  charge  whatsoever  shall be taken,
  received, reserved or contracted for by the seller under or holder of  a
  retail instalment credit agreement except as provided in this section. A
  retail  instalment  credit  agreement  may  provide  for  the payment of
  attorney's fees not exceeding twenty per centum of the  amount  due  and
  payable  under the credit agreement if it is referred to an attorney not
  a salaried employee of the seller or holder for collection.
    (b) In addition to the  service  charge  on  outstanding  indebtedness
  permitted  under subdivision three of this section, the seller or holder
  may charge, receive and collect any one or more of the fees and  charges
  described  in  this  paragraph,  provided that any such fee or charge is
  provided for in the retail  instalment  credit  agreement.  When  credit
  cards   are  issued  in  connection  with  a  retail  instalment  credit
  agreement, the retail instalment credit agreement  may  provide  for  an
  annual  fee  for  membership  in  the  credit  card plan. If a buyer has
  requested the issuance of a credit card, the fee for the first year  may
  be  charged  by  the  seller or holder at any time. The seller or holder
  shall in each subsequent year in which an annual fee  is  payable,  send
  the buyer in or with the statement for the monthly billing period before
  that in which the fee is to be billed, a notice that the annual fee will
  be  billed  in the next monthly statement. A buyer who is not delinquent
  or otherwise in breach of any term of the agreement with the  seller  or
  holder shall have the right during the first six months after the annual
  fee  is billed to notify the seller or holder in writing, at its address
  on the credit agreement, to terminate the buyer's account and request  a
  refund  of  the  unused  portion of the annual fee previously paid. Upon
  receipt of the termination notice and refund request  from  such  buyer,
  the seller or holder shall refund to the buyer the unused pro-rata share
  of any annual fee previously paid as of the first billing statement date
  after  receipt  of the termination notice. The retail installment credit
  agreement may provide for the assessment of a fee  for  any  installment
  which  is not paid on or before the date on which it is due. A seller or
  holder that imposes a fee for late payments  without  allowing  a  grace
  period of at least ten days must credit any cash payment made by a buyer
  to  an  authorized representative of the seller or holder at all stores,
  or to a teller at a branch where deposits are accepted, as of  the  date
  of  the  receipt of the payment. The retail installment credit agreement
  may, in addition, provide for an overlimit charge. The overlimit  charge
  may  be  imposed whenever the specified credit limit is exceeded but not
  more than once in a monthly billing cycle. If the  overlimit  charge  is
  imposed,  the  credit  limit  must  be  disclosed on the monthly billing
  statement. The retail installment credit agreement also may provide for:
  (i) a returned payment charge, in the amount set forth in section  5-328
  of the general obligations law, for any check or other method of payment
  that  is  returned  unpaid,  excluding  payment made by automated teller


 machine or other electronic media; (ii) a charge for replacement of lost
  or stolen credit cards, which charge shall be applied only where a buyer
  has suffered a  lost  or  stolen  credit  card  after  two  replacements
  thereof;  (iii)  a  charge  for  additional credit cards for the buyer's
  account; and (iv) a charge for copies of sales slips, monthly statements
  and other documents when such copies are  not  required  by  federal  or
  state law governing billing error disputes.
    Sections  190.40  and  190.42 of the penal law shall not apply to fees
  and charges set forth in this subdivision. For purposes of 12 U.S.C.  §§
  85,  1831  d, 1463(g) and 1785 (g), the fees and charges permitted under
  this subdivision are  interest  under  New  York  law,  and  all  terms,
  conditions,   and   other  provisions  of  a  retail  instalment  credit
  agreement, including without limitation, fees  and  charges,  provisions
  relating  to  the  method of determining the outstanding indebtedness on
  which a service charge is imposed and circumstances in which  a  service
  charge may be avoided, are material to the determination of the interest
  rate under New York law.
    6.  If  the  cost  of any insurance is to be separately charged to the
  buyer, the retail instalment credit agreement shall  state  whether  the
  insurance is to be procured by the buyer or the seller or holder. If the
  insurance  is  to  be  procured  by  the seller or holder, the seller or
  holder shall comply with the provisions of subdivision five  of  section
  four hundred two.
    7.  No  retail instalment credit agreement shall require or entail the
  execution of any note or  series  of  notes  by  the  buyer  which  when
  separately  negotiated  will  cut  off  as to third parties any right of
  action or defense which the buyer may have against the seller.
    8. The provisions of  subdivisions  four  and  five  of  section  four
  hundred  two  A and of sections four hundred six and four hundred twelve
  hereof shall be applicable to retail instalment credit  agreements.  The
  words  "credit  service charge" in subdivisions four and five of section
  four hundred two A shall read "service charge" for the purposes of  this
  section.
    9.  The  service  charge  allowed in subdivision three of this section
  shall be allowed to a seller or holder under this section only:
    (a) If the seller enters into an agreement subject to  the  provisions
  of  this  article  with  any  buyer  on or after October first, nineteen
  hundred fifty-seven; or
    (b) In the case of any buyer who had entered into an agreement with  a
  seller  prior  to  October  first,  nineteen hundred fifty-seven, if the
  seller or holder delivers or mails to the  buyer  a  copy  of  a  retail
  instalment  credit  agreement  in  conformity  with  this  section  duly
  executed on behalf of the seller and the  seller  or  holder  thereafter
  complies with all the other provisions of this section.
    Nothing in this subdivision contained shall be construed to affect the
  validity  or invalidity of any agreement or alleged agreement made prior
  to October first, nineteen hundred fifty-seven.
    10. No retail instalment credit agreement shall contain any  provision
  by which:
    (a) In the absence of the buyer's default, the holder may, arbitrarily
  and without reasonable cause, accelerate the maturity of any part or all
  of the amount owing thereunder;
    (b) A power-of-attorney is given to confess judgment in this state, or
  an assignment of wages is given;
    (c)  The buyer waives any right of action against the seller or holder
  of the agreement, or other person acting on his behalf, for any  illegal
  act committed in the collection of payments under the agreement;


   (d)  The  buyer  executes a power-of-attorney appointing the seller or
  holder of the agreement, or other person acting on his  behalf,  as  the
  buyer's agent in collecting payments under the agreement;
    (e)  The buyer relieves the seller from liability for any legal remedy
  which the buyer may have against  the  seller  under  the  agreement  or
  otherwise;
    (f)  The  buyer  waives  any right to a trial by jury in any action or
  proceeding arising out of the agreement.
    (g) The buyer consents to receive any goods or services on  a  regular
  or  irregular  basis. Any such consent to receive goods or services must
  be separately agreed to by the buyer in a writing other than the  retail
  instalment credit agreement.
    Any  such  prohibited  provision shall be void but shall not otherwise
  affect the validity of the contract.
    11. (a) Provided that the retail instalment credit agreement  complies
  in  all  other respects with the provisions of this section, a financing
  agency may enter into a credit agreement with a retail buyer for its own
  account or on  behalf  of  one  or  more  retail  sellers  or  municipal
  corporations,  or the New York city water board, which need not be named
  in the agreement, pursuant to which the financing agency may,  with  the
  buyer's  consent, purchase or acquire from one or more retail sellers or
  municipal corporations, or the New York city water board, which need not
  be named in the credit agreement, indebtedness  of  the  buyer  under  a
  sales  slip  or memorandum evidencing a purchase or fine, civil penalty,
  rent, rate, tax, fee, charge, revenue, financial  obligation,  or  other
  amount,  including a penalty, special assessment or interest, to be paid
  in accordance with the agreement. Such a credit agreement shall  contain
  the  name and place of business of the financing agency in lieu of those
  of a retail seller, municipal corporation or the  New  York  city  water
  board, and may not contain any provision for a security interest in real
  or  personal  property  or  fixtures  of  the buyer to secure payment or
  performance of the buyer's obligation under the credit  agreement  other
  than  a  security interest in a specifically identified interest-bearing
  deposit account of the buyer with such  financing  agency.  A  financing
  agency  may  in  such  a credit agreement contract for, and if it has so
  contracted and delivered to the buyer a copy  of  the  credit  agreement
  executed  by  it,  may  charge,  receive  and collect the service charge
  authorized by this section. Each sales slip or memorandum  evidencing  a
  purchase  or fine, civil penalty, rent, rate, tax, fee, charge, revenue,
  financial obligation, or other  amount,  including  a  penalty,  special
  assessment  or  interest  due to a municipal corporation or the New York
  city water board from the buyer to be paid in  accordance  with  such  a
  credit  agreement  shall refer to the credit agreement between the buyer
  and the financing agency by account number or otherwise and contain  the
  names  of  the retail buyer and the retail seller, municipal corporation
  or the New York city water board.
    A financing agency which  purchases  from  more  than  one  seller  or
  municipal  corporation  or  which purchases from the New York city water
  board indebtedness of a retail buyer to be paid in accordance with  such
  a  retail  instalment  credit  agreement  entered  into by the financing
  agency with the buyer  as  provided  in  this  subdivision  may  charge,
  receive  and  collect the service charge authorized by subdivision three
  of this section only if the service charge so authorized is computed  on
  the  buyer's total outstanding indebtedness to the financing agency from
  month to month to be paid in accordance with such  a  retail  instalment
  credit agreement.
    (b) A financing agency may enter into a credit agreement with a retail
  buyer  for  its  own  account  or  on  behalf  of one or more authorized


 insurers or insurance agents or insurance brokers, who need not be named
  in the agreement, pursuant to which the financing agency may,  with  the
  buyer's  consent,  purchase  or  acquire  from  one  or  more authorized
  insurers  or  insurance  agents or brokers, who need not be named in the
  agreement, the buyer's indebtedness under a  sales  slip  or  memorandum
  evidencing  a  purchase  of  insurance  under  an  insurance contract or
  contracts, provided that (i) such credit  agreement  complies  with  the
  requirements  of paragraph (a) of this subdivision, and (ii) such credit
  agreement does not permit cancellation  of  the  insurance  contract  or
  contracts  as  a  result  of  default  under the credit agreement by the
  buyer. For purposes of this paragraph, the terms  "authorized  insurer",
  "insurance contract", "insurance agent", and "insurance broker" shall be
  as  defined  in  or  have  the  meanings assigned to them by section one
  hundred seven of the insurance law.
    (c)  A  single  credit  agreement  entered  into  pursuant  to  either
  paragraph  (a)  or paragraph (b) of this subdivision may provide for the
  financing agency to acquire indebtedness of a retail buyer under a sales
  slip or memorandum evidencing a purchase  or,  if  applicable,  a  fine,
  civil   penalty,  rate,  rent,  tax,  fee,  charge,  revenue,  financial
  obligation or other amount, including a penalty, special assessment,  or
  interest,  pursuant  to  the other of said paragraphs. Where a financing
  agency enters into a credit agreement with a retail buyer  for  its  own
  account,  the  credit agreement may consist of an agreement complying in
  all other respects with the provisions of  this  section,  but  executed
  only  by  the financing agency, together with a credit card issued by it
  to the retail buyer. The credit agreement, however,  must  then  provide
  that  it shall not become effective unless and until the retail buyer or
  a person authorized by him signs a sales slip or  memorandum  evidencing
  purchase  or  lease  of  property  or services or the payment of a fine,
  civil  penalty,  rent,  rate,  tax,  fee,  charge,  revenue,   financial
  obligation  or  other amount, including a penalty, special assessment or
  interest, to a municipal corporation or the New York city water board by
  use of the credit card and that prior thereto the retail buyer shall not
  be responsible for any purchase or lease of property or services or  the
  payment  of  a  fine,  civil  penalty,  rate,  rent,  tax,  fee, charge,
  financial obligation, or other  amount,  including  a  penalty,  special
  assessment  or  interest,  by  use  of the credit card after its loss or
  theft.
    (d) A credit agreement entered into pursuant to paragraph (a)  or  (b)
  of  this  subdivision  shall  contain  or  be accompanied by a statement
  making the disclosures required by the act of congress  entitled  "Truth
  in  Lending  Act"  and  the  regulations  thereunder,  as  such  act and
  regulations may from time to time be amended.
    (e) A financing agency enters into a credit agreement provided for  in
  this  subdivision  in  this  state, for purposes of this article, if the
  financing agency delivers or mails in this state to the buyer a copy  of
  the  agreement executed by the financing agency, provided, however, that
  in order to reduce the potential for theft or fraud, a financing  agency
  may  mail  the  credit  agreement  from  outside the state if the credit
  agreement is prepared and sealed in the state before mailing  and  prior
  to  being  transported  to  a  location  outside of the state for actual
  mailing.
    (f)  For  the  purpose  of  this  subdivision,  the  term   "municipal
  corporation",  as  defined  in  subdivision  twenty-two  of section four
  hundred one of this chapter, shall  include  the  White  Plains  parking
  authority,  and the term "purchase" shall include any fee, rate, rent or
  other charge of such authority.


   12. (a)  Except  as  provided  in  paragraphs  (b)  and  (c)  of  this
  subdivision,  no  retail  instalment  credit agreement, or any agreement
  executed in connection therewith, may provide  for  the  creation  of  a
  security  interest in any personal or real property (including any goods
  sold  under such agreement) to secure payment of the buyer's outstanding
  indebtedness under such retail instalment  credit  agreement.  Any  such
  prohibited  provision  shall  be void but shall not otherwise affect the
  validity of such retail instalment credit agreement.
    (b) A financing agency may require a pledge to such  financing  agency
  of  a  specifically  identified  interest-bearing deposit account of the
  buyer maintained at such financing agency as collateral security  for  a
  loan  made  by  such  financing  agency  under  the  authority  of  this
  subdivision and provided further that any such  financing  agency  which
  requires  such  a  pledge  shall be subject to the provisions of section
  five hundred twenty-b of the general business law.
    (c) Except for motor vehicles as  defined  in  article  nine  of  this
  chapter,  or  goods which the seller knows or reasonably should know are
  or are likely to be so affixed to a motor vehicle or  to  realty  as  to
  become a part thereof, a retail seller, or financing agency which enters
  into a retail installment credit agreement with a retail buyer on behalf
  of a retail seller named in the agreement, may take or retain a purchase
  money  security  interest,  as that term is defined in section 9--103 of
  the uniform commercial code, in any item of merchandise purchased  at  a
  price  of  not  less  than  two  hundred  dollars  pursuant  to a retail
  installment  credit  agreement  until  the  purchase   price   of   such
  merchandise  is  fully  paid,  but  in no event shall any purchase money
  security interest created hereunder be valid or enforceable for a period
  greater than five years from the  date  a  purchase  is  posted  to  any
  account  which may be used to purchase an item of merchandise at a price
  less than two hundred dollars.  In  the  event  such  a  purchase  money
  security  interest  is taken or retained by a retail seller or financing
  agency, payments shall be applied to the  purchase  in  the  order  such
  purchases  are  posted  to  the  account  after  such payments are first
  applied to any finance, late, or other charges  imposed  by  the  retail
  seller  or  financing  agency. Notwithstanding the provisions of section
  9--609 of the  uniform  commercial  code,  repossession  of  merchandise
  subject  to  a  purchase  money  security  interest permitted under this
  subdivision shall be prohibited unless and until payment on the  account
  shall  be in default for a period of at least thirty days and thereafter
  a notice of default be mailed  to  the  buyer  providing  an  additional
  thirty  days  time  in  which to cure the default on the account. In the
  event  of  repossession  without  judicial  process,   a   substantially
  contemporaneous  writing  signed  by  the  buyer  indicating the buyer's
  agreement to such repossession shall be required.
    13. (a) Subject to the limitation contained in paragraph (b)  of  this
  subdivision,   the  holder  of  a  retail  instalment  credit  agreement
  (including for purposes of this subdivision  a  financing  agency  which
  enters  into  a  credit  agreement  with  a  retail buyer as provided in
  subdivision eleven of this section)  shall  be  subject  to  all  claims
  (other  than  tort  claims)  and  defenses  arising  out  of the buyer's
  purchase of goods and services to be paid in accordance with the  credit
  agreement  if  (1)  the  buyer  has  made a good faith attempt to obtain
  satisfactory resolution of a disagreement or  problem  relative  to  the
  sale  from the seller; (2) the amount of the initial transaction exceeds
  fifty dollars; and (3) the place where the initial transaction  occurred
  was  in the same state as the mailing address previously provided by the
  buyer or was within one hundred miles from such address, except that the
  limitations set forth in subparagraphs (2) and  (3)  of  this  paragraph


 with  respect  to  a buyer's right to assert claims and defenses against
  the holder shall not be applicable  to  any  transaction  in  which  the
  seller  (A)  is  the same person as the holder; (B) is controlled by the
  holder;  (C) is under direct or indirect common control with the holder;
  (D) is a franchised dealer of the holder's products or services; or  (E)
  has obtained the order for such sale through a mail solicitation made by
  or  participated  in  by  the  holder in which the buyer is solicited to
  enter into such transactions by using  the  credit  agreement  with  the
  holder.
    (b)  The  amount  of  claims or defenses asserted by the buyer may not
  exceed the amount of indebtedness owing to the holder  with  respect  to
  such  transaction  at  the  time  the buyer first notifies the holder or
  seller of such claim or defense. For  the  purpose  of  determining  the
  amount  of  indebtedness  owing to the holder in the preceding sentence,
  payments and credits to the buyer's account  are  deemed  to  have  been
  applied,  in  the order indicated, to the payment of (1) service charges
  in order of their entry to the account; and (2) debits  to  the  account
  other than those set forth above, in the order in which each debit entry
  to the account was made.
    14.  (a) A seller of goods pursuant to the terms of this article shall
  adopt and apply procedures to  reasonably  avoid  debiting  the  buyer's
  account  with respect to any transaction, or to reasonably avoid selling
  or assigning to a financing agency a sales slip or memorandum evidencing
  a purchase of goods,  prior  to  the  date  the  goods  subject  to  the
  transaction are delivered to the buyer or the buyer's designee. A seller
  of goods may debit the buyer's account, or sell or assign to a financing
  agency  a sales slip or memorandum evidencing a purchase of goods, on or
  after the date of sale where:
    (i) the goods subject to the transaction are shipped within  ten  days
  of  the  date of sale and the seller has reason to believe that delivery
  will be effected not later than fourteen days from the date of sale; or
    (ii) the goods subject to the transaction are one of a kind or are  to
  be specifically manufactured for the buyer and are not suitable for sale
  to others in the ordinary course of the seller's business; or
    (iii)  the  buyer  requested  delayed  delivery  of goods that will be
  available for delivery not later than fourteen days  from  the  date  of
  sale; or
    (iv)  the buyer and seller have agreed that delivery of the goods will
  occur at regular intervals or in instalments.
    (b) For the purposes of this  subdivision,  a  seller  may  debit  the
  buyer's account, or sell or assign to a financing agency a sales slip or
  memorandum  evidencing  a  purchase  of  goods,  on or after the date of
  shipment where, in the ordinary course of business, delivery  is  to  be
  effected no later than ten days after the date of shipment.
    (c)  It  shall  not  be  a violation of this subdivision if the seller
  ships or makes the goods available for delivery as agreed  and  delivery
  is delayed due to failure of the buyer to accept said delivery.
    (d)  The  provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to mail order
  merchandise as regulated by section three hundred  ninety-six-m  of  the
  general business law.




   §  414.  Penalties.  1.  Any  person  who  shall  wilfully violate any
  provision of this article shall be guilty  of  a  misdemeanor  and  upon
  conviction  shall  be  punished  by  a  fine  not exceeding five hundred
  dollars.
    2. In case of failure by any person to comply with the  provisions  of
  this article, the buyer shall have the right to recover from such person
  an  amount  equal to the credit service charge or service charge imposed
  and the amount of any delinquency, collection,  extension,  deferral  or
  refinance charge imposed.
    3.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  this section, any failure to
  comply with any provision of this article may be  corrected  within  ten
  days  after  the holder is notified thereof in writing by the buyer and,
  if so corrected, neither the seller nor the holder shall be  subject  to
  any penalty under this section.
    4. Subdivision three of this section shall not apply to any person who
  wilfully  violates  any provision of this article in connection with the
  imposition, computation or  disclosures  of  or  relating  to  a  credit
  service  charge  on  a  consolidated  total  of two or more contracts or
  obligations under the provisions of section four hundred  ten,  and  the
  buyer may recover from such person an amount equal to the credit service
  charges   and   any  delinquency,  collection,  extension,  deferral  or
  refinance charges imposed, contracted for or received on  all  contracts
  and  obligations included in the consolidated total and the seller shall
  be barred from the recovery of any such charges.
    5. Subdivisions one and three of this section shall not apply  to  any
  person  who  violates subdivision two-a of section four hundred three of
  this article.




   § 415. Exceptions. 1. The provisions of sections four hundred nine and
  four hundred eleven of this article shall apply to an instalment sale of
  goods or services for any use.
    2.  The provisions of section four hundred eight of this article shall
  apply to an installment sale of equipment used for production of a  farm
  product, as defined in section two of the agriculture and markets law.




   §  416.  Waiver.  Any  waiver  by  the buyer of the provisions of this
  article shall be unenforceable and void.




   §  417.  Severability.  If  any  provision  of  this  article  or  the
  application  thereof  to   any   person   or   circumstances   is   held
  unconstitutional,  the  remainder  of the article and the application of
  such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not  be  affected
  thereby.




   §  418.  Short  title.  This  article  may  be  cited  as  the "Retail
  Instalment Sales Act."




   §  419.  Refund  credit on cancellation of credit related insurance or
  prepayment of contract. The provisions of this article requiring refunds
  and refund credits with respect to group credit life insurance in  cases
  of  cancellation  of  group  credit life insurance or of prepayment of a
  retail instalment contract or obligation shall also require refunds  and
  refund  credits  with  respect  to  credit unemployment insurance, group
  credit accident, group credit health or group credit accident and health
  insurance in cases of cancellation of such insurance or of prepayment of
  a  retail  instalment  contract  or  obligation  which   included   such
  insurance.




   §  420.  Guaranties  to  sellers of liabilities of buyers under retail
  instalment contracts. (a) No guaranty given to  the  seller  or  to  the
  seller  and  the seller's assignee of the liabilities of a buyer under a
  retail instalment  contract  shall  be  valid  unless  the  guaranty  is
  incorporated  in  or endorsed on the contract or identifies the contract
  and specifies the time balance thereof. A copy of the guaranty  and  the
  contract  to  which it relates shall be given or mailed to the guarantor
  upon or immediately after the execution and delivery of the guaranty  by
  the guarantor. As used in this section, "retail instalment contract" and
  "contract"   include   a  retail  instalment  obligation  and  a  retail
  instalment contract as defined in the motor  vehicle  retail  instalment
  sales  act, constituting article nine of this chapter. This section does
  not apply to a guaranty made by  a  seller  or  a  holder  of  a  retail
  instalment contract.
    (b)  No guaranty given to the seller or to the seller and the seller's
  assignee of the  liabilities  of  a  buyer  under  a  retail  instalment
  contract shall relate to any future retail instalment contracts.




   §  421.  Security  interest  in  other property. Except as provided in
  section four hundred ten of this chapter, no retail instalment  contract
  or  obligation, or any other agreement executed in connection therewith,
  may provide for the creation of a  security  interest  in  any  real  or
  personal  property, other than the goods which are the subject matter of
  the retail instalment sale, to secure the payment of the time sale price
  under such  contract  or  obligation  or  any  part  thereof;  provided,
  however, that the prohibition of this section shall not be applicable to
  the taking of a mortgage upon real property to secure the payment of the
  time  sale  price  of a retail instalment obligation, if the transaction
  which gave rise to such  obligation  was  the  furnishing  of  goods  or
  services for repairs, alterations or improvements upon, or in connection
  with  buildings  upon, such real property. Any such prohibited provision
  shall be void but  shall  not  otherwise  affect  the  validity  of  the
  contract or obligation.




   § 422. Claim for deficiency after default and repossession. If a buyer
  defaults  on  any  instalment  of  the  time  sale  price under a retail
  instalment contract, and the holder  obtains  possession  of  the  goods
  which are the subject matter of such contract and disposes of such goods
  as  provided by section 9--610 of the uniform commercial code, the buyer
  shall be liable to the holder for any deficiency to the extent  provided
  in  that section; provided, however, that in calculating such deficiency
  there shall be deducted from the amount thereof as  prescribed  by  such
  section  9--610, an amount equal to that portion of the refund credit to
  which the buyer would have been  entitled  under  section  four  hundred
  eight of this chapter if, at the time the holder disposed of such goods,
  the buyer had not been in default and had prepaid in full the balance of
  the  time  sale price as the amount realized upon the disposition of the
  goods bears to the balance of the time sale price.




   § 425. Short title; purpose. This act may be cited as the door-to-door
  sales  protection  act. The purpose of this act is to afford consumers a
  "cooling-off" period to cancel contracts which are  entered  into  as  a
  result of high pressure door-to-door sales tactics.




   § 426. Definitions. In this article:
    1.  "Door-to-door sale" shall mean a sale, lease or rental of consumer
  goods or services in which the seller or his  representative  personally
  solicits  the  sale,  including  those  in  response  to or following an
  invitation by the buyer, and the buyer's agreement or offer to  purchase
  is  made  at a place other than the place of business of the seller. The
  term "door-to-door sale" does not include a transaction:
    (a) made pursuant to prior negotiations in the course of  a  visit  by
  the  buyer  to  a retail business establishment having a fixed permanent
  location where the goods are exhibited or the services are  offered  for
  sale on a continuing basis; or
    (b)  in  which  the  buyer  has initiated the contact and the goods or
  services are needed to meet a bona fide immediate personal emergency  of
  the  buyer, and the buyer furnishes the seller with a separate dated and
  signed personal statement in  the  buyer's  handwriting  describing  the
  situation  requiring  immediate  remedy  and expressly acknowledging and
  waiving the right to cancel the sale within three business days; or
    (c) conducted and consummated  entirely  by  mail  or  telephone;  and
  without  any  other  contact  between  the  buyer  and the seller or its
  representative, other than at the place of business of the seller, prior
  to delivery of the goods or performance of the services; or
    (d) in which the buyer has  initiated  the  contact  and  specifically
  requested  the  seller to visit his home for the purpose of repairing or
  performing maintenance upon the buyer's personal  property.  If  in  the
  course  of such a visit, the seller sells the buyer the right to receive
  additional services or goods other than  replacement  parts  necessarily
  used in performing the maintenance or in making the repairs, the sale of
  those additional goods or services would not fall within this exclusion;
  or
    (e)  pertaining to the sale or rental of real property, to the sale of
  insurance or to the sale of securities or commodities by a broker-dealer
  registered with the securities and exchange commission; or
    (f)  where  the  purchase  price  whether  under  single  or  multiple
  contracts,  does not exceed twenty-five dollars and the products, goods,
  or merchandise purchased is capable of delivery at one time.
    2.  "Consumer  goods  or  services"  shall  mean  goods  or   services
  purchased, leased, or rented primarily for personal, family or household
  purposes, including courses of instruction or training regardless of the
  purpose for which they are taken.
    3.  "Seller"  shall  mean  any  person,  partnership,  corporation  or
  association engaged in the the door-to-door sale of  consumer  goods  or
  services.
    4.  "Place of business" shall mean the main or permanent branch office
  or local address of the seller.
    5. "Purchase price" shall mean the total price paid or to be paid  for
  the  consumer  goods  or  services,  including  all interest and service
  charges.
    6. "Business day" shall mean any calendar day except  Sunday,  or  the
  following  business  holidays:  New  Year's  Day, Washington's Birthday,
  Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans'  Day,
  Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.
    7.  (a)  "Personal  emergency  response  service"  shall  mean (i) the
  provision and maintenance of electronic communication equipment  in  the
  home  of  an  individual which signals a monitoring agency for help when
  activated by the individual, or after  a  period  of  time  if  a  timer
  mechanism  has  not  been  reset; (ii) the continuous monitoring of such
  signals by a trained operator and, in case of receipt  of  such  signal,


 the  immediate  notification of such emergency response organizations or
  persons, if necessary, as the individual has previously specified.
    (b) With respect to a "personal emergency response service" as defined
  in  paragraph  (a)  of  this subdivision, the provisions of this article
  shall apply to the purchase by a consumer of provision for such service,
  whether or not such purchase is made in a "door-to-door sale" as defined
  in subdivision one of this section, except where  applying  any  of  the
  provisions of this article conflicts with any provision of section three
  hundred  ninety-one-l  of  the  general  business law, in which case the
  provisions of section three hundred ninety-one-l of the general business
  law shall prevail. For this purpose, the transactional  exclusions  from
  the  definition  of  "door-to-door  sale"  contained  in  paragraphs (a)
  through (f) of subdivision one of this section shall not  apply  to  the
  sale  or  purchase  of  a personal emergency response service as defined
  herein, and the term "door-to-door sale" wherever used in  this  article
  shall  be  deemed  to  also mean any sale, lease or rental of a personal
  emergency response service to or by a consumer.




   §  427.  Buyer's or other obligor's right to cancel. 1. In addition to
  any right otherwise to revoke  an  offer,  the  buyer  or  other  person
  obligated  for  any part of the purchase price may cancel a door-to-door
  sale until midnight of the third business day, or until midnight of  the
  seventh  business  day  in the case of a door-to-door sale of a personal
  emergency response service, after the day on which the buyer has  signed
  an agreement or offer to purchase relating to such sale.
    2. Cancellation occurs when written notice of cancellation is given to
  the seller.
    3.  Notice  of  cancellation,  if given by mail, shall be deemed given
  when deposited in a mailbox properly addressed and postage prepaid.
    4. Notice of cancellation need not take the form prescribed and  shall
  be  sufficient  if  it  indicates  the  intention of the buyer not to be
  bound.




   §  428.  Form  of  notice;  statement  of  buyer's  rights.  1.  In  a
  door-to-door sale, the seller shall furnish to the buyer
    (a) a fully completed receipt or copy of any  contract  pertaining  to
  such  sale  at the time of its execution, which is in the same language,
  e.g.  Spanish, as that principally used in the oral  sales  presentation
  and  which  shows  the date of the transaction and contains the name and
  address of the seller, and in immediate proximity to the space  reserved
  in  the  contract for the signature of the buyer or on the front page of
  the receipt if a contract is not used and in  not  less  than  ten-point
  bold face type, a statement in substantially the following form:
    "YOU,  THE  BUYER,  MAY  CANCEL  THIS TRANSACTION AT ANY TIME PRIOR TO
  MIDNIGHT OF THE THIRD BUSINESS DAY AFTER THE DATE OF  THIS  TRANSACTION.
  SEE  THE ATTACHED NOTICE OF CANCELLATION FORM FOR AN EXPLANATION OF THIS
  RIGHT."
    (b) at the time the buyer signs the  door-to-door  sales  contract  or
  otherwise  agrees  to  buy consumer goods or services from the seller, a
  completed form in duplicate, captioned "NOTICE OF  CANCELLATION",  which
  shall  be attached to the contract or receipt and easily detachable, and
  which shall contain in not  less  than  ten-point  bold  face  type  the
  following information and statements in the same language, e.g. Spanish,
  as that used in the contract:
                            NOTICE OF CANCELLATION
  (enter  date  of  transaction) _________________________________________
  (Date)
    YOU MAY CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION, WITHOUT ANY  PENALTY  OR  OBLIGATION,
  WITHIN THREE BUSINESS DAYS FROM THE ABOVE DATE.
    IF  YOU CANCEL, ANY PROPERTY TRADED IN, ANY PAYMENTS MADE BY YOU UNDER
  THE CONTRACT OR SALE, AND ANY NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENT EXECUTED BY YOU WILL
  BE RETURNED WITHIN 10 BUSINESS DAYS FOLLOWING RECEIPT BY THE  SELLER  OF
  YOUR  CANCELLATION  NOTICE, AND ANY SECURITY INTEREST ARISING OUT OF THE
  TRANSACTION WILL BE CANCELLED.
    IF YOU  CANCEL,  YOU  MUST  MAKE  AVAILABLE  TO  THE  SELLER  AT  YOUR
  RESIDENCE,  IN  SUBSTANTIALLY  AS  GOOD  CONDITION AS WHEN RECEIVED, ANY
  GOODS DELIVERED TO YOU UNDER THIS CONTRACT OR SALE; OR YOU  MAY  IF  YOU
  WISH,  COMPLY  WITH  THE INSTRUCTIONS OF THE SELLER REGARDING THE RETURN
  SHIPMENT OF THE GOODS AT THE SELLER'S EXPENSE AND RISK.
    IF YOU DO MAKE THE GOODS AVAILABLE TO THE SELLER AND THE  SELLER  DOES
  NOT  PICK  THEM  UP  WITHIN  TWENTY  DAYS  OF THE DATE OF YOUR NOTICE OF
  CANCELLATION, YOU MAY RETAIN OR DISPOSE OF THE GOODS WITHOUT ANY FURTHER
  OBLIGATION. IF YOU FAIL TO MAKE THE GOODS AVAILABLE TO THE SELLER, OR IF
  YOU AGREE TO RETURN THE GOODS TO THE SELLER AND FAIL TO DO SO, THEN  YOU
  REMAIN LIABLE FOR PERFORMANCE OF ALL OBLIGATIONS UNDER THE CONTRACT.
    TO CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION, MAIL OR DELIVER A SIGNED AND DATED COPY OF
  THIS  CANCELLATION  NOTICE  OR  ANY  OTHER  WRITTEN  NOTICE,  OR  SEND A
  TELEGRAM, TO
  (Name of Seller),        AT    Address of Seller
    __________________      _________________________________
    (Place of Business)       NOT LATER THAN MIDNIGHT OF
    __________________ __________________
    (Date)
    I HEREBY CANCEL THIS TRANSACTION.
    _________________
    (Date)
    ______________________________ (Buyer's Signature)
    and the seller shall complete both copies by entering the name of  the
  seller,  the  address of the seller's place of business, the date of the
  transaction, and the date, not  earlier  than  the  third  business  day


 following  the  date  of  the  transaction,  by which the buyer may give
  notice of cancellation.
    2.  In a door-to-door sale, the seller shall inform each buyer orally,
  at the time he signs the contract or purchases the goods or services, of
  his right to cancel. Until the seller has complied  with  this  section,
  the  buyer  or  any  other person obligated for any part of the purchase
  price may cancel the door-to-door sale by notifying the  seller  in  any
  manner  and  by  any  means  of  his  intention  to  cancel.  The period
  prescribed by subdivision one of section four hundred twenty-seven shall
  begin to run from the time the seller complies with this section.
    3. A door-to-door sales contract or  receipt  shall  not  include  any
  confession  of  judgment or any waiver of any of the rights to which the
  buyer is entitled under this article including specifically his right to
  cancel the sale in accordance with the provisions of this article.
    4.  A  door-to-door  sales  contract   or   receipt   shall   disclose
  conspicuously  the  seller's  refund  policy  as  to all goods, wares or
  merchandise subject to the door-to-door sales agreement. If  the  seller
  fails  to  disclose conspicuously the applicable refund policy, then the
  seller shall be liable to the buyer for a cash refund of the total price
  or a credit of the total price, at the  buyer's  option,  provided  that
  within  twenty  days  from the date of delivery of the purchased item or
  items,  the  buyer  makes  a  demand  therefor  and  provided  that  the
  merchandise  is  in  substantially as good condition as when received by
  the buyer. In no event shall this subdivision be deemed to  supercede  a
  refund  policy  of a seller which allows return of merchandise more than
  twenty days after the date of delivery of the purchased item  or  items.
  The  amount  paid  by  the  buyer  to  the  seller  shall be refunded or
  credited, as the case may be, within ten business days from the date  of
  return of the seller's merchandise in substantially as good condition as
  when received by the buyer.
    5.  This  section  does  not  relieve any person, firm, corporation or
  association subject to the provisions of  this  section  from  complying
  with any other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to
  refund  policies  which affords the buyer greater protection than do the
  provisions of this section.




   §  429.  Restoration  of  down  payment.  1.  Within  ten days after a
  door-to-door sale has been cancelled or an offer  to  purchase  revoked,
  the  seller shall tender to the buyer all payments made by the buyer and
  any note or other evidence of indebtedness.
    2. If the down payment includes goods traded in, the  goods  shall  be
  tendered  in  substantially  as  good  condition as when received by the
  seller. If the seller fails to tender the  goods  as  provided  by  this
  section,  the buyer may elect to recover an amount equal to the trade-in
  allowance stated in the agreement.
    3. If the seller refuses within the period prescribed  by  subdivision
  one  to return all payments made by the buyer, he shall be liable to the
  buyer for the said payments and if the buyer is successful in his action
  therefor or appeal thereon,  the  court  shall  award  him  one  hundred
  dollars  plus  reasonable attorney's fees and costs, in addition to such
  payments.
    4. Until the seller has complied with  this  section,  the  buyer  may
  retain possession of goods delivered to him by the seller and shall have
  a  lien  on  the  goods in his possession or control for any recovery to
  which he may be entitled.




   §  430.  Duty  of  buyer. 1. Except as provided by subdivision four of
  section four hundred twenty-nine,  within  a  reasonable  time  after  a
  door-to-door  sale  has  been cancelled or an offer to purchase revoked,
  the buyer upon demand shall tender to the seller any goods delivered  by
  the  seller  pursuant to the sale but need not tender at any place other
  than his residence. If the seller fails to  demand  possession  of  such
  goods  within  a  reasonable  time after cancellation or revocation, the
  goods shall become the property of the buyer without obligation  to  pay
  for them. For the purpose of this section, twenty days shall be presumed
  to be a reasonable time.
    2. The buyer shall take reasonable care of the goods in his possession
  both  before  cancellation  or  revocation  and  for  a  reasonable time
  thereafter, during which time the goods are otherwise  at  the  seller's
  risk.
    3. If the seller has performed any services pursuant to a door-to-door
  sale  prior  to  its  cancellation,  the seller shall not be entitled to
  compensation therefor.




   §  431. Restriction on assignment of obligation. 1. A seller shall not
  negotiate, transfer, sell or  assign  any  note  or  other  evidence  of
  indebtedness to a finance company or other third party prior to midnight
  of the fifth business day, or in the case of a contract for door-to-door
  sale  of a personal emergency response service, prior to midnight of the
  ninth business day, following the day the contract  was  signed  or  the
  goods or services were purchased.
    2.  The  assignee  of  any  note  or evidence of indebtedness shall be
  subject to all claims and defenses  of  the  buyer  against  the  seller
  arising from the sale notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary, but
  the  assignee's  liability  under  this subdivision shall not exceed the
  amount owing to the assignee  at  the  time  the  claim  or  defense  is
  asserted  against  the assignee.  Rights of the buyer under this section
  can be asserted affirmatively against or as a matter of  defense  to  or
  set-off against a claim by the assignee.




   §  440.  Short  title;  purpose.  This  article  may  be  cited as the
  "telephone sales protection act". The purpose  of  this  article  is  to
  afford  consumers  a "cooling-off" period to cancel a sale which is made
  as a result of high pressure telephone sales tactics.




   §  441.  Definitions.  1.  (a) "Telephone sales business" shall mean a
  business which is primarily engaged in the  solicitation  of  orders  by
  telephone for:
    (1)  merchandise  or services connected with merchandise to be shipped
  to the customer through the mail or by other carrier, upon receipt of an
  order in a communication initiated by the  seller  with  charge  account
  authorization remitted by telephone and the merchandise by its nature is
  ready for use or consumption when advertised or offered for sale and can
  be held in stock;
    (2)  vacation  club  membership,  vacation  packages  or  other travel
  services.
    (b)  The  term  "telephone  sales  business"  does   not   include   a
  transaction:
    (1)  where  the  purchase  price  whether  under  single  or  multiple
  contracts, does not exceed twenty-five dollars and the  products,  goods
  or merchandise purchased are capable of delivery at one time; or
    (2)  pertaining to the sale or rental of real property, to the sale of
  insurance or to the sale of securities or commodities by a broker-dealer
  registered with the securities  and  exchange  commission  or  with  the
  department of law; or
    (3)  pertaining  to  the solicitation of sales by a catalog seller who
  periodically issues and delivers catalogs  to  potential  purchasers  by
  mail  or  by  other  means; provided, however, that this exception shall
  only apply if the catalog includes a written description or illustration
  and the sales price of  each  item  of  merchandise  offered  for  sale,
  includes  at  least  twenty-four  full  pages  of  written  material  or
  illustrations, is distributed in more than one state, and has an  annual
  circulation of not less than two hundred fifty thousand customers; or
    (4)  pertaining  to  a renewal or continuation of an existing or prior
  contractual relationship or  prior  purchasing  relationship  between  a
  buyer and a seller; or
    (5)  pertaining  to  the sale of a vacation or travel service which is
  offered by a:
    (i) person, firm, corporation, partnership or association that  is  an
  officially  appointed  agent  of  a  common carrier and meets applicable
  standards no less than those  required  for  authorized  agents  of  the
  airline reporting corporation; or
    (ii)  person,  firm, corporation, partnership or association that is a
  registered member in good standing of  the  cruise  lines  international
  association  and  who  solely  solicits and/or sells travel services and
  products as an officially appointed agent of one or more ocean  carriers
  in  the  sale  of  the  ocean  carrier's travel services pursuant to the
  agency appointment.
    (6) Pertaining to a sale in which the seller at a minimum has a policy
  of:
    (i) accepting returns or canceling services, for a period of not  less
  than seven days after the date of delivery to the customer and providing
  a  cash  refund  for  a  cash  purchase or issuing a credit for a credit
  purchase, which credit is applied to the account on which  the  purchase
  was  debited,  in connection with the return of its unused and undamaged
  merchandise or canceled services;
    (ii) disclosing such seller's return and refund policy to  the  buyer,
  orally   by  telephone  or  in  writing  with  advertising,  promotional
  material, or with delivery of the products or service; and
    (iii) restoring such payment or issuing such credit, as required under
  clause (i) of this subparagraph, within thirty days after  the  date  on
  which the seller receives returned merchandise or notice of cancellation
  of  services. A seller who discloses, in writing, that a sale is made or


 provided "satisfaction guaranteed", with  "free  inspection",  "no  risk
  guarantee",  or  similar  words  or  phrases shall be deemed to meet the
  requirements of the review and return for refund  policy  set  forth  in
  this subparagraph.
    2.  "Telephone sale" shall mean any of the transactions referred to in
  subdivision one of this section and shall include transactions initiated
  by a consumer as a result of a mail solicitation inviting such telephone
  call.
    3. "Merchandise" shall mean tangible  chattels  bought  for  personal,
  family or household purposes.
    4.  "Shipment" shall mean the act whereby the seller physically places
  the merchandise into the possession of the United States postal  service
  or other carrier.
    5. "Accepts orders" shall mean receipt of an order with charge account
  authorization and debiting the buyer's account.
    6.  "Purchase price" shall mean the total price paid or to be paid for
  the merchandise, including all interest and service charges.
    7. "Business day" shall mean any calendar day except  Sunday,  or  the
  following  business  holidays:  New  Year's Day, Martin Luther King Day,
  Washington's  Birthday,  Memorial  Day,  Independence  Day,  Labor  Day,
  Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.




   §  442.  Buyer's or other obligor's right to cancel. 1. In addition to
  any other right otherwise to revoke an offer, the buyer or other  person
  obligated  for  any  part of the purchase price may cancel the telephone
  sale until midnight of the third business day after the day on which the
  buyer has received written notice from the seller notifying the buyer of
  his right to cancel the telephone sale.
    2. Cancellation occurs when written notice of cancellation is given to
  the seller.
    3. Notice of cancellation shall be deemed given when  deposited  in  a
  mailbox properly addressed and postage prepaid.
    4.  Notice of cancellation shall be deemed received on midnight of the
  fifth day after it is deemed given.
    5. Notice of cancellation need not take the form prescribed and  shall
  be  sufficient  if  it  indicates  the  intention of the buyer not to be
  bound.




   §  443. Form of notice; statement of buyer's rights. 1. In a telephone
  sale, the seller shall furnish to the buyer, in  the  same  language  as
  that principally used in the sales presentation, a written notice, which
  shall  contain  in not less than ten-point boldface type, a statement in
  substantially the following form:
    "You, the buyer, may cancel this transaction without  any  penalty  or
  obligation at any time prior to midnight of the third business day after
  receipt  of  this  notice. If you cancel, any payments made by you under
  the sale will be credited to your charge  account  within  ten  business
  days  following  receipt  by  the  seller  of  your  written  notice  of
  cancellation and any security interest arising out  of  the  transaction
  will be cancelled.
    If  you  cancel,  you  must  make  available  to  the  seller  at your
  residence, in substantially as good  condition  as  when  received,  any
  goods  delivered  to you under this contract of sale; or you may, if you
  wish, comply with the instruction of the  seller  regarding  the  return
  shipment of the goods at the seller's expense and risk.
    If  you  do make the goods available to the seller and the seller does
  not pick them up within twenty days  of  the  date  of  your  notice  of
  cancellation, you may retain or dispose of the goods without any further
  obligation. If you fail to make the goods available to the seller, or if
  you  agree to return the goods to the seller and fail to do so, then you
  remain liable for performance of all obligations under the contract.
    To cancel this transaction,  mail  or  deliver  a  written  notice  of
  cancellation,  or  send  a telegram to (name of seller) at the following
  address (address of seller)".
    2. Until the seller has informed the buyer of his right to cancel  and
  has complied with the provisions of this article, the buyer or any other
  person  obligated  for  any  part  of  the purchase price may cancel the
  telephone sale by notifying the seller in any manner and by any means of
  his intention to cancel. The period prescribed  by  subdivision  one  of
  this  section  shall begin to run from the time the seller complies with
  the provisions of this article.
    3. Pursuant to subdivision one of this section, the seller is required
  to furnish the buyer with the seller's name, and the name of the  person
  to  whom any notice of cancellation is to be given if different from the
  seller's name, the legal name of the company  for  whom  the  seller  is
  soliciting,  the  seller's street address and the seller's phone number.
  The seller is additionally required to furnish the buyer with  the  date
  of the telephone sale and a description of the telephone sale.




   §  444.  Restoration  of  down  payment. 1. Within thirty days after a
  telephone sale has been cancelled, the seller shall recredit the buyer's
  charge account.
    2. If the down payment includes goods traded in, the  goods  shall  be
  tendered  in  substantially  as  good  condition as when received by the
  seller. If the seller fails to tender the  goods  as  provided  by  this
  section,  the buyer may elect to recover an amount equal to the trade-in
  allowance stated in the agreement.
    3. If the seller refuses within the period prescribed  by  subdivision
  one  of  this section to return all payments made by the buyer, he shall
  be liable to the buyer for  the  said  payments  and  if  the  buyer  is
  successful  in  his  action  therefor or appeal thereon, the court shall
  award him one hundred dollars and may award reasonable  attorney's  fees
  and  costs, in addition to such payments. In addition to such an action,
  such payments and the one hundred dollar amount may  be  recovered  from
  any  telemarketer  maintaining  a  bond  pursuant to subdivision four of
  section three hundred ninety-nine-pp of the general business law, or the
  surety or  bank,  trust  company,  savings  bank  or  savings  and  loan
  association  in an action on the bond. Nothing in the preceding sentence
  shall authorize the awarding of attorney's fees and  costs  against  the
  surety, bank, trust company or savings and loan association.
    4.  Until  the  seller  has  complied with this section, the buyer may
  retain possession of goods delivered to him by the seller and shall have
  a lien on the goods in his possession or control  for  any  recovery  to
  which he may be entitled.




 §  445.  Duty  of  buyer.  1.  Except as provided in subdivision four of
  section four hundred forty-four of this  article,  within  a  reasonable
  time  after  a  telephone  sale  has  been  cancelled  and the buyer has
  received written notice from the seller that the buyer's charge  account
  has  been  recredited,  the buyer upon demand shall tender to the seller
  any goods delivered by the seller pursuant to  the  sale  but  need  not
  tender  at  any  place  other than his residence. If the seller fails to
  demand  possession  of  such  goods  within  a  reasonable  time   after
  cancellation  or  revocation, the goods shall become the property of the
  buyer without obligation to pay  for  them.  For  the  purpose  of  this
  section, twenty days shall be presumed to be a reasonable time.
    2. The buyer shall take reasonable care of the goods in his possession
  both  before  cancellation  and for a reasonable time thereafter, during
  which time the goods are otherwise at the seller's risk.
    3. If the seller has performed any services pursuant  to  a  telephone
  sale  prior  to  its  cancellation,  the seller shall not be entitled to
  compensation therefor.




   §  446. Restriction on assignment of obligation. 1. A seller shall not
  negotiate, transfer, sell or  assign  any  note  or  other  evidence  of
  indebtedness to a finance company or other third party prior to midnight
  of  the  fifth  business  day  following the day the seller sent written
  notice to the buyer informing the buyer of his right to cancel.
    2. The assignee of any note  or  evidence  of  indebtedness  shall  be
  subject  to  all  claims  and  defenses  of the buyer against the seller
  arising from the sale notwithstanding any agreement to the contrary, but
  the assignee's liability under this subdivision  shall  not  exceed  the
  amount  owing  to  the  assignee  at  the  time  the claim or defense is
  asserted against the assignee. Rights of the buyer  under  this  section
  can be asserted affirmatively against a claim by the assignee.




 §  447.  Enforcement;  penalties. Whenever there shall be a violation of
  this article, an application may be made by the attorney general in  the
  name of the people of the state of New York to a court or justice having
  jurisdiction  by  a  special proceeding to issue an injunction, and upon
  notice to the defendant of not  less  than  five  days,  to  enjoin  and
  restrain  the  continuance of such violations; and if it shall appear to
  the satisfaction of the court or justice  that  the  defendant  has,  in
  fact,  violated  this article, an injunction may be issued by such court
  or justice, enjoining and restraining  any  further  violation,  without
  requiring  proof  that  any person has, in fact, been injured or damaged
  thereby. In any such proceeding, the court may make  allowances  to  the
  attorney  general  as  provided  in  paragraph six of subdivision (a) of
  section eighty-three hundred three of the civil practice law and  rules,
  and  direct  restitution.  Whenever  the  court  shall  determine that a
  violation of this article has occurred, the court  may  impose  a  civil
  penalty  of  not  more  than five hundred dollars for each violation. In
  connection with any such proposed application, the attorney  general  is
  authorized  to take proof and make a determination of the relevant facts
  and to issue subpoenas in accordance with the  civil  practice  law  and
  rules.




 § 448. Separability. If any provision of this article or the application
  of  such  provision  in certain circumstances shall be held invalid, the
  validity of the remainder of this article and its applicability to other
  circumstances shall not be affected.




   § 500. Definitions. For the purposes of this article:
    1.  "Advertisement"  means  a  commercial  message  in any medium that
  directly or indirectly promotes or assists a rental-purchase agreement.
    2. "Cash price" means the price of the merchandise  described  in  the
  rental-purchase  agreement  that  the  consumer  may  pay in cash to the
  merchant at the inception of the rental-purchase  agreement  to  acquire
  ownership of such merchandise.
    3. "Consumer" means an individual who leases personal property under a
  rental-purchase agreement.
    4.  "Merchandise" means the personal property that is the subject of a
  rental-purchase agreement.
    5. "Merchant" means a person who, in the ordinary course of  business,
  regularly  leases,  offers to lease, or acts as an agent for the leasing
  of merchandise under a rental-purchase agreement.
    6. "Rental-purchase agreement" means  an  agreement  for  the  use  of
  merchandise  by  a consumer for primarily personal, family, or household
  purposes, for an  initial  period  of  four  months  or  less,  that  is
  renewable  with  each  payment after the initial period and that permits
  the consumer to become the owner of  the  property.  An  agreement  that
  complies  with  this article is not a retail installment sales contract,
  agreement, or obligation as defined  in  this  chapter  nor  a  security
  interest  as  defined  in  paragraph  thirty-five  of  subsection (b) of
  section 1--201 of the uniform commercial code.
    7. "Cost of rental" means the difference between the total of payments
  necessary to acquire ownership under the rental-purchase  agreement  and
  the  cash  price  of  the  rental  merchandise  that  is  subject to the
  rental-purchase agreement.
    8. "Fee" means any payment, charge, fee,  cost,  or  expense,  however
  denominated, other than a rental payment.
    9.  "Appliance"  means  and  includes any refrigerator, freezer, range
  including  any  cook  top  or  oven,  microwave  oven,  washer,   dryer,
  dishwasher, or room air conditioner or air purifier or other machine for
  routine household tasks.
    10. "Electronic set" means and includes any television, radio, camera,
  video  game,  computer  system  or any type of device for the recording,
  storage, copying, printing, transmission, display, or  playback  of  any
  sound or image.
    11.  "Merchant's  cost"  means  the  documented actual cost, including
  actual freight charges, of the rental merchandise to the merchant from a
  wholesaler, distributor,  supplier,  or  manufacturer  and  net  of  any
  discounts,  rebates, and incentives that are vested and calculable as to
  a specific item of merchandise at the time the merchant accepts delivery
  of the merchandise.
    12. "Total of payments" means the total amount  of  periodic  payments
  necessary to acquire ownership of the merchandise that is the subject of
  the  rental-purchase  agreement  if  the  consumer  makes  all regularly
  scheduled payments.
    13. "Periodic payment" means a payment to be made by  a  consumer  for
  the right of the possession and use of merchandise for a specific rental
  period, but does not include taxes imposed on such payment.




   §  501.  Form. 1. A rental-purchase agreement must be written in plain
  English  and  in  any  other  language  used  by  the  merchant  in   an
  advertisement   related  to  the  rental-purchase  agreement.  Numerical
  amounts must be stated in figures.
    2. Disclosures required by this section must be printed  or  typed  in
  each  rental-purchase  agreement  in  a size equal to at least ten-point
  bold-faced type.
    3. A rental-purchase agreement may not contain a provision:
    (a) requiring a confession of judgment;
    (b) authorizing a merchant or an agent of the  merchant  to  commit  a
  breach of the peace in the repossession of merchandise;
    (c)  waiving  a  defense, counterclaim, or right the consumer may have
  against the merchant or an agent of the merchant;
    (d) requiring the purchase of insurance from the merchant to cover the
  merchandise;
    (e) requiring the payment of a late charge or reinstatement fee unless
  a periodic payment is delinquent for more than three days for agreements
  that are renewed on week by week terms and  seven  days  for  agreements
  that are renewed on month by month terms, and the charge or fee is in an
  amount not more than the greater of ten percent of the delinquent amount
  or  three  dollars for agreements that are renewed on week by week terms
  and not more than the greater of ten percent of the delinquent amount or
  five dollars for agreements that are renewed on month by month terms. In
  the event that multiple items are leased to a consumer pursuant to  more
  than  one  rental-purchase  agreement,  any late fee imposed pursuant to
  this section shall not exceed ten percent of the total of  the  periodic
  payments that are delinquent.
    (f)  requiring  a  payment in addition to regular periodic payments in
  order to acquire ownership of  the  merchandise  or  requiring  periodic
  payments  totalling more than the cost to acquire ownership, as provided
  in section five hundred three of this article.
    4. Only one late charge or reinstatement fee may  be  assessed  for  a
  delinquent  periodic  payment  regardless  of the period during which it
  remains in default. No  merchant  shall  assess  a  late  charge  for  a
  periodic  payment  made in full on its due date or within three days for
  agreements that are renewed on week by week  terms  or  seven  days  for
  agreements  that  are  renewed  on  month  by  month terms when the only
  delinquency is attributable to late fees assessed  on  earlier  periodic
  payments.  With respect to payments accepted by mail or by store deposit
  box,  no  merchant  shall  assess  a  late  fee  for  payments which are
  post-marked  or  received  before  the  expiration  of  the   applicable
  delinquency periods.
    5. A rental-purchase agreement must provide that:
    (a)  a  charge  in  addition  to  periodic  payments,  if any, must be
  reasonably related to the cost of a service performed;
    (b) a consumer who fails to make a timely  payment  may  reinstate  an
  agreement  without  losing  rights  or  options  previously acquired and
  without incurring any charges, other than rental charges for the time he
  possessed the  property,  except  for  those  charges  provided  for  in
  paragraph  (e)  of  subdivision  three  of  this  section  by making the
  required payment before the later of seven days or half  the  number  of
  days in a regular payment period after the due date of the payment;
    (c)  if  the merchandise is returned or voluntarily surrendered by the
  consumer, other than through judicial  process,  during  the  applicable
  reinstatement period set forth in paragraph (b) of this subdivision, the
  consumer's  right  to  reinstate the agreement as set forth in paragraph
  (b) of this subdivision shall be extended for a period of not less  than
  one year after the date of the return of the merchandise.


   6.  This  section  does  not  prevent  a  merchant  from attempting to
  repossess  merchandise  during  the  reinstatement  period  provided  in
  paragraph  (b) of subdivision five of this section. The consumer's right
  to  reinstate  an  agreement  does  not  expire  because   of   such   a
  repossession.  If  the  consumer  is  entitled  to  reinstatement  after
  repossession,  then,  within  fifteen  days  of  the  repossession,  the
  merchant  shall provide written notice to the consumer of the consumer's
  right  to  reinstate  the  agreement  pursuant  to  paragraph   (c)   of
  subdivision  five  of this section. On reinstatement, the merchant shall
  provide the consumer with the same merchandise or substitute merchandise
  of comparable  quality  and  condition.  If  substitute  merchandise  is
  provided,  the  merchant shall provide the consumer with the disclosures
  required in subdivision seven of this section.
    7. (a) Every rental-purchase agreement shall be contained in a  single
  document which shall set forth all of the agreements of the merchant and
  the  consumer  with respect to the rights and obligations of each party.
  Every rental-purchase agreement shall clearly and conspicuously disclose
  all of the following:
    (1) the names  of  the  merchant  and  the  consumer,  the  merchant's
  business  address and telephone number, the consumer's address, the date
  on which the agreement is executed, and a description of the merchandise
  sufficient to identify it;
    (2) whether the merchandise subject to the  rental-purchase  agreement
  is  new  or  used, provided, however that it shall not be a violation of
  this section to indicate that the merchandise is used if it is  actually
  new;
    (3)  the  minimum period for which the consumer is obligated under the
  rental-purchase agreement; the duration of the rental-purchase agreement
  if all regularly scheduled periodic payments are made, designated as the
  "rental period"; and the amount of each periodic payment;
    (4) the total of payments and the total number  of  periodic  payments
  necessary  to  acquire  ownership of the merchandise if the renter makes
  all regularly scheduled periodic payments;
    (5) the cash price of the merchandise subject to the  rental  purchase
  agreement;
    (6) the cost of rental;
    (7)  the amount and purpose of any other payment or fee in addition to
  those specified  pursuant  to  subparagraphs  three  and  four  of  this
  paragraph, including any late payment fee;
    (8)  a  statement  that the total number and dollar amount of payments
  necessary to acquire ownership of the rental merchandise disclosed under
  subparagraph four of this paragraph does not include other fees, such as
  late payment fees, and that the consumer should read the rental-purchase
  agreement for an explanation of any applicable additional fees;
    (9) whether  the  consumer  is  liable  for  loss  or  damage  to  the
  merchandise and, if so, the maximum amount for which the consumer may be
  liable,  which in the case of loss shall in no event be greater than the
  price the consumer would have paid to exercise an early purchase  option
  pursuant  to  this  article.  In  the case of damage to the merchandise,
  other than normal wear and tear the consumer shall  be  liable  for  the
  lesser  of  the  price the consumer would have paid to exercise an early
  purchase option pursuant to this article or the cost of  the  repair  as
  determined by the merchant;
    (10)  that  the  consumer does not acquire ownership rights unless the
  consumer has complied with the ownership terms of the agreement;
    (11) the following notice:
 
                                   NOTICE


   You are renting this merchandise. You will not own it until  you  make
  all  of  the  regularly scheduled payments or you use the early purchase
  option.
    You  do  not have the right to keep the merchandise if you do not make
  required payments or do not use the early purchase option. If you miss a
  payment, the merchant can repossess the merchandise, but, you  may  have
  the right to the return of the same or similar merchandise.
    See the contract for an explanation of your rights.
 
  (12)  a  statement  of  the  consumer's  right  to  acquire ownership as
  provided in  section  five  hundred  four  of  this  article,  including
  substantially  the  following  statement:  "The attached chart shows the
  amount required to  exercise  your  early  purchase  option  after  each
  renewal  payment,  assuming you make each periodic payment on time." The
  rental-purchase agreement shall be accompanied by a  chart  showing  the
  amount  required  to exercise the consumer's early purchase option after
  each periodic payment if payments are made as scheduled;
    (13) a description of the consumer's reinstatement rights as  provided
  in subdivision five of this section;
    (14)  a  description of the consumer's right to lower periodic payment
  amounts as provided in section five hundred four-a of this article.
    (15) if warranty coverage is transferable to a consumer  who  acquires
  ownership  of the merchandise, a statement that the unexpired portion of
  all warranties provided by the manufacturer, distributor, or  seller  of
  the  merchandise  that  is  the subject of the rental-purchase agreement
  will be transferred by the merchant to the  consumer  at  the  time  the
  consumer acquires ownership of the merchandise from the merchant; and
    (16) a description of the merchant's obligation to maintain the rental
  merchandise  and  to  repair  or  replace rental merchandise that is not
  operating properly, as provided in section five hundred four-b  of  this
  article.
    (b)  (1)  The disclosures required by subparagraphs three, four, five,
  and six of paragraph (a) of this subdivision  shall  be  printed  in  at
  least  ten-point boldfaced type or capital letters if typed and shall be
  grouped together in a box formed by a heavy line in the following form:
 
  ________________________________________________________________________
  TOTAL OF                 COST OF RENTAL           CASH PRICE
  PAYMENTS
  $                        $                        $
  You must pay             Amount over              Merchandise available
  this amount to           cash                     at this
  own the                  price you will           price for cash from
  merchandise if           pay if                   the merchant. See
  you make all             you make all             about your
  the regular              regular                  early purchase
  payments.                payments.                option rights.
  You can buy
  the merchandise
  for less
  under the
  early
  purchase
  option.
 
  ________________________________________________________________________
 
                           AMOUNT OF                NUMBER      RENTAL


                          EACH PAYMENT             OF          PERIOD
                                                    PAYMENTS
 
                           $
                           per
                           _______________
 
                           (insert period)
  ________________________________________________________________________
    (2)  The  box  described  in  subparagraph one of this paragraph shall
  appear  immediately  above  the  space  reserved  for   the   consumer's
  signature.
    (c)  The  disclosures required by subparagraphs three, four, five, and
  six of paragraph (a) of this subdivision shall be grouped together in  a
  box  formed  by  a heavy line in the form prescribed in paragraph (b) of
  this subdivision and shall be clearly and conspicuously placed on a  tag
  or  sticker affixed to the merchandise available for rental-purchase. If
  the merchandise available for rental-purchase is not  displayed  at  the
  merchant's  place  of  business  but  appears in a photograph or catalog
  shown to consumers, a tag or sticker shall be affixed to the  photograph
  of  the  merchandise  or catalog shown to consumers or shall be given to
  consumers. The disclosure required by subparagraph two of paragraph  (a)
  of  this  subdivision  also shall be clearly and conspicuously placed on
  the tag or sticker. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply  to
  photographic  depictions  of merchandise that comply with the provisions
  of section five hundred five of this article.
    (d) All disclosures required by this subdivision shall be  printed  or
  typed in a color or shade that clearly contrasts with the background.
    8.  (a)  (1) Subject to federal law and regulation, no rental-purchase
  agreement  shall  contain  a  mandatory  arbitration   clause.   Nothing
  contained  herein  shall  be  construed  to  prohibit  a  merchant  from
  incorporating a provision within such contract that such merchant agrees
  that the decision of the arbitrator or panel  of  arbitrators  shall  be
  final  in  its  application  to  such  merchant and not subject to court
  review.
    (2) The provisions of a mandatory arbitration clause shall be null and
  void but shall not constitute a violation of this article. The inclusion
  of such clause in a rental-purchase agreement shall not serve to  impair
  the enforceability of any other provision of such contract.
    (b)  For  the  purposes  of this subdivision the following terms shall
  have the following meaning:
    (1) "mandatory arbitration clause" shall  mean  a  term  or  provision
  contained  in a rental-purchase agreement which requires the consumer to
  submit any  controversy  thereafter  arising  under  such  agreement  to
  arbitration prior to the commencement of any legal action to enforce the
  provisions of such agreement and which also further provides language to
  the  effect  that the decision of the arbitrator or panel of arbitrators
  in its application to the consumer shall be final  and  not  subject  to
  court review.
    (2)  The  term  "arbitration"  shall mean the use of a decision making
  forum conducted by an arbitrator or  panel  of  arbitrators  within  the
  meaning  and  subject  to  the provisions of article seventy-five of the
  civil practice law and rules.


   §  502.  Availability.  Every rental purchase agreement shall indicate
  that a consumer at his or her request shall be  permitted  to  review  a
  completed rental-purchase agreement for up to forty-eight hours prior to
  signing. A copy of the fully completed rental-purchase agreement and all
  other  documents  which the merchant requests the consumer to sign shall
  be  given  to  the  consumer  at  the  time   they   are   signed.   The
  rental-purchase  agreement shall not be enforceable against the consumer
  until the consumer has received a signed copy. In addition to any  other
  right   of   cancellation,   a  consumer  has  the  right  to  cancel  a
  rental-purchase agreement, without penalty or obligation if the consumer
  has not taken possession of the property.




   § 503. Total cost. 1. A merchant shall maintain records that establish
  the  merchant's cost for each item of merchandise that is the subject of
  the rental-purchase agreement. A copy of each rental-purchase  agreement
  and  of the records required by this subdivision shall be maintained for
  at least two years following the termination of the agreement.
    2. The maximum cash price for  the  merchant's  first  rental  of  the
  merchandise that is the subject of the rental-purchase agreement may not
  exceed  1.75  times  the  merchant's cost for appliances, 1.75 times the
  merchant's cost for electronic sets having merchant cost less  than  one
  hundred  fifty  dollars,  2.0  times the merchant's costs for electronic
  sets having merchant cost greater than or equal  to  one  hundred  fifty
  dollars,  2.15  times  the  merchant's cost for furniture, 2.0 times the
  merchant's  cost  for  automotive  accessories,  jewelry,  and   musical
  instruments, and 1.75 times the merchant's cost for all other items.
    3. The maximum total of payments may not exceed 2.25 times the maximum
  cash  price  that  could  have  been charged for the first rental of the
  merchandise under subdivision two of this section.
    4. The maximum  total  of  payments  for  the  merchant's  second  and
  subsequent  rental  of  the  merchandise  that  is  the  subject  of the
  rental-purchase agreement may not exceed the maximum total  of  payments
  permitted under the terming matrix contained in subdivision five of this
  section.
    5.  (a)  The  terming  matrix  provided  for  in paragraph (b) of this
  subdivision shall be used to lower  the  number  of  periodic  payments,
  which shall result in a lower total of payments and a lower maximum cash
  price  for  the  used merchandise based on its age and condition, or, in
  the event that the merchant chooses to maintain the number  of  periodic
  payments  of  the  original  term when new, the merchant shall lower the
  total of payments and maximum cash price  on  a  pro-rata  basis.    The
  merchant  shall  keep  in electronic or hard copy form, the matrix used,
  together with a record of the number of periodic  payments  provided  in
  the  first agreement for the item when it was offered as new, as well as
  a record of the item's condition as determined by the merchant  pursuant
  to  such  matrix each time it is priced as used.  This requirement shall
  be satisfied by a record of the number of  periodic  payments  and  cash
  price  from  each  rental-purchase agreement under which merchandise was
  rented. These records shall be maintained as long as the item  is  owned
  by  the  merchant.  No  merchant shall price used goods in excess of the
  prices dictated by the matrix.
    (b) The attorney general shall  make  available  in  printed  form  to
  merchants  and publish on the website of the department of law a terming
  matrix in chart form to be used by merchants  as  required  pursuant  to
  paragraph  (a)  of  this  subdivision. The chart shall have as its title
  "Terming Matrix for Used Merchandise". The matrix chart shall conform to
  the example set forth in this paragraph and shall consist of  five  rows
  and five columns and shall be printed in at least ten point type.
 
                     TERMING MATRIX FOR USED MERCHANDISE
 
  Original Term                                               91 weeks
    in Weeks      34 weeks      35 - 38 weeks  39 - 90 weeks  or more
    when New       or less
 
  EXCELLENT      subtract a     subtract a     subtract a     subtract a
  CONDITION      minimum of 1   minimum of 2   minimum of 3   minimum of
                 week from      weeks from     weeks from     4 weeks
                 original       original       original       from ori-
                 term           term           term           ginal term


 GOOD           subtract a     subtract a     subtract a     subtract a
  CONDITION      minimum of 3   minimum of 5   minimum of 7   minimum of
                 weeks from     weeks from     weeks from     9 weeks
                 original       original       original       from ori-
                 term           term           term           ginal term
 
  FAIR           subtract a     subtract a     subtract a     subtract a
  CONDITION      minimum of 4   minimum of 7   minimum of 10  minimum of
                 weeks from     weeks from     weeks from     13 weeks
                 original       original       original       from ori-
                 term           term           term           ginal term
 
  POOR           subtract a     subtract a     subtract a     subtract a
  CONDITION      minimum of 6   minimum of 10  minimum of 15  minimum of
                 weeks from     weeks from     weeks from     20 weeks
                 original       original       original       from ori-
                 term or cash   term or cash   term or cash   ginal term
                 sale           sale           sale           or cash
                                                              sale
 
    (c) Immediately below the terming matrix, the following language shall
  be printed in ten point type.
    New = Full Term
    Excellent = In great shape. Refurbished to look like new.
    Good  =  In  good  working order. Refurbished, but imperfections still
  exist.
    Fair = Completely operational, but  refurbishment  has  not  concealed
  obvious wear and tear.
    Poor  =  Ripped,  faded,  cracked  or broken and refurbishment did not
  change it.
    6. The maximum cash price for merchandise on its second or  subsequent
  rental may not exceed the maximum total of payments for that merchandise
  as permitted under subdivision five of this section divided by 2.25.
    7.  Upon  the written request of the attorney general a merchant shall
  provide copies of the records described in this section.
    8. If a merchant intentionally discloses a cash price or  a  total  of
  payments  that  exceeds  the  amount  permitted  by  this  section,  the
  rental-purchase  agreement  is  void,  the  consumer  shall  retain  the
  merchandise without any obligation, and the merchant shall refund to the
  consumer all amounts paid.




   § 504. Early purchase option. 1. The consumer has the right to acquire
  ownership  of  the  merchandise at any time by tendering to the merchant
  all past due payments and fees and an amount equal  to  the  cash  price
  stated  in  the  rental-purchase agreement multiplied by a fraction that
  has as its numerator the number of periodic payments remaining under the
  agreement and that has as its denominator the total number  of  periodic
  payments.  A  consumer  must  affirmatively  elect  to exercise an early
  purchase option. In no event shall the consumer's early purchase  option
  be less than the amount of one periodic payment.
    2.  In  a  clear  and conspicuous manner on the consumer's receipt for
  every periodic  payment,  the  merchant  shall,  in  connection  with  a
  consumer's  rights  under  this  section,  provide  the  consumer with a
  written statement of:
    (a) the total amount  the  consumer  would  have  to  pay  to  acquire
  ownership  of the rental merchandise if the consumer makes all regularly
  scheduled payments remaining under the rental-purchase agreement; and
    (b) the total amount  the  consumer  would  have  to  pay  to  acquire
  ownership  of  that  merchandise  pursuant  to  subdivision  one of this
  section.




   §  504-a. Interruption or reduction of income in certain instances. 1.
  If any consumer who has signed a rental-purchase  agreement  experiences
  an  interruption  or  reduction of twenty-five percent or more of income
  due to involuntary job loss, involuntary  reduced  employment,  illness,
  pregnancy  or  disability  after one-half or more of the total amount of
  the rental payments necessary to acquire ownership under  the  agreement
  has  been paid, and such consumer provides to the merchant some evidence
  of the amount and cause of the interruption or reduction of income,  the
  merchant  shall  reduce  the  amount  of  each rental payment by (a) the
  percentage of the reduction  in  the  consumer's  income  or  (b)  fifty
  percent,  whichever  is less, for the period during which the consumer's
  income is interrupted or reduced.
    2. If payments are  reduced,  the  total  dollar  amount  of  payments
  necessary  to  acquire  ownership  shall  not  be  increased,  provided,
  however, that the number of payments necessary to acquire ownership  may
  be  increased  accordingly and the rights and duties of the merchant and
  the consumer shall not otherwise be affected.
    3. When the consumer's income is restored, the merchant  may  increase
  the  amount  of  rental  payments, but in no event shall rental payments
  exceed the originally disclosed amount of rental payments.




   §  504-b.  Maintenance  of merchandise. 1. The merchant shall maintain
  the property subject to the rental-purchase agreement  in  good  working
  order  while  the agreement is in effect without charging any fee to the
  consumer in addition to the  regularly  scheduled  rental  payments  set
  forth in the rental-purchase agreement.
    2.  By  the  end of the second business day following the day on which
  the merchant received notice from the consumer that the property is  not
  operating  properly,  the  merchant shall repair or replace the property
  without any fee to the consumer in addition to the  regularly  scheduled
  rental payments set forth in the rental-purchase agreement.
    3.  If  a  repair  or  replacement cannot be immediately effected, the
  merchant shall temporarily substitute property of comparable quality and
  condition while  repairs  are  being  effected.  If  repairs  cannot  be
  completed  to  the reasonable satisfaction of the consumer within thirty
  days after the merchant receives notice from the consumer  or  within  a
  longer  period voluntarily agreed to by the consumer, the merchant shall
  permanently replace the property.
    4. All replacement property shall be the same brand, if available, and
  comparable in quality, age, condition,  and  warranty  coverage  to  the
  replaced  property. If the same brand is not available, the brand of the
  replacement property shall  be  agreeable  to  the  consumer,  provided,
  however that any request by the consumer shall not be unreasonable.
    5.  All  of the consumer's and merchant's rights and obligations under
  the rental-purchase  agreement  and  this  title  that  applied  to  the
  property originally subject to the rental-purchase agreement shall apply
  to any replacement property.
    6. The consumer shall not be charged, or held liable for, any pro rata
  portion  of  a  periodic payment for any period of time greater than one
  full day and each full day thereafter during which the property that  is
  the subject of the rental-purchase agreement or any property substituted
  for it pursuant to this section is not in good working order.
    7.  This  section  shall  not apply to repairs or damage for which the
  consumer is liable under the rental-purchase agreement as  permitted  by
  this article.
    8.  A  merchant shall not deliver to a consumer any property which the
  merchant knows or has reason to know is defective.




   §  505.  Advertisement.  1.  An  advertisement  for  a rental-purchase
  agreement that refers to or states the amount of a payment or the  right
  to  acquire  ownership  of  any  one particular item under the agreement
  shall clearly and conspicuously state:
    (a) that the transaction advertised is a rental-purchase agreement;
    (b) the total number of payments and the total amount to  be  paid  to
  acquire  ownership,  which  amount  shall  be  explicitly labeled "total
  cost";
    (c) the circumstances under which the consumer can  acquire  ownership
  rights; and
    (d) whether the advertised terms are for new or used merchandise.
    2.   An   advertisement   for   personal  property  available  through
  rental-purchase agreements that refers to more  than  one  appliance  or
  particular  item  and  includes  information on periodic payment amounts
  shall include a representative item available at that amount  and  shall
  conspicuously state:
    (a) that the merchandise offered may be new or used;
    (b) that transaction advertised is a rental-purchase agreement; and
    (c)  that  the  consumer  does not acquire ownership rights unless the
  consumer complies with the ownership terms of the agreement.
    3. Every item displayed or offered under a  rental-purchase  agreement
  shall have clearly and conspicuously indicated in arabic numerals, so as
  to  be  readable  and  understandable  by visual inspection, each of the
  following affixed to the item:
    (a) the cash price of the merchandise;
    (b) the amount of  the  periodic  payment  and  the  total  number  of
  periodic payments required for ownership; and
    (c)  the  total  amount  that  must  be  paid  to acquire ownership of
  merchandise, which amount shall be explicitly labeled total cost.




   § 506. Exempted transactions. This article does not apply to:
    1.  Agreements  for  the rental of merchandise in which the person who
  rents the merchandise has no legal right to  become  the  owner  of  the
  property at the end of the rental period;
    2. A lease of a safe deposit box; and
    3. Retail installment sales agreements, contracts, or obligations.




   §  507.  Enforcement.  1.  A consumer who has suffered a loss due to a
  violation of this article by a merchant is entitled to recover from  the
  merchant actual damages, reasonable attorney's fees and court costs.
    2.  Whenever  a court finds that a consumer has been injured because a
  merchant acted in bad faith in its performance under this  article,  the
  merchant  shall  be  subject  to  a penalty of not less than one hundred
  dollars nor more than one thousand dollars as determined by the court.
    3. A violation of this article is a  deceptive  trade  practice  under
  section three hundred forty-nine of the general business law.
    4.  Whenever there shall be a violation of this article an application
  may be made by the attorney general in the name of  the  people  of  the
  state  of New York to a court or justice having jurisdiction to issue an
  injunction, and upon notice to the defendant of not less than five days,
  to enjoin and restrain the continuance of such  violations;  and  if  it
  shall  appear  to  the  satisfaction  of  the court or justice, that the
  defendant has, in fact, violated  this  section  an  injunction  may  be
  issued  by  such  court or justice enjoining and restraining any further
  violation, without requiring proof that any person has,  in  fact,  been
  injured  or damaged thereby.  In any such proceeding, the court may make
  allowances to the attorney general  as  provided  in  paragraph  six  of
  subdivision  (a)  of  section  eighty-three  hundred  three of the civil
  practice law and rules, and direct restitution. Whenever the court shall
  determine that a violation of this article has occurred, the  court  may
  impose  a  civil  penalty of not more than five hundred dollars for each
  violation. In connection with any such proposed application the attorney
  general is authorized to take proof and  make  a  determination  of  the
  relevant  facts  and  to  issue  subpoenas  in accordance with the civil
  practice law and rules.
    5. Nothing in this article shall be construed  so  as  to  nullify  or
  impair  any right or rights which a consumer may have against a merchant
  at common law, by statute, or otherwise.
    6. A merchant or assignee may not be held liable in an action  brought
  under   this   article   for  a  violation  of  this  article  that  was
  unintentional  and  resulted  from  a  bona  fide  or   clerical   error
  notwithstanding  the  maintenance  of  procedures  reasonably adopted to
  avoid any such error.
    7. An action shall not be brought under this article  more  than  four
  years  after  the occurrence of the act, method or practice which is the
  subject of the action or more than one year after the last payment in  a
  transaction  involving  the method, act or practice which is the subject
  of the action, whichever is later.






	   §  508.  Administration  by the attorney general. The attorney general
  may make rules and regulations necessary for the administration of  this
  article;  provided,  however,  that such rules and regulations shall not
  attempt to regulate or  characterize  rental-purchase  agreements  as  a
  security  interest,  credit  sale,  retail installment sale, conditional
  sale  or  any  other  form  of  consumer  credit  that  imputes   to   a
  rental-purchase agreement the creation of a debt or extension of credit,
  nor  shall  such  rules  and  regulations  require  the  disclosure of a
  percentage rate calculation, including  a  time-price  differential,  an
  annual percentage rate, or an effective annual percentage rate.




   §  550.  Laws  repealed. Of the laws enumerated in the schedule hereto
  annexed, that portion specified in the last column is hereby repealed.




   §   551.   When  to  take  effect.  This  chapter  shall  take  effect
  immediately.