§  1132. Infrastructure development contracts. 1. The agency is hereby
  authorized, within the amounts appropriated,  to  enter  into  contracts
  with   eligible   applicants   to   provide   funds  for  infrastructure
  improvements which are necessary for and will reduce the cost of the new
  construction or rehabilitation  of  affordable  housing  projects.  Such
  contracts  shall  provide  for  grants  by  the  agency  to the eligible
  applicant  for  infrastructure  improvements  carried  out   under   the
  contract.  Grants  shall be used to advance to or reimburse the eligible
  applicant  for  the  actual  and  necessary  cost  of   providing   such
  infrastructure  improvements,  provided however that grants shall not be
  used to pay the administrative costs incurred by an  eligible  applicant
  for   such   improvements.   Such  payments,  including  payments  to  a
  municipality, shall be made  in  accordance  with  the  agency's  prompt
  payment  statement  adopted  pursuant  to  section  twenty-eight hundred
  eighty of the public authorities law. Payment to the eligible  applicant
  shall  not  be  conditioned  on pre-payment for such improvements by the
  eligible applicant. No such grants shall exceed an amount equal to  five
  thousand  dollars  for each unit of affordable housing to be constructed
  or rehabilitated in conjunction with such infrastructure improvements.
    2. The agency shall not enter  into  a  contract  under  this  article
  except  with an eligible applicant which has submitted an application to
  a state, federal or local entity to receive funds for  the  construction
  or  rehabilitation of an affordable housing project and submits proof of
  such application to the agency. Such contract shall  contain  provisions
  that   infrastructure   development   funds   are  dependent  upon  such
  application being approved. Any contract for infrastructure  development
  funds  shall  contain  such  other  information  which  the agency deems
  appropriate, and a plan acceptable to the agency which demonstrates that
  the infrastructure improvements shall be undertaken in conjunction  with
  the new construction or rehabilitation of an affordable housing project,
  shall   be   completed  in  a  timely  fashion  and  will  result  in  a
  corresponding reduction in the cost of such affordable  housing  to  the
  occupants therein.
    3.  Moneys  expended  by  the  agency for the purposes of this article
  shall  not  substitute  for  locally   funded   operating   or   capital
  expenditures  which  the  municipality  would have allocated through its
  normal  budgetary  process  to  programs  that  provide   infrastructure
  improvement  in  the absence of the funds provided for this program. All
  such moneys shall be  used  to  increase  locally  funded  operating  or
  capital  expenditures  for this program to a level which is greater than
  the level which would have existed if such moneys had not been  provided
  by the state. Nothing in this subdivision shall require the municipality
  to  allocate  funds  for  this program if in the municipality's judgment
  such allocation would require an increase in taxation or a reduction  in
  other municipal services.
    4.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  article  one-A of the public
  authorities law, contracts entered into by the agency pursuant  to  this
  article  shall  not be subject to the provisions of article one-A of the
  public authorities law.




   §  1133.  General  and  administrative provisions. 1. The agency shall
  issue and promulgate rules and regulations  for  the  administration  of
  this  article.  The  rules  and  regulations  shall  include  provisions
  concerning eligibility of applicants  for  grants  under  this  article;
  funding  criteria  and  funding  determination  process;  evaluation  of
  contracting applicants; provisions for modification and  termination  of
  contracts; and such other matters not inconsistent with the purposes and
  provisions  of  this  article  as  the  agency  shall  deem necessary or
  appropriate.
    2. Not less than seventy-five percent of the total amount appropriated
  for the purposes of this demonstration program shall be  made  available
  for projects located in cities, towns or villages having a population of
  thirty  thousand  or  less persons; such remaining amounts shall be made
  available to projects located in cities,  towns  or  villages  having  a
  population of more than thirty thousand persons.
    3.  The  agency  shall  inform  prospective eligible applicants of the
  existence of this program and to the maximum  extent  practicable  shall
  provide  information  on  this  program  to  all  applicants for housing
  programs designed to  promote  the  construction  or  rehabilitation  of
  affordable housing.
    4. The agency shall enter into agreements to the extent feasible, with
  other state agencies and public corporations to carry out the provisions
  of  this  article.  In  entering  into  such agreements the agency shall
  consider the extent to which funds provided  pursuant  to  this  article
  would  compliment  the  programs administered by such agencies or public
  corporations. Such agreements shall  be  designed  to  allow  the  funds
  hereunder  to  be  used in conjunction with the programs administered by
  such agencies or public corporations.
    5. The agency or its designee shall require submission of  the  names,
  addresses and business background of the principals involved, the nature
  of  their fiduciary relationship and their financial relationship, past,
  present and future, to the project and to each other.




   §  1120. Statement of legislative intent. The legislature hereby finds
  and declares that the shortage of decent affordable housing for  persons
  of  low and moderate income remains significant and must be addressed in
  new and innovative ways; that a particular housing  problem  exists  for
  homeowners  residing  in  manufactured  home parks, wherein there is the
  potential for serious dislocation of families and loss of equity through
  the sale of manufactured  home  parks  to  interests  not  conducive  to
  continuation  of  park  settings  for  these  manufactured  homes;  that
  manufactured home  park  residents  frequently  lack  the  resources  to
  purchase  new  homes or move existing homes; that an innovative and cost
  effective solution to the problem of dislocation  of  manufactured  home
  park  families  is  the  formation  of  park  cooperatives  in which the
  manufactured home park is owned cooperatively by the  manufactured  home
  owners  who  reside  therein;  that  a significant public purpose may be
  served by assisting these homeowners in the  formation  of  manufactured
  home  park  cooperatives,  such purpose being a reduction in the cost of
  safe and sanitary housing for persons of low and moderate  income;  that
  manufactured  home  park  cooperatives should be assisted through public
  support for infrastructure improvements; that it is the  policy  of  the
  state  to  create  such housing cooperative opportunities and to provide
  for the aid, care, and support of the needy in a manner that  encourages
  self-sufficiency and self-determination. The legislature therefore finds
  that  a  program  should  be  established  to  provide  monies  for land
  acquisition by manufactured home park cooperatives and for  improvements
  to the infrastructures of such manufactured home parks.




   § 1121. Definitions. For the purposes of this article:
    1.  "Agency"  shall  mean  the  New  York state housing finance agency
  created by section forty-three of this chapter.
    2. "Cooperative project" or "project" shall mean any manufactured home
  park property which,  subsequent  to  receiving  assistance  under  this
  article,   will  be  owned  as  a  cooperative  by  the  owners  of  the
  manufactured homes situated therein.
    3. "Eligible applicant" shall  mean  a  manufactured  home  residents'
  association  representing a majority of the manufactured home residents,
  a  manufactured  home  park  cooperative,  a  municipality,  a   housing
  development fund company incorporated pursuant to article eleven of this
  chapter,  or  any  not-for-profit corporation or charitable organization
  which has as one of its primary purposes the improvement of housing.
    4.  "Infrastructure  improvement"   shall   mean   the   construction,
  reconstruction, improvement, reconditioning, and preservation, including
  the  acquisition  of  real  property  and  interests therein required or
  expected to be required in  connection  therewith,  of  roads,  bridges,
  sewage  and  water  collection and disposal systems, lighting districts,
  sidewalks, and other capital projects which will benefit the cooperative
  as a whole.
    5. "Manufactured home park" shall mean a  manufactured  home  park  as
  defined in section two hundred thirty-three of the real property law.
    6.  "Manufactured  home  park cooperative" shall mean a corporation or
  other entity formed for the purpose of owning a manufactured  home  park
  wherein the ownership of such shares, membership interest or certificate
  of membership will entitle the owners or holders thereof to occupancy in
  such  park  pursuant to section three hundred fifty-two-e of the general
  business law.




   §  1122.  Manufactured  home cooperative fund contracts. 1. Within the
  limit of funds available in the manufactured home cooperative fund,  the
  agency  is  hereby  authorized  to  enter  into  contracts with eligible
  applicants to provide loans which such eligible applicants shall use  to
  establish  manufactured  home  park  cooperatives through acquisition or
  infrastructure improvement or both.
    2. No such loan may be made or its  term  extended  pursuant  to  this
  article,  unless  the  agency  determines  that  the eligible applicants
  cannot afford or  obtain  the  financing  necessary  to  accomplish  the
  purposes of such loans through the ordinary unaided operation of private
  enterprise.
    3.  The  agency  shall  not enter into loans under this article except
  with an eligible applicant which has submitted a plan acceptable to  the
  agency  which  provides  that  subsequent  to  conversion to cooperative
  ownership, a majority of the manufactured home owners  or  one  or  more
  members  of  their  immediate family intend to occupy their manufactured
  homes as their primary residence.
    4. Such contracts  may  provide  for  loans  by  the  agency  for  the
  activities  to  be  carried  out  by  the  eligible  applicant under the
  contract, including participation in loans including but not limited  to
  participation in loans originated or financed by lending institutions as
  defined in section forty-two of this chapter, private or public employee
  pension  funds  or the state of New York mortgage agency. Loans shall be
  at the prevailing interest rate in the area for  long  term  residential
  mortgages or at such lower rate as the agency determines to be necessary
  for  the  project  to  be  financially  feasible. Loans shall not exceed
  ninety-five percent of the project costs including  purchase  price  and
  costs  for  infrastructure  improvement.  The  term  of  the  loan for a
  cooperative project or infrastructure improvement shall not  exceed  ten
  years  unless extended for periods not to exceed ten years in which case
  the term of the loan as extended shall not exceed thirty  years  in  the
  aggregate  and  the  amortization schedule for the loan shall not exceed
  thirty years.
    5. In determining loans pursuant to this article the agency shall give
  preference to applications based upon the following criteria:
    (a)  the  extent  to  which  park  residents   are   threatened   with
  displacement by the projected sale or closing of the existing park;
    (b)  the  scarcity of affordable alternate sites in the immediate area
  for relocation of park residents;
    (c) the  extent  to  which  manufactured  home  parks,  subsequent  to
  receiving  assistance under this article, will be owned as a cooperative
  by  shareholders  or  owners  or  holders  of  membership  interests  or
  certificate  of  membership in such cooperative whose average incomes do
  not exceed (i) the greater of one hundred percent of the  median  income
  for  the  metropolitan statistical area in which a project is located or
  one hundred percent of the median income for the state, or (ii)  if  the
  project  is  located  outside  such  an area, the greater of one hundred
  percent of the median income for the county  in  which  the  project  is
  located or one hundred percent of the median income for the state;
    (d)  the  extent  to  which  the proposed resident ownership structure
  provides long-term security and tenure;
    (e) the extent to which the proposed project will  be  undertaken  and
  completed in a timely fashion; and
    (f)  the  extent  to  which  the  homes  in a park are occupied by the
  manufactured home owners or members of their families.
    6. The agency shall provide for the review, at periodic intervals  not
  less than annually, of the performance of applicants receiving financial
  assistance  pursuant  to  this  article.  Such review shall, among other


 things, be for the purposes of ascertaining  conformity  to  contractual
  provisions, the financial integrity and efficiency of applicants and the
  evaluation   of  the  applicants'  activities.  Contracts  entered  into
  pursuant  to  this  article may be terminated, funds may be withheld and
  unspent funds recaptured by the agency upon  a  finding  of  substantial
  nonperformance  or  breach by the applicant of its obligations under its
  contract.




   § 1123. General and administrative provisions. 1. The agency may issue
  and  promulgate  rules  and  regulations  for the administration of this
  article. The rules and regulations shall include  provisions  concerning
  the  eligibility of applicants for payments, grants and loans under this
  article;  funding  criteria  and  the  funding  determination   process;
  supervision   and   evaluation  of  contracting  applicants;  reporting,
  budgeting and record-keeping requirements; provisions  for  modification
  and  termination  of  contracts; and such other matters not inconsistent
  with the purposes and provisions of this article  as  the  agency  shall
  deem necessary, proper and appropriate.
    2.  The  agency  may  provide  technical  services  and  assistance or
  contract to  provide  technical  services  and  assistance  to  eligible
  applicants  to  comply  with  the  provisions and intent of this article
  which services and assistance may include but shall not  necessarily  be
  limited  to  site  selection,  financial  packaging  and engineering and
  architectural services necessary for the preparation  of  proposals  for
  entering into contracts or for the continued operation of a manufactured
  home cooperative or for infrastructure improvement projects.
    3.  The  agency  and  applicants shall deposit any recaptured funds or
  funds from the repayment of loans and interest received  on  loans  into
  the manufactured home cooperative fund.
    4.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  article  one-A of the public
  authorities law, contracts entered into by the agency pursuant  to  this
  article  shall  not be subject to the provisions of article one-A of the
  public authorities law.
    5. The agency shall require the submission of the names, addresses and
  business background of the principals  involved,  the  nature  of  their
  fiduciary  relationship  and their financial relationship, past, present
  and future, to the project and to each other.




   § 1130. Statement of legislative findings and purpose. The legislature
  hereby  finds  and  declares  that  there  exists throughout the state a
  serious  shortage  of  affordable  housing  and   that   the   cost   of
  infrastructure  improvements,  such  as  sewer, water and utility lines,
  increases the cost of providing such housing. The legislature  therefore
  determines that a demonstration program should be established to provide
  infrastructure  development  grants  in conjunction with existing state,
  local and federal housing programs to eligible applicants to enable, aid
  and facilitate the development of affordable housing.




   §  1131.  Definitions.  1.  "Eligible  applicant"  shall mean a public
  benefit   corporation,   not-for-profit   corporation   or    charitable
  organization  whose  purpose includes the construction or rehabilitation
  of affordable housing or a municipality.
    2.  "Infrastructure  improvements"  shall  mean  the  installation  or
  upgrading  of  water  and  sewer  lines  to  a  public  connection,  the
  installation or upgrading of private wells and sanitary  systems,  storm
  sewers and road and sidewalk construction where required by local zoning
  ordinances and the installation of gas and electric lines and other site
  improvements  or site preparation which is necessary for the creation of
  affordable housing.
    3. "Affordable housing project" shall mean residential  housing  being
  rehabilitated  or  constructed  in  conjunction with a state, federal or
  local program to produce affordable housing.
    4. "Agency" shall mean the New York state housing finance agency.
    5. "Municipality" shall mean a county, city, town or village.




   §  1132. Infrastructure development contracts. 1. The agency is hereby
  authorized, within the amounts appropriated,  to  enter  into  contracts
  with   eligible   applicants   to   provide   funds  for  infrastructure
  improvements which are necessary for and will reduce the cost of the new
  construction or rehabilitation  of  affordable  housing  projects.  Such
  contracts  shall  provide  for  grants  by  the  agency  to the eligible
  applicant  for  infrastructure  improvements  carried  out   under   the
  contract.  Grants  shall be used to advance to or reimburse the eligible
  applicant  for  the  actual  and  necessary  cost  of   providing   such
  infrastructure  improvements,  provided however that grants shall not be
  used to pay the administrative costs incurred by an  eligible  applicant
  for   such   improvements.   Such  payments,  including  payments  to  a
  municipality, shall be made  in  accordance  with  the  agency's  prompt
  payment  statement  adopted  pursuant  to  section  twenty-eight hundred
  eighty of the public authorities law. Payment to the eligible  applicant
  shall  not  be  conditioned  on pre-payment for such improvements by the
  eligible applicant. No such grants shall exceed an amount equal to  five
  thousand  dollars  for each unit of affordable housing to be constructed
  or rehabilitated in conjunction with such infrastructure improvements.
    2. The agency shall not enter  into  a  contract  under  this  article
  except  with an eligible applicant which has submitted an application to
  a state, federal or local entity to receive funds for  the  construction
  or  rehabilitation of an affordable housing project and submits proof of
  such application to the agency. Such contract shall  contain  provisions
  that   infrastructure   development   funds   are  dependent  upon  such
  application being approved. Any contract for infrastructure  development
  funds  shall  contain  such  other  information  which  the agency deems
  appropriate, and a plan acceptable to the agency which demonstrates that
  the infrastructure improvements shall be undertaken in conjunction  with
  the new construction or rehabilitation of an affordable housing project,
  shall   be   completed  in  a  timely  fashion  and  will  result  in  a
  corresponding reduction in the cost of such affordable  housing  to  the
  occupants therein.
    3.  Moneys  expended  by  the  agency for the purposes of this article
  shall  not  substitute  for  locally   funded   operating   or   capital
  expenditures  which  the  municipality  would have allocated through its
  normal  budgetary  process  to  programs  that  provide   infrastructure
  improvement  in  the absence of the funds provided for this program. All
  such moneys shall be  used  to  increase  locally  funded  operating  or
  capital  expenditures  for this program to a level which is greater than
  the level which would have existed if such moneys had not been  provided
  by the state. Nothing in this subdivision shall require the municipality
  to  allocate  funds  for  this program if in the municipality's judgment
  such allocation would require an increase in taxation or a reduction  in
  other municipal services.
    4.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  article  one-A of the public
  authorities law, contracts entered into by the agency pursuant  to  this
  article  shall  not be subject to the provisions of article one-A of the
  public authorities law.




   §  1133.  General  and  administrative provisions. 1. The agency shall
  issue and promulgate rules and regulations  for  the  administration  of
  this  article.  The  rules  and  regulations  shall  include  provisions
  concerning eligibility of applicants  for  grants  under  this  article;
  funding  criteria  and  funding  determination  process;  evaluation  of
  contracting applicants; provisions for modification and  termination  of
  contracts; and such other matters not inconsistent with the purposes and
  provisions  of  this  article  as  the  agency  shall  deem necessary or
  appropriate.
    2. Not less than seventy-five percent of the total amount appropriated
  for the purposes of this demonstration program shall be  made  available
  for projects located in cities, towns or villages having a population of
  thirty  thousand  or  less persons; such remaining amounts shall be made
  available to projects located in cities,  towns  or  villages  having  a
  population of more than thirty thousand persons.
    3.  The  agency  shall  inform  prospective eligible applicants of the
  existence of this program and to the maximum  extent  practicable  shall
  provide  information  on  this  program  to  all  applicants for housing
  programs designed to  promote  the  construction  or  rehabilitation  of
  affordable housing.
    4. The agency shall enter into agreements to the extent feasible, with
  other state agencies and public corporations to carry out the provisions
  of  this  article.  In  entering  into  such agreements the agency shall
  consider the extent to which funds provided  pursuant  to  this  article
  would  compliment  the  programs administered by such agencies or public
  corporations. Such agreements shall  be  designed  to  allow  the  funds
  hereunder  to  be  used in conjunction with the programs administered by
  such agencies or public corporations.
    5. The agency or its designee shall require submission of  the  names,
  addresses and business background of the principals involved, the nature
  of  their fiduciary relationship and their financial relationship, past,
  present and future, to the project and to each other.




   §  1150.  Statement of legislative findings and purposes. It is hereby
  found and declared that there exists in the city of New York a seriously
  inadequate  supply   of   safe,   sanitary   and   affordable   dwelling
  accommodations for persons and families for whom the ordinary operations
  of   private   enterprise   cannot   provide  such  accommodations.  The
  legislature further finds and declares that the city of New York  should
  be permitted to assist the private sector in the development of dwelling
  accommodations  affordable  to  such  persons through establishment of a
  program  to  provide  monies  to  make  the  construction  of   dwelling
  accommodations more affordable. It is recognized that currently the city
  of  New  York  assists  the  development  of such housing accommodations
  through the provisions of articles fifteen and sixteen  of  the  general
  municipal law which permit such assistance on city-owned sites which are
  sold  to  private  developers  or  non-profit groups for construction of
  housing.  It is intended that the city of New York also be authorized to
  expend monies to assist housing  development  on  sites  which  are  not
  city-owned.  Accordingly, the legislature enacts this article to provide
  such authorization  and  to  encourage  the  development  of  additional
  affordable dwelling accommodations.




   §  1151.  Definitions. 1. "Eligible site" shall mean any real property
  in the city of New York which the agency determines to be located in  an
  area  which  is blighted or deteriorated or has a blighting influence on
  the surrounding area or is in danger of becoming a slum or blighted area
  because  of  neighborhood  conditions   indicating   an   inability   or
  unwillingness of the private sector to invest in housing in such area.
    2.  "Eligible  project" shall mean a project intended to construct new
  housing accommodations on  an  eligible  site  by  new  construction  or
  substantial  rehabilitation,  provided  that  such  new  construction or
  substantial rehabilitation may include climate resiliency  improvements.
  An  eligible  project  shall  serve  the needs of persons of low income,
  including privately-owned one to four family dwellings, condominiums and
  cooperatives, and rental projects.
    3. "Participation loan" and the city's "participation"  in,  "portion"
  of,  or  "investment" in a loan, or words of similar meaning, shall mean
  any loan or grant made by the agency pursuant  to  this  article  either
  with  or without a private lender, provided, however, that provisions of
  this article concerning the repayment or  forgiveness  of,  or  security
  for, a loan shall not apply to any grant.
    4.  "Persons  of  low  income" for purposes of this article shall mean
  those persons defined as low income pursuant  to  section  two  of  this
  chapter.
    5.  "Sponsor"  shall  mean  any not-for-profit corporation, any public
  benefit corporation or any individual, corporation or partnership  which
  receives  a  loan  pursuant  to  this article for the construction of an
  eligible project, or which receives an advance pursuant to this  article
  to  defray  the pre-development costs of any eligible project. A sponsor
  who is not a not-for-profit corporation shall agree to limit its  profit
  in accordance with a formula satisfactory to the agency.
    6.  "Loan"  shall  mean  a  mortgage  loan made by a private lender in
  participation with the city of New York to a sponsor for the purpose  of
  construction  of  an  eligible  project  including  a  loan in which the
  portion of the loan funded by the agency is represented  by  a  separate
  note and mortgage.
    7.  "Private  lender"  shall  mean  one or more banking organizations,
  foundations,  labor  unions,  credit  unions,  employees'  associations,
  veterans'    organizations,    colleges,    universities,    educational
  institutions,  child  care  institutions,  hospitals,  medical  research
  institutes,  insurance  companies,  trustees or fiduciaries, trustees of
  pensions and retirement funds and systems,  corporations,  partnerships,
  individuals  or other entities or any combinations of the foregoing, and
  shall include any public benefit corporations and the United  States  of
  America  and  any  of  its  agencies  and  departments.  As used in this
  definition, the terms "trustees" and  "fiduciaries"  shall  include  any
  fiduciary  or  fiduciaries  holding  funds  for  investment and the term
  "banking organizations" shall have the same meaning  as  in  subdivision
  eleven of section two of the banking law.
    8.  "Rental project" shall mean any project consisting of five or more
  dwelling units occupied as a residential rental project.
    9. "Agency" shall mean the  department  of  housing  preservation  and
  development of the city of New York or any successor thereto.




   §  1152.  Affordable housing development loans. 1. (a) Notwithstanding
  the provisions of any general, special or local law, one or more private
  lenders and the city of New York, acting through the agency, shall  have
  the  power to participate and invest in making loans to sponsors for the
  construction of eligible projects. Such loans may  be  made  exclusively
  for  or may include such amounts as may be required for site acquisition
  or the refinancing of eligible projects. Each  such  participation  loan
  shall  be secured by a bond or note and single participating mortgage or
  by separate bonds or notes and mortgages upon the eligible project. Such
  bond or note and mortgage or bonds or notes  or  mortgages  may  contain
  such  other terms and provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of
  this article as the agency may deem necessary or  desirable,  including,
  but  not  limited to, terms providing that the lien created by such note
  and mortgage, and, if applicable, any regulatory agreement  executed  by
  the  sponsor  and  such  agency or restrictive covenant approved by such
  agency, may  be  recorded  in  an  equal  or  subordinate  position,  or
  subsequently  made  equal  or  subordinate,  to  the lien created by any
  private lender against such eligible project.
    (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of any general,  special  or  local
  law,  and  in  addition  to  the  power  to  make  or  contract  to make
  participation loans granted by paragraph (a) of  this  subdivision,  the
  city  of  New  York,  acting through the agency, shall have the power to
  make or contract to make loans or  grants  to  any  owner  described  in
  paragraph (a) of this subdivision without the participation of a private
  lender,  on  the  same  terms  as  permitted  under such paragraph for a
  participation loan.
    2. The agency may enter into an agreement with  a  private  lender  to
  deposit  its  share  of a loan with the private lender to be advanced by
  the private lender. The portion of the loan funded by the agency may  be
  equal to or subordinate in lien to the portion of the loan funded by the
  private lender and may contain such terms with respect to interest rate,
  if  any,  rate of amortization of principal, if any, and time of payment
  of interest and principal as determined by the agency.  The  agency  may
  make  provision  either  in  the  mortgage  or  mortgages or by separate
  agreement for the performance by the private lender of such services  as
  are  generally  performed  by a banking institution which itself holds a
  mortgage, including, without  limitation,  construction  loan  advances,
  construction   supervision,   initiation   of  foreclosure  proceedings,
  procurement of insurance, and all other matters in connection  with  the
  financing,  supervision,  regulation  and  audit of any such loan to any
  such eligible project.
    3. If the eligible project is to consist of one to four unit  dwelling
  accommodations  or  cooperative or condominium units, the agency's share
  of the loan may be  converted  after  completion  of  construction  into
  mortgages  on  such  dwelling  accommodations  or  condominium  units or
  financing statements filed with  respect  to  such  cooperative  shares,
  provided  such units or such cooperative shares are purchased by persons
  of low income. Such mortgages and any blanket mortgage that  the  agency
  retains  on  any  portion  of,  or  on  all of, the eligible project may
  provide that such mortgages and such blanket mortgage will automatically
  be reduced to zero  over  a  period  of  continuous  compliance  by  the
  mortgagor  with  a  regulatory agreement or restrictive covenant with or
  approved by the agency and  upon  the  satisfaction  of  any  additional
  conditions   specified   therein.   Notwithstanding  such  provision  as
  contained in such mortgage, the loan shall be reduced to zero  only  if,
  prior  to  or  simultaneously with delivery of such mortgage, the agency
  made a written determination that such reduction would be  necessary  to
  ensure the continued affordability or economic viability of the eligible


 project.  Such written determination shall document the basis upon which
  the loan was determined to be eligible for evaporation. Such  period  of
  continuous  compliance  with  such  regulatory  agreement or restrictive
  covenant shall not be less than fifteen years.
    4.  If the eligible project is to consist of one to four unit dwelling
  accommodations or cooperative or condominium  units,  the  agency  shall
  require  that the dwelling units be offered only to bona fide purchasers
  who intend to occupy a unit  as  their  principal  place  of  residence;
  provided,  however,  that  in  the  case  of  two  to four unit dwelling
  accommodations the bona fide purchaser may occupy only a single unit  as
  a  principal  place  of residence. If the purchaser ceases to occupy the
  unit as a principal place of  residence,  the  agency  may  provide  for
  recapture of all or a portion of the agency's share of the loan.
    5.  If the eligible project is a rental project, the agency's share of
  the loan may be  converted  after  completion  of  construction  into  a
  permanent loan with a term of forty years, provided that such period may
  be  extended  as  the  agency  may  determine is necessary to ensure the
  continued affordability or economic viability of the  eligible  project,
  payable  in  such manner as may be provided in the note and any mortgage
  in connection with such loan. Such note and mortgage  may  contain  such
  terms  and  conditions  as the agency may deem necessary or desirable to
  effectuate the purposes and provisions of this article. The  sponsor  or
  any  subsequent  owner  or  owners of such a project shall agree to rent
  such units only to persons of low income for such period as  the  agency
  may  determine.  All such units shall be subject to the emergency tenant
  protection act of nineteen seventy-four and the rent  stabilization  law
  of  nineteen  hundred  sixty-nine,  as  amended,  unless  converted to a
  cooperative  or  condominium  pursuant  to  subdivision  seven  of  this
  section.  Initial  rentals  for  all  rental  units  shall be set by the
  agency.
    6. If the eligible project is a rental project annual profits shall be
  limited to an amount set by the agency  for  as  long  as  the  loan  is
  outstanding. Excess profits shall be used to establish project reserves,
  provide  capital  improvements  or  reduce  the  principal amount of the
  agency's loan, as determined by the agency.
    7. If the eligible project is a rental project,  no  conversion  to  a
  cooperative  or  condominium  shall  be permitted for a period of twenty
  years after initial occupancy, and unless (i) the agency's share of  the
  loan  is prepaid upon such conversion, (ii) the conversion shall be done
  pursuant to section three hundred fifty-two-eeee of the general business
  law  as  a  non-eviction  plan,  and  (iii)   apartments   occupied   by
  non-purchasing  tenants continue to be subject to the rent stabilization
  law of nineteen hundred sixty-nine as amended, until the occurrence of a
  vacancy.
    8. A loan made pursuant to this  article  shall  be  exempt  from  the
  mortgage recording taxes imposed by article eleven of the tax law.
    9. Notwithstanding the provisions of any general, special or local law
  or  charter,  the  agency shall have power, without soliciting competing
  bids, to contract with any sponsor or to make provision in  a  loan  for
  the  construction  or reconstruction of any site improvements located in
  the public right-of-way or on the eligible site which are necessary  for
  the  development  of  an  eligible  project.  Such site improvements may
  include, but shall not be limited to, streets,  sidewalks,  landscaping,
  parks   and   open  space,  social,  recreational,  communal  and  other
  non-residential  facilities  and  the   outfitting   thereof,   lighting
  fixtures,  and  water  and sewer lines, incidental or appurtenant to the
  construction of such eligible projects.


   10. No loan shall be made pursuant to the provisions of  this  article
  unless  the  agency  finds  that:  (a)  the construction of the eligible
  project does not directly  displace  current  low  and  moderate  income
  residents  of  the  eligible  site;  (b)  the eligible project leverages
  private  and other public investment, if any, so as to reduce the amount
  of assistance provided pursuant to this article to  the  minimal  amount
  which  is  necessary  for  construction of the eligible project; (c) the
  eligible project will be built by a private  developer/builder  who  has
  agreed  to limit its profit in accordance with a formula satisfactory to
  the agency; (d) the eligible project will provide assistance to an  area
  which  is  blighted  or deteriorated or has a blighting influence on the
  surrounding area, or is in danger of becoming a slum or a blighted  area
  because   of   neighborhood   conditions   indicating  an  inability  or
  unwillingness of the private sector to cause the  type  of  construction
  for  which  a  loan is to be provided; and (e) the eligible project will
  make home ownership or rental housing affordable to persons  who  cannot
  presently  afford  the housing available based upon the ordinary unaided
  operation of private enterprise.
    11. a. The agency may make non-interest bearing advances  to  sponsors
  to  defray  the pre-development costs of eligible projects in accordance
  with the provisions of this chapter.
    b. No such advances shall be made unless the agency  finds  that:  (i)
  the sponsor proposes to finance the eligible project in whole or in part
  by  a  loan  granted  pursuant  to  this article or that the project, if
  otherwise financed, will provide housing for persons or families of  low
  income,  and that such project is otherwise consistent with the purposes
  of this article; (ii) the project site is suitable, there is a need  for
  the  housing  type  proposed in the area to be served and the project is
  feasible; and (iii) it is reasonable to anticipate that  financing  will
  be obtained and the agency makes a finding to that effect.
    c.  No  such  advances  may  be  made to a sponsor unless such sponsor
  enters into an agreement  with  the  agency  which  provides  that  such
  sponsor shall be regulated with respect to rents, profits, dividends and
  disposition  of  its  property  or  franchise,  in  accordance  with the
  provisions of this article.
    d. An advance granted pursuant to this section shall be used  only  to
  defray  the  pre-development costs of eligible projects. For purposes of
  this subdivision, the term  pre-development  costs  shall  include,  but
  shall  not  be  limited  to:  the  reasonable  and  necessary  costs for
  planning,  site  preparation,  developing  architectural  drawings   and
  conducting  engineering and environmental studies, but shall not include
  acquisition of land or buildings, drainage  and  landscaping  of  vacant
  land,   construction   of   new   buildings  or  the  reconstruction  or
  rehabilitation of existing buildings.
    e. Each such advance shall be repaid in full  to  the  agency  by  the
  sponsor. Such repayment shall be made upon receipt by the sponsor or its
  successor  in  interest  of the proceeds of its mortgage or construction
  loan for the eligible project, unless the agency extends the period  for
  the  repayment of such advances. In no event shall the time of repayment
  be extended to a date later than the date  of  final  advance  of  funds
  pursuant  to  such  mortgage  or construction loan. Notwithstanding this
  paragraph, the agency may reduce such advance to zero over a  period  of
  continued  compliance  with  the  agency's  agreement  with  the sponsor
  pursuant to paragraph c of this subdivision if the  agency  has  made  a
  written  determination  that such reduction would be necessary to ensure
  the continued  affordability  or  economic  viability  of  the  eligible
  project.  Such written determination shall document the basis upon which


 the agency's non-interest bearing advance was  determined  eligible  for
  evaporation.
    f.  If  the  agency,  in  its  discretion, determines at any time that
  mortgage or construction financing for the eligible project may  not  be
  obtained,  then  all  advances  made  to  the  sponsor  pursuant to this
  subdivision shall become immediately due and payable upon the demand  of
  the agency.
    12.  If the eligible project is a rental project, the bond or note and
  mortgage or bonds or notes or mortgages issued by  the  sponsor  of  any
  eligible  project  to  secure  a participation loan may provide that the
  city's portion of such loan shall be reduced to zero commencing  on  the
  fifteenth  year after the execution of such bond or note and mortgage or
  bonds or notes or mortgages, provided that, as of the date of  any  such
  reduction,  the  eligible project has been and continues to be owned and
  operated in a manner consistent with a  regulatory  agreement  with  the
  city.  Notwithstanding  such  provision as contained in the bond or note
  and mortgage or bonds or notes or mortgages, the loan shall  be  reduced
  to  zero  only if, prior to or simultaneously with delivery of such bond
  or note and mortgage or bonds or notes or mortgages, the agency  made  a
  written  determination  that such reduction would be necessary to ensure
  the continued  affordability  or  economic  viability  of  the  eligible
  project.  Such written determination shall document the basis upon which
  the loan was determined to be eligible for evaporation.




   §  1153.  General provisions. 1. The agency shall issue and promulgate
  rules and regulations for the administration of this article.
    2. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or  part  of  this  act
  shall  be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
  such judgement shall not affect,  impair  or  invalidate  the  remainder
  thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
  paragraph,  section or part thereof directly involved in the controversy
  in which such judgment shall have been rendered.




   §   1170.   Statement   of  legislative  findings  and  purposes.  The
  legislature hereby finds and declares that it is in the best interest of
  the state to authorize participation in programs created by the  federal
  government  pursuant  to the national affordable housing act of 1990 and
  that it is the purpose of this article to  coordinate  activities  aided
  under  existing municipal, state and federal housing programs with other
  public and private actions in order to  address  the  lack  of  adequate
  affordable housing in New York state.




   § 1171. Definitions. As used in this article: 1. "NAHA" shall mean the
  national affordable housing act, 42 U.S.C. 12701-12839.
    2.  "HOME  program"  shall mean subtitle A of title II of the national
  affordable housing act.
    3. "Division"  shall  mean  the  division  of  housing  and  community
  renewal.
    4.  "HUD"  shall  mean  the  federal  department  of housing and urban
  development.
    5. "HOME regulations" shall mean HUD regulations created  pursuant  to
  the national affordable housing act of 1990 as amended.
    6.  "Applicant"  shall  mean  any entity eligible to receive grants or
  loans under the HOME program.
    7.  "CHAS"  shall  mean  the  New  York  state  comprehensive  housing
  affordability  strategy  prepared in accordance with the requirements of
  the national affordable housing act of 1990.
    8. "Participating jurisdiction" shall mean a  unit  of  general  local
  government  designated  by  HUD  to receive HOME funds through a formula
  allocation.
    9. "Non-participating jurisdiction" shall mean a unit of general local
  government which does not receive federal funds directly under the  HOME
  program.
    10.  "Eligible activities" shall have the same meaning as set forth in
  the HOME regulations.




   §  1172.  The  New York state HOME program.  1. Agreements. (a) Within
  the limit of HOME program funds, the division is  hereby  authorized  to
  take  administrative  actions  necessary to comply with HUD requirements
  and consistent with the provisions of this article  in  order  to  enter
  into  agreements  with applicants to provide grants and loans which such
  applicants shall  use  to  finance  projects  that  qualify  under  HOME
  regulations as eligible activities.
    (b)  The division shall not enter into an agreement under this article
  except with an eligible applicant which  has  submitted  an  application
  pursuant  to  a  notification  of  fund  availability  and a request for
  proposals issued by the division.
    (c) The division and the applicant  shall  execute  a  grant  or  loan
  agreement which shall set forth the terms and conditions under which the
  grant or loan will be provided.
    2.  Notice  of fund availability. The division shall issue its initial
  notice of fund availability and request for proposals within  forty-five
  working  days  of the effective date of this article. No more than sixty
  percent of the HOME funds shall be available  for  reservation  in  such
  initial  funding  cycle. No later than sixteen months from the effective
  date of this article, the division shall  issue  a  second  request  for
  proposals  and  make  available  those  funds  not  committed during the
  initial  request  for  proposals,  including  funds  recaptured  by   or
  otherwise made available to the division by the federal government under
  the  HOME  program. Additional requests for proposals shall be issued at
  the discretion of the division but in any event no later than sixty days
  following the availability of additional federal funds.
    3. Application procedures.  (a) Documentation determining eligibility.
  The division shall provide each applicant with a list of documents  that
  must  be  included  in  the  application  before  the application can be
  entered into the competitive process for  the  awarding  of  grants  and
  loans.  The  division  shall  also include with such list of documents a
  detailed description of the review  and  selection  procedures  criteria
  utilized  by the division pursuant to paragraph (b) of this subdivision.
  Within ten working days after the last day for receipt of  applications,
  the  division  shall  notify  applicants  if  and how the application is
  incomplete and provide ten working days to  complete  such  application.
  Documentation  requirements shall include but not necessarily be limited
  to: (1) a feasibility study and market analysis of the proposal;  (2)  a
  proposed  project  financing  and  leveraging plan; (3) a schedule, with
  specific dates, of the  expected  project  commencement  date,  expected
  completion  date,  and  if  appropriate,  the  anticipated  schedule for
  closing and occupancy of units; (4) a  description  of  the  applicant's
  qualifications and previous experience; (5) a statement by the applicant
  as  to  the  status  of  all public approvals and clearances required to
  undertake the project; (6) a plan  as  to  how  applicants  will  ensure
  compliance  with  all  federally  mandated  regulations  throughout  the
  regulatory term; (7) a statement describing the amount of and source  of
  any  matching  contributions  required  for  the proposed project and an
  opinion  of  counsel  that  funds  proposed  to  be  used  as   matching
  contributions  are  legally  available to be used as proposed; and (8) a
  statement of need and how the  project  will  further  goals  delineated
  within the state CHAS.
    (b) The review and selection procedure. Within forty-five working days
  of  the  effective  date  of  this  article, the division shall develop,
  consistent with federal law and  regulations,  a  review  procedure  and
  selection  criteria  for  evaluating  applications,  which shall include
  design, underwriting, legal and program requirements. Such procedure and
  selection criteria shall be provided to applicants with the application.


 Such selection  criteria  shall  include  but  not  be  limited  to  the
  following  factors:  (1)  the  extent to which the proposal will serve a
  demonstrated need; (2)  the  degree  to  which  the  proposal  leverages
  private  investment  or  other  funding  sources;  (3) the likelihood of
  successful project completion, including consideration of the  submitted
  market  analysis,  the  prior  experience  of  the  applicant,  and  the
  viability  of  the  submitted  completion  schedule;  and  (4)  type  of
  assistance requested.
    4.  Selection  for  award  and notification requirements. The division
  shall base the awarding of grants and loans subject to the  availability
  of  funds  upon the competitive review and selection procedure described
  in paragraph (b) of subdivision three of  this  section.  Within  eighty
  working  days  following  the  last  day  for receipt of applications in
  response to a request for  proposals,  the  division  shall  notify  all
  applicants of its funding decisions.
    (a)  The division will notify, in writing, all applicants who were not
  selected for funding of the reasons why the  proposal  was  not  funded,
  including  the  design,  underwriting,  legal  or  program deficiencies,
  deficiencies  of  any  documents  and/or  the  basis  upon   which   the
  application  was  determined  to  be  ineligible  for funding. Until the
  issuance of a subsequent notice of  fund  availability,  applicants  not
  selected for funding due solely to the non-availability of federal funds
  under  the  notice  of  fund  availability  shall  remain  eligible  for
  selection for funding under such notice  of  fund  availability  in  the
  event that unused federal funds become available for reallocation.
    (b)  The  division  shall  provide each applicant selected for funding
  with a list of conditions that must be met  prior  to  entering  into  a
  contract  pursuant  to  this  article.  Within  fifteen  working days of
  receipt by the division of all documents in satisfaction  of  the  list,
  the   division   shall  notify  the  applicant  of  the  sufficiency  or
  insufficiency of the documents. After satisfaction by the  applicant  of
  all  conditions  required  by  the  division  prior  to  entering into a
  contract, the division shall enter into the contract  within  forty-five
  working  days of satisfaction of such conditions. Applications which are
  not selected for funding  must  be  resubmitted  by  the  applicant  for
  consideration under subsequent notices of funding availability.
    5.  Distribution  of  funds.  Eighty  percent  of  the funds available
  hereunder after deducting the set asides mandated by NAHA for  community
  housing  development  organizations,  shall  be  reserved  for  projects
  located within non-participating jurisdictions, provided  however,  that
  such  reservation  may  be  less  than eighty percent where, following a
  notice of funding availability and request for proposals,  the  division
  has  made  a  written  finding  that  (i) applications, except those not
  selected for funding pursuant to subdivision four of this  section,  for
  projects in non-participating jurisdictions will not totally utilize the
  remaining  available  reserved  funds and (ii) such funds are subject to
  recapture by HUD pursuant to federal HOME regulations within one hundred
  eighty days.
    6. Monitoring and review. The division shall provide for  the  review,
  at  periodic  intervals  not  less  than annually, of the performance of
  applicants receiving grants or loans  pursuant  to  this  article.  Such
  review  shall,  among  other things, be for the purposes of ascertaining
  the conformity to agreement provisions, and adherence  to  federal  HOME
  regulations.    Agreements  entered into pursuant to this article may be
  terminated and funds may be withheld or recaptured by the division  upon
  a  finding  of  substantial  nonperformance  or breach by such applicant
  under  its  agreement  or  for  failure  to  adhere  to   federal   NAHA
  requirements.


   7.  Notwithstanding  any  contrary provision of law, on and after June
  thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-five, the division  shall  not  issue
  notices  of fund availability, accept applications or enter into any new
  agreements pursuant to the provisions of this section.




   * §  1173.  Gap communities. Notwithstanding the provisions of section
  eleven hundred seventy-two of this article the division may award  funds
  to  one or more localities, whose allocations of HOME program funds from
  the  federal  government  are  insufficient  for  such   to   become   a
  participating  jurisdiction, as are necessary to qualify the locality as
  a participating  jurisdiction  as  set  forth  in  92.102  of  the  HOME
  regulations.  Provided,  however,  the  provisions of this section shall
  expire and be deemed repealed having no further force and effect on  and
  after September thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-two.
    * NB Expired September 30, 1992




   §  1174. General and administrative provisions.  1. The division shall
  issue and promulgate rules and regulations  for  the  administration  of
  this  article.  The  rules  and  regulations  shall  include  provisions
  concerning  reporting,   budgeting   and   recordkeeping   requirements;
  provision  for  modification,  termination,  extension  and  renewal  of
  agreements; and such other matters not inconsistent  with  the  purposes
  and  provisions  of  this  article as the division shall deem necessary,
  proper or appropriate.
    2.  The  division  may  provide  appropriate  technical  services  and
  assistance to applicants to comply with the provisions of this article.
    3. The division shall issue a report to the temporary president of the
  senate  and  the speaker of the assembly, the chairpersons of the senate
  and assembly housing committees  and  the  chairpersons  of  the  senate
  finance  and  assembly  ways  and  means committees on or before January
  first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-three  and  annually  thereafter  with
  respect  to  funds  committed,  contracted  or disbursed pursuant to the
  national affordable housing act. This report shall include  but  not  be
  limited  to:  a  description of the programs/projects funded pursuant to
  this program; the amount of funds  committed,  contracted  or  disbursed
  during  the  previous  federal  fiscal  year;  the  amount of such funds
  derived  from  bond  proceeds;  the  number  of  new  affordable   units
  constructed  or rehabilitated, including both rental and home ownership;
  the number of units created which were constructed or  rehabilitated  by
  combining  NAHA  funds with other state-assisted housing programs and an
  accounting of the amount of such state-assisted  housing  program  funds
  expended; and any access to additional HOME funds made available through
  any  federal  fund  reallocation. In addition such report shall indicate
  the status of the rules and regulations as required in  subdivision  one
  of this section, until such rules and regulations have been promulgated.
    4.  All  state  agencies,  offices,  departments,  boards,  divisions,
  commissions, public authorities  and  public  benefit  corporations  may
  render  such  services to the division within their respective functions
  as may  be  requested  by  the  division  in  order  to  administer  the
  provisions of this article.




   * §   1200.   Statement  of  legislative  findings  and  purpose.  The
  legislature hereby finds and declares that  there  exists  in  New  York
  state  a  serious  need  for financial and technical resources to assist
  renters and property owners to make dwelling units  accessible  for  low
  and moderate income persons with disabilities. Providing assistance with
  the   cost   of  adapting  homes  will  enable  many  New  Yorkers  with
  disabilities to safely and comfortably continue to, or return  to,  live
  in their residences instead of residing in an institutional setting.
    * NB Effective until May 15, 2024
 
  § 1201. Definitions. As used in this article:
    1.  "Corporation"  shall  mean  the  housing  trust  fund  corporation
  established in section forty-five-a of this chapter.
    2.  "Eligible  applicant"  shall  mean  a  city,  town,   village   or
  not-for-profit  corporation  in  existence  for  a period of one or more
  years prior to application, which is, or will be at the time  of  award,
  incorporated   under   the   not-for-profit   corporation  law  and  has
  substantial experience in adapting or  retrofitting  homes  for  persons
  with disabilities.
    3.  "Disabled  veteran"  shall  mean a veteran who is certified by the
  United States department  of  veterans  affairs  or  the  department  of
  defense   as   entitled   to   receive   disability  payments  upon  the
  certification of such department for a disability incurred by him or her
  in time of war.
    4. "Access to home programs" or "programs"  shall  mean  a  series  of
  activities  by  an  eligible  applicant  to  administer funds to provide
  either loans or grants to homeowners and  renters  and  to  oversee  the
  adaptation or retrofitting of eligible properties.
    5.  "Eligible  property" shall mean a housing unit that is the primary
  residence of a person with a physical disability and a  total  household
  income  that  does  not  exceed  eighty  percent  of  median income or a
  disabled veteran who has a total household income that does  not  exceed
  one  hundred  twenty  percent  of median income. A property shall not be
  considered an  eligible  property  if  the  owner  of  the  property  is
  otherwise  obligated  by  federal,  state  or  local  law to provide the
  improvements funded under this article.




   §  1202.  Access  to  home  contracts.  1.  Within  the limit of funds
  available in the access to  home  program,  the  corporation  is  hereby
  authorized  to  enter into contracts with eligible applicants to provide
  financial assistance for the actual costs of an access to home  program.
  The financial assistance shall be either in the form of grants or loans,
  as  the  corporation  shall determine. No more than fifty percent of the
  total amount awarded pursuant to this article in any fiscal  year  shall
  be  allocated  to  access  to  home  programs  located within any single
  municipality.
    2. The total payment pursuant to any one  contract  shall  not  exceed
  five  hundred  thousand  dollars  and  the  contract  shall  provide for
  completion of the program  within  a  reasonable  period,  as  specified
  therein,  which  shall  not  in  any  event  exceed three years from its
  commencement. Upon request, the corporation may extend the term  of  the
  contract  for up to two additional one year periods for good cause shown
  by the eligible applicant.
    3. The corporation may authorize the eligible applicant to spend up to
  seven  and  a  half  percent  of  the  contract  amount   for   approved
  administrative costs associated with administering the program.
    4.  The  corporation  shall  require  that,  in order to receive funds
  pursuant to this article, the eligible applicant  shall  submit  a  plan
  which  shall include, but not be limited to, program feasibility, impact
  on the community, budget for expenditure of program  funds,  a  schedule
  for  completion of the program, affirmative action and minority business
  participation.




   * §  1203.  Report.  1.  The division of housing and community renewal
  shall issue an annual report on the access to  home  programs  regarding
  certain  data  and  program  progress for the previous year. Such report
  shall include, but not be limited to:
    (a) the number of contracts the corporation entered into with eligible
  applicants and the amount  of  funding  both  awarded  and  expended  by
  successful applicants;
    (b) the number of projects each eligible recipient completed;
    (c)  the  types  of  projects  completed  by  each eligible recipient,
  including the average cost of each type of project;
    (d) the geographic diversity of the beneficiaries  of  each  completed
  project;
    (e) the demographic information of the beneficiaries of each completed
  project, including differentiating between renters and homeowners;
    (f)  the  unmet  demand  for  access  to home programs who applied for
  funding through an access to home programs;
    (g) how many persons with eligible  properties  were  denied  and  the
  demographic information regarding such denied individuals; and
    (h) the average timeline for completion of each project.
    2.  Such  report  required pursuant to subdivision one of this section
  shall be posted and made publicly available on the division  of  housing
  and community renewal's website in a clear and conspicuous manner.
    * NB Effective May 15, 2024




   § 1220. Statement of legislative findings and purpose. The legislature
  hereby  finds and declares that there exists in New York state a serious
  need for financial and technical  resources  to  help  communities  with
  their  efforts  to  preserve  and  revitalize  main  street and downtown
  business districts which include commercial and  residential  uses.  The
  legislature  therefore  finds  that  a  program should be established to
  provide financial assistance to  stimulate  reinvestment  in  properties
  located  within main street, mixed-use commercial, and downtown business
  districts in urban, small town, and rural areas by  preserving  existing
  housing units, fostering the development of new housing units, upgrading
  commercial  and  retail  areas, and by creating innovative approaches to
  neighborhood and community revitalization, including the improvement  of
  cultural, civic and community facilities.




   § 1221. Definitions. As used in this article:
    1.  "Corporation"  shall  mean  the  housing  trust  fund  corporation
  established in section forty-five-a of this chapter.
    2. "Eligible applicant" shall mean  a  unit  of  local  government  or
  not-for-profit  corporation  in  existence  for  a period of one or more
  years prior to application, which is, or will be at the time  of  award,
  incorporated  under  the  not-for-profit  corporation  law  and has been
  engaged primarily in community development activities.
    3. "Eligible area" shall  mean  an  area:  (i)  that  has  experienced
  sustained physical deterioration, decay, neglect, or disinvestment; (ii)
  has   a  number  of  substandard  buildings  or  vacant  residential  or
  commercial units; and (iii) in which more  than  fifty  percent  of  the
  residents  are  persons of low income, or which is designated by a state
  or federal agency to be eligible for a community or economic development
  program.
    4. "Main street program" or "program" shall  mean  a  proposal  by  an
  eligible  applicant  for  a  specific  work  or  series of works for the
  revitalization and improvement of an eligible area through the creation,
  preservation  or  improvement  of  residential  housing   units;   local
  commercial  facilities;  public  facilities or other aspects of the area
  environment. Not less than eighty percent of the  total  amount  awarded
  pursuant  to  this article in any fiscal year shall be allocated to main
  street programs that include the creation, preservation  or  improvement
  of residential housing units as an objective.
    5. "Persons of low income" shall mean those persons and families whose
  incomes  do  not exceed ninety percent of the area median income for the
  county in which a project is located as calculated by the United  States
  department of housing and urban development.




   §  1222. Main street contracts. 1. Within the limit of funds available
  in the main street program, the  corporation  is  hereby  authorized  to
  enter  into  contracts  with  eligible  applicants  to provide financial
  assistance for the actual costs of a main street program. The  financial
  assistance  shall be either in the form of payments, grants or loans, as
  the corporation shall determine. No more than fifty percent of the total
  amount awarded pursuant to this article in  any  fiscal  year  shall  be
  allocated   to   main   street   programs   located  within  any  single
  municipality.
    2. The total payment pursuant to any one  contract  shall  not  exceed
  five  hundred  thousand  dollars  and  the  contract  shall  provide for
  completion of the program  within  a  reasonable  period,  as  specified
  therein  which  shall  not  in  any  event  exceed  two  years  from its
  commencement. Upon request, the corporation may extend the term  of  the
  contract for up to an additional two year period for good cause shown by
  the eligible applicant.
    3. The corporation may authorize the eligible applicant to spend up to
  seven  and one-half percent of the contract amount for approved planning
  and administrative costs of carrying out a program.
    4. The corporation shall provide technical assistance and training  to
  eligible  applicants  to help communities with their efforts to preserve
  and revitalize main street and downtown  business  districts  consistent
  with the legislative findings and purpose of this article.
    5.  The  corporation  shall  require  that,  in order to receive funds
  pursuant to this article, the eligible  applicant  must  submit  a  plan
  which   shall  include  but  not  be  limited  to  program  feasibility,
  leveraging of other resources,  impact  on  the  community,  affirmative
  action and minority business participation.
    6.  If  the  eligible  applicant  is a not-for-profit corporation, its
  officers, directors and members must be representative of the  residents
  and other legitimate interests of the community.
    7.  The  owner  of a property improved with funds made available under
  this article must agree for a minimum of five  years  to:  maintain  the
  property  in  good  operating order and condition; to make available and
  maintain the affordability of residential housing units  to  persons  of
  low income; and to obtain the consent of the corporation prior to making
  alterations to the property or changing its use.




   § 1230. Statement of legislative findings and purpose. The legislature
  finds and declares that there exists in New York state a serious need to
  assist  communities  with  the  creation  and  improvement of affordable
  housing, and the commercial, retail and community facilities related  to
  mixed   use   affordable   residential   developments.   Locally   based
  not-for-profit organizations play a significant role in  addressing  the
  unique  characteristics  of  rural  and urban communities. Partnerships,
  alliances and collaborations with  corporate  entities,  to  the  extent
  practicable,  will foster cross-sector collaboration in order to build a
  diverse community support system. The legislature finds  that,  in  both
  rural  and  urban areas of the state, a program should be established to
  fund  the  creation,  preservation  and/or  improvement  of   affordable
  housing; or the creation, preservation or improvement of the commercial,
  retail  or  community  facilities  component  of  mixed  use  affordable
  residential developments.




   §  1231.  Definitions.  1.  "Corporation" shall mean the housing trust
  fund corporation established in section forty-five-a of this chapter.
    2. "Rural and urban community  investment  fund  program"  shall  mean
  activities  by  an  eligible  applicant for a specific work or series of
  works for  the  creation,  preservation  or  improvement  of  affordable
  housing, or the creation, preservation or improvement of the commercial,
  retail  or  community  facilities  component  of  mixed  use  affordable
  residential developments, in rural and urban areas of the state.
     3. "Rural area of the state" shall mean cities,  towns  and  villages
  having  a  population of less than twenty-five thousand as determined by
  the last federal decennial census.
    4. "Urban area of the state" shall mean any unit of  local  government
  within  the state with a population of more than or equal to twenty-five
  thousand persons as determined by the last federal decennial census.
    5. "Eligible applicant" shall include a not-for-profit corporation  or
  charitable   organization,  or  a  wholly-owned  subsidiary  of  such  a
  corporation or organization, or a private for-profit developer such as a
  person, corporation, partnership or limited liability company.
    6. "Affordable  residential  development"  shall  include  residential
  units  that  are  rent  restricted  and occupied by persons and families
  whose income does not exceed ninety percent of area  median  income  for
  the  county  in  which  a project is located as calculated by the United
  States department of housing and urban development.




   §  1232.  Rural and urban community investment fund. 1. Within amounts
  appropriated or otherwise available therefor,  the  housing  trust  fund
  corporation  shall  develop  and  administer a rural and urban community
  investment fund program which shall provide assistance in  the  form  of
  payments,  grants and loans for reasonable and necessary expenses, to an
  eligible applicant for the  creation,  preservation  or  improvement  of
  affordable  housing; or the creation, preservation or improvement of the
  commercial, retail  or  community  facilities  component  of  mixed  use
  affordable  residential  developments,  in  rural and urban areas of the
  state.
    2.  Program  criteria.  The  corporation  shall  develop   procedures,
  criteria  and  requirements  related  to  the  application  and award of
  projects pursuant to this  section  which  shall  include:  eligibility,
  market   demand,   feasibility   and   funding   criteria;  the  funding
  determination  process;  supervision  and  evaluation   of   contracting
  applicants;   reporting,   budgeting  and  record-keeping  requirements;
  provisions for modification and termination of contracts; and such other
  matters not inconsistent  with  the  purposes  and  provisions  of  this
  article as the corporation shall deem necessary or appropriate.
    3.  Fund allocation. Sixty percent of the total funds awarded pursuant
  to this article in any  fiscal  year  shall  be  allocated  to  projects
  located  in  urban  areas of the state. Forty percent of the total funds
  awarded pursuant to this article in any fiscal year shall  be  allocated
  to projects located in rural areas of the state.
    4.  Funding  criteria. A one-third match requirement shall be required
  of any eligible applicant, which may include donated property, materials
  or labor and other resources, and  may  be  reduced  or  eliminated  for
  projects located within a declared disaster area.
    5.  Funding  and annual report. The corporation in its sole discretion
  shall authorize all funding decisions and make all award  announcements.
  The  corporation  shall, on or before December thirty-first in each year
  submit a report  to  the  legislature  on  the  implementation  of  this
  article.  Such  report  shall  include,  but not be limited to, for each
  award made to a grantee under this article: a description of such award;
  contract amount and cumulative total; the specific activities  in  rural
  and  urban  areas performed by such grantee; the amounts of match monies
  received by the grantee from sources other than payments  made  pursuant
  to  this  article;  and  such other information as the corporation deems
  pertinent.




   § 1260. Statement  of  legislative  findings.  The  legislature hereby
  finds and declares that there exists  in  New  York  state  a  need  for
  financial resources to assist senior citizen homeowners with the cost of
  addressing  emergencies  and code violations that pose a threat to their
  health and safety, or affecting the livability of their home.  Providing
  assistance for the cost of making such critical repairs will enable many
  seniors to continue to live independently in their own homes.




   § 1261. Definitions. As used in this article:
    1.  "Corporation"  shall  mean  the  housing  trust  fund  corporation
  established in section forty-five-a of this chapter.
    2. "Eligible applicant" shall mean  a  unit  of  local  government  or
  not-for-profit  corporation  in  existence  for  a period of one or more
  years prior to application, which is, or will be at the time  of  award,
  incorporated  under  the  not-for-profit  corporation  law  and has been
  engaged primarily in housing and community development activities.
    3. "Residential emergency  services  to  offer  home  repairs  to  the
  elderly  programs"  shall  mean  a  series  of activities by an eligible
  applicant to administer funds to  provide  either  loans  or  grants  to
  homeowners  sixty years of age or older, with a household income of less
  than one hundred percent of the  area  median  income,  to  oversee  the
  adaptation or retrofitting of eligible properties.
    4.  "Eligible  property" shall mean a housing unit that is the primary
  residence of a person that is sixty years of age or  older  and  have  a
  household  income  that  does not exceed one hundred percent of the area
  median income.




   § 1262. Residential  emergency  services  to offer home repairs to the
  elderly contracts. 1.  Within  the  limit  of  funds  available  in  the
  residential  emergency  services  to  offer  home repairs to the elderly
  program, the corporation is hereby authorized to  enter  into  contracts
  with  eligible applicants to provide financial assistance for the actual
  costs of a residential emergency services to offer home repairs  to  the
  elderly program. The financial assistance shall be either in the form of
  grants  or loans, as the corporation shall determine. Funds must be used
  for one- to four-unit dwellings that are owned and occupied by  eligible
  households,  and  work  undertaken cannot exceed twenty thousand dollars
  per building. No more than fifty percent of  the  total  amount  awarded
  pursuant  to  this  article in any fiscal year shall be allocated to any
  residential emergency services to offer  home  repairs  to  the  elderly
  program located within any single municipality.
    2.  From  the  date  of  the  emergency  referral, all repairs must be
  completed within sixty  business  days  of  the  start  of  the  repairs
  provided,  however,  that  the  commissioner  shall  grant  the eligible
  applicant additional time for good cause.
    3. The total payment pursuant to any one  contract  shall  not  exceed
  five  hundred  thousand  dollars  and  the  contract  shall  provide for
  completion of the program  within  a  reasonable  period,  as  specified
  therein,  which  shall  not  in  any  event  exceed three years from its
  commencement. Upon request, the corporation may extend the term  of  the
  contract  for up to two additional one year periods for good cause shown
  by the eligible applicant.
    4. The corporation shall authorize the eligible applicant to spend ten
  percent of the contract amount for approved planning and  administrative
  costs associated with administering the program.




   § 1270. Statement of legislative findings and purpose. The legislature
  hereby  finds and declares that many disabled veterans in New York state
  face a significant impediment to accessible and affordable housing as  a
  result  of service related injuries, age or health related disabilities.
  These men and women have served our country and  state  with  honor  and
  distinction   and   deserve  to  achieve  maximum  independence,  social
  interaction and community integration.  Providing  financial  assistance
  with  the  cost of adapting the dwelling units of our disabled veterans,
  is  fundamental  to  providing  for  the  promise  of   living   safely,
  comfortably  and  productively  in  the most integrated setting of their
  choice.




   § 1271. Definitions. As used in this article:
    1.  "Corporation"  shall  mean  the  housing  trust  fund  corporation
  established in section forty-five-a of this chapter.
    2.  "Eligible  applicant"  shall  mean  a  city,  town,   village   or
  not-for-profit  corporation  in  existence  for  a period of one or more
  years prior to application, which is, or will be at the time  of  award,
  incorporated   under   the   not-for-profit   corporation  law  and  has
  substantial experience in adapting or  retrofitting  homes  for  persons
  with disabilities.
    3.  "Veteran"  shall  mean  a veteran as defined in section one of the
  veterans' services law, or is a discharged LGBT veteran, as  defined  in
  section  one  of  the  veterans'  services law, who is a resident of the
  state  and  has  received  a  discharge  other  than  bad   conduct   or
  dishonorable from such service.
    4.  "Disabled  veteran"  shall  mean a veteran with, including but not
  limited to, a permanent physical or medical impairment resulting from an
  anatomical or physiological condition which prevents the exercise  of  a
  normal  bodily  function,  substantially limits a major life activity or
  which is demonstrable  by  medically  accepted  clinical  or  laboratory
  diagnostic  techniques. A professional evaluation must be provided which
  identifies the disability, describes the substantial  limitation  caused
  by  the disability, and recommends potential structural modifications to
  improve the activities of daily living  within  and/or  access  to  such
  residence in consideration of such disability.
    5.  "Access  to  home  for heroes programs" or "programs" shall mean a
  series of activities by an eligible applicant  to  administer  funds  to
  provide  grants  to homeowners and renters and to oversee the adaptation
  or retrofitting of eligible properties.
    6. "Eligible property" shall mean a housing unit that is  the  primary
  residence  of  a disabled veteran and a total household income that does
  not exceed one hundred and twenty  percent  of  area  median  income.  A
  property  shall  not  be considered an eligible property if the owner of
  the property is otherwise obligated by federal, state or  local  law  to
  provide the improvements funded under this article.


   §  1272.  Access  to home for heroes contracts. 1. Within the limit of
  funds  available  in  the  access  to  home  for  heroes  program,   the
  corporation  is  hereby authorized to enter into contracts with eligible
  applicants to provide financial assistance for the actual  costs  of  an
  access  to home for heroes program. The financial assistance shall be in
  the form of grants. No more than  fifty  percent  of  the  total  amount
  awarded  pursuant  to this article in any fiscal year shall be allocated
  to access to home programs located within any single municipality.
    2. The total payment pursuant to any one  contract  shall  not  exceed
  five  hundred  thousand  dollars  and  the  contract  shall  provide for
  completion of the program  within  a  reasonable  period,  as  specified
  therein,  which  shall  not  in  any  event  exceed three years from its
  commencement. Upon request, the corporation may extend the term  of  the
  contract  for up to two additional one year periods for good cause shown
  by the eligible applicant.
    3. The corporation shall authorize the  eligible  applicant  to  spend
  seven   and  one-half  percent  of  the  contract  amount  for  approved
  administrative costs associated with administering the program.
    4. The corporation shall require  that,  in  order  to  receive  funds
  pursuant  to  this  article,  the eligible applicant shall submit a plan
  which shall include, but not be limited to, program feasibility,  impact
  on  the  community,  budget for expenditure of program funds, a schedule
  for completion of the program, affirmative action and minority  business
  participation.




   §  1280.  Legislative  findings  and  purpose.  The state of New York,
  through the housing trust fund corporation, is empowered to finance  the
  purchase,  acquisition,  holding  or conversion of distressed hotels and
  commercial office properties for use  as  affordable  permanent  housing
  that   meets  standards  established  to  ensure  safety,  habitability,
  quality, and access to supportive services as appropriate,  to  be  made
  available  to low-income households and people experiencing homelessness
  immediately prior to entering such housing. These  properties  shall  be
  owned,  operated  and  managed  by  appropriate  nonprofit organizations
  through  the  use  of  government  agency  funding,  pursuant  to   such
  appropriation  to  support  the creation of an adaptive reuse affordable
  housing program, to acquire and/or convert the property.
    The acquired properties shall be converted into permanently affordable
  housing modeled as financially and operationally deemed necessary by the
  state or appropriate nonprofit organization for the purposes of creating
  supportive or permanently affordable housing units;  provided  that  the
  housing  shall  remain  affordable  as  defined  by  the term affordable
  housing included in this article.




   §  1281.  Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following
  terms shall have the following meanings:
    1.  "Corporation"  shall  mean  the  housing  trust  fund  corporation
  established pursuant to section forty-five-a of this chapter.
    2.  "Appropriate  nonprofit  organization" shall mean a not-for-profit
  corporation formed pursuant to the not-for-profit  corporation  law  and
  exempt  pursuant  to  section  501(c)(3)  or  502(c)(4)  of the Internal
  Revenue Code of 1984 as amended and that:
    (a) Has as one of such organization's primary purposes:
    (i)  The  provision  of  housing  that  is  affordable  to  low-income
  families; or
    (ii)  The provision of services or housing for individuals or families
  experiencing homelessness; or
    (b) Is otherwise  considered  by  the  state  as  a  suitable  housing
  management   organization,   by  a  vetting  process  developed  by  the
  corporation.
    3.  "Affordable  housing"  shall  mean  permanent  housing   that   is
  affordable  to  low  and  moderate-income  households, such that the new
  housing achieves income averaging at or below sixty percent of the  area
  median income, with residents' eligibility capped at a maximum of eighty
  percent  of  the  area  median  income  at  the  start  of  their lease.
  Applicants shall not  be  rejected  from  eligibility  based  on  credit
  histories or credit scores.
    4.  "Building service employee" shall mean any person who is regularly
  employed  at,  and  performs  work  in  connection  with  the  care   or
  maintenance  of, a converted property in a city with a population of one
  million or more, including  but  not  limited  to,  a  watchman,  guard,
  doorman,   building   cleaner,   porter,  handyman,  janitor,  gardener,
  groundskeeper, elevator operator and starter, or window cleaner.
    5. "Distressed" shall mean an  available  asset  that  is  financially
  distressed as determined by the corporation.
    6. "Exempt supportive housing" shall mean converted property for which
  a nonprofit organization has:
    (a)  entered  into  a  regulatory  agreement with a federal, state, or
  local government entity in a city with a population of  one  million  or
  more that requires:
    (i)  at least fifty percent of the residential units in such converted
  property be reserved for  homeless,  disabled  individuals  or  homeless
  families with a disabled head-of-household; and
    (ii)  the provision of on-site supportive services to the residents of
  at least fifty percent of the residential units; and
    (b) the remaining fifty percent  of  the  residential  units  in  such
  converted  property  rented  to  households  earning,  on average, up to
  eighty percent of the area median income, adjusted for household size.
    7.  "Experiencing  homelessness"  shall  refer  to  those  individuals
  residing  in  shelters,  transitional  housing, public spaces, and other
  types of emergency housing.
    8. "Fiscal officer" shall mean the comptroller of the city of New York
  or other analogous officer of such city.
    9. "Prevailing wage" shall mean the rate  of  wages  and  supplemental
  benefits paid in the locality to workers in the same trade or occupation
  and  annually  determined  by  the fiscal officer in accordance with the
  provisions of section two hundred thirty-four of the labor law.
    10. "Rent stabilized" shall mean collectively, the rent  stabilization
  law of nineteen hundred sixty-nine, the rent stabilization code, and the
  emergency  tenant  protection  act  of  nineteen seventy-four, all as in
  effect as of the effective date of  the  chapter  of  the  laws  of  two
  thousand   twenty-one   that   added  this  subdivision  or  as  amended


 thereafter,  together  with  any  successor  statutes   or   regulations
  addressing substantially the same subject matter.
    11. "Small converted property" shall mean a converted property project
  (a)  to  improve  no more than one hundred nineteen residential units in
  one or more buildings; and (b) which has received  financial  assistance
  pursuant to this article.




   §  1282. Housing our neighbors with dignity program. 1. Establishment.
  Subject to amounts available by appropriation therefor, the  corporation
  shall  develop a housing our neighbors with dignity program (hereinafter
  referred to as "the program"), which shall provide a mechanism  for  the
  state  to finance the acquisition and/or conversion of distressed hotels
  and commercial office properties by appropriate nonprofit  organizations
  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining or increasing affordable housing. All
  affordable housing properties produced through this program shall remain
  permanently affordable, and all converted properties in a  city  with  a
  population of one million or more, with the exception of small converted
  properties  and  exempt  supportive  housing,  shall  be required to pay
  building service employees the applicable prevailing  wage  pursuant  to
  subdivision  one-a of this section. Permanent affordability restrictions
  shall require a regulatory  agreement  with  the  corporation  or  local
  housing agency or other affordability restrictions in recorded documents
  not specifically listed in this subdivision, provided the corporation or
  local  housing  agency determines that such restrictions are enforceable
  and likely to be enforced. Such enforcement measures shall  include  but
  not  be  limited  to  the  ability  to cancel or transfer the regulatory
  agreement or property to another entity for violating the terms of  such
  regulatory  agreement,  such  as failure to meet the minimum obligations
  set forth in this article when such failure is not cured.
    1-a. In a city with a population of one million or more, all  building
  service employees employed by an appropriate nonprofit organization at a
  converted property or otherwise employed at a converted property that is
  not  a  small  converted  property  or  exempt  supportive housing shall
  receive at least the applicable prevailing wage in such city for  craft,
  trade,  or  occupation  of  such  building  service employee. The fiscal
  officer shall have the power to enforce  such  provisions  in  the  same
  manner  as  provided  under  subparagraph  (iii)  of  paragraph  (g)  of
  subdivision seventeen of section four hundred twenty-one-a of  the  real
  property  tax  law. In addition, the fiscal officer shall have the power
  to conduct an investigation and hearing and file a determination  as  to
  the payment of wages owed by a lessee, owner, successor, or any employer
  of building service employees, as provided under subdivisions one, four,
  five,  six,  eight  and  nine  of section two hundred thirty-five of the
  labor law.
    2. Purpose. The program shall seek to:
    (a) Finance the acquisition of distressed hotels and commercial office
  properties by appropriate nonprofit organizations  for  the  purpose  of
  stabilizing communities and the housing market;
    (b)   Finance  the  conversion  and  rehabilitation  of  the  physical
  condition of acquired property by appropriate nonprofit organizations in
  order to improve the condition of such property  for  future  occupants,
  such as habitability and environmental sustainability; and
    (c)  Provide an appropriate, expedient and efficient manner for owners
  of such distressed properties to transfer ownership  to  an  appropriate
  nonprofit  organization  so  as  to  promote the state's interest in the
  conversion of such properties to new supportive and affordable permanent
  housing units.
    3. Powers. The state may finance the purchase, acquisition, conversion
  and/or holding by  appropriate  nonprofit  organizations  of  distressed
  hotel  or  commercial office properties in any part of the state for the
  purpose of maintaining or increasing the stock  of  affordable,  stable,
  quality  housing;  provided  that in the case of a property at which any
  hotel workers are represented by a collective bargaining representative,
  prior  to  the   proposed   acquisition,   the   collective   bargaining
  representative shall be notified in writing of the proposed acquisition,


 and  the property owner shall certify prior to the state initiating such
  acquisition   through   financing   that   the   collective   bargaining
  representative  has  mutually  agreed  in  a  separate  writing with the
  property owner to take the specific acquisition described in the written
  notice.
    4.  Converted  properties.  All  properties  converted  to  affordable
  housing pursuant to this section shall meet  the  minimum  standards  of
  habitability,  safety  and  quality of life for all established housing.
  Additional operating expenses shall be met through  any  combination  of
  subsidies,  vouchers,  commercial  rents,  or  other  sources  of income
  available to the housing provider under the model the non-profit chooses
  to pursue. All units shall be rent stabilized as defined in this article
  in localities that have adopted or opted in to  the  rent  stabilization
  law.  At  least  fifty percent of all converted units shall be set aside
  for  individuals  and  families  who  were   experiencing   homelessness
  immediately  prior  to  entering such converted affordable housing. Each
  unit must contain,  at  a  minimum,  a  living/sleeping  space,  private
  bathroom with bath or shower, and either a full kitchen or a kitchenette
  with  at  least  a  7-cubic  feet  capacity refrigerator, sink, cooktop,
  microwave oven and outlets for countertop appliances.
    5. Restrictions. The state shall not, in any case, facilitate the sale
  or transfer of property unless the state has entered into  an  agreement
  with  the  appropriate nonprofit organization to ensure that any actions
  necessary  to  bring  the  property  into  compliance  with   applicable
  building, safety, health and habitability codes and requirements will be
  taken before such property is occupied.
    6.  Tenant  protections.  Tenants  residing in properties converted to
  affordable housing pursuant to this  section  shall  have  full  tenancy
  rights,   including   all   the  tenant  protections  pursuant  to  rent
  stabilization as defined in this article in localities that have adopted
  or opted in to the rent stabilization laws. Tenancy in  such  affordable
  housing  shall  not  be  restricted  on  the basis of sexual identity or
  orientation, gender identity or expression, conviction or arrest record,
  credit history, credit score, or immigration status.