§  1.  Short  title.  This chapter shall be known and may be cited and
  referred to as the "private housing finance law."




   § 2. Definitions. The following terms, whenever used or referred to in
  this  chapter,  shall  have  the  following  meaning, unless a different
  meaning clearly appears from the context, or unless specifically defined
  in any of the articles of this chapter:
    1. "Area". A  section  of  a  municipality  which  is  substandard  or
  insanitary.  The term "substandard or insanitary area" shall mean and be
  interchangeable with a slum,  blighted,  deteriorated  or  deteriorating
  area,  whether  residential, non-residential, commercial, industrial, or
  vacant, or any combination thereof and may include land and buildings or
  improvements not in themselves insanitary or substandard, the  inclusion
  of which is necessary to effectuate a plan.
    2. "Assessed valuation." The value of any parcel of real property with
  respect  to  any  local  tax  thereon,  including  therein buildings and
  improvements as well as land, as assessed by  the  respective  official,
  bureau,  board, commission or agency charged with assessing the same for
  such local tax.
    3. "Authority." A public corporation as defined in subdivision two  of
  section three of the public housing law.
    4. "Banking institution." Any corporation, association or organization
  organized  under the banking laws of New York state or the United States
  which is authorized to transact business in this state.
    5. "City." A city in the state.
    6. "Commissioner." The commissioner of housing of  the  state  of  New
  York.
    7. "Comptroller." The comptroller of the state of New York.
    8.  "Condemnation."  The  acquisition  of  real property in the manner
  provided by any general, special or local law or city  charter  for  the
  acquisition  of real property by the municipality in which such property
  is to be taken.
    8-a. "Federal government." The government  of  the  United  States  of
  America or any agency or instrumentality thereof.
    9.   "Foundation."   Any   organization,  association  or  corporation
  organized for charitable purposes which shall  have  received  exemption
  from  federal  taxation  by  virtue  of  its  eleemosynary, religious or
  educational functions.
    9-a. "Home owners purchase note." A  promissory  note  accepted  by  a
  mutual company, mutual housing company, mutual redevelopment company, or
  housing  development  fund  company  which  is organized pursuant to the
  business  corporation  law  and  article  eleven  of  this  chapter,  as
  consideration for the issuance of shares entitling a person or family to
  occupancy  of  an  apartment in a project of such mutual company, mutual
  housing company, mutual redevelopment company,  or  housing  development
  fund company, as the case may be, payable over or within a period of ten
  years.
    10.  "Insurance company." Any insurance company authorized to transact
  business in this state.
    11. "Labor union." Any organization organized under the  laws  of  the
  state  of  New York and which exists and is constituted for the purpose,
  in whole or in part,  of  collective  bargaining,  or  of  dealing  with
  employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment or of
  other mutual aid or protection for its members.
    12. "Local legislative body". In a city, the board of aldermen, common
  council, commission, or other board or body now or hereafter vested with
  jurisdiction  to enact ordinances or local laws, except that if there be
  in a city of one million population or more, a board  of  estimate,  the
  term  shall mean only such board of estimate; in a town, the town board;
  in a village,  the  board  of  trustees;  in  a  county,  the  board  of
  supervisors.


   13.  "Mortgage."  A mortgage, trust indenture, deed of trust, building
  and loan contract or other instrument creating a lien on real  property,
  and the indebtedness secured by each of them.
    14.  "Multiple dwelling." An existing building, accommodating three or
  more families living independently of each other.
    14-a.  "Mutual  company,"  "mutual   housing   company"   or   "mutual
  redevelopment  company".  A  limited  profit or limited dividend housing
  company incorporated pursuant to the provisions of  this  chapter  or  a
  redevelopment  company  incorporated  pursuant to the provisions of this
  chapter, and operated exclusively for the  benefit  of  the  persons  or
  families  who  are  entitled  to occupancy in a project of such company,
  housing company or redevelopment company, as the case may be, by  reason
  of ownership of shares therein.
    15.  "Supervising  agency." The comptroller in a municipality having a
  comptroller; in a municipality having no comptroller, the  chief  fiscal
  officer  of  such  municipality;  except that in the city of New York it
  shall be the department of housing preservation and development.
    16. "Municipal corporation,"  and  "municipality".  A  city,  town  or
  village,  or  a county having a county department of assessment with the
  power to assess real property; the term "municipal" shall be  deemed  to
  relate  to  a  city,  town  or  village,  or to a county having a county
  department of assessment with the power to assess real property.
    17. "Municipally-aided project."  A  limited  profit  housing  company
  project, other than a state urban development corporation project, which
  is  aided  by  a  municipal  mortgage  loan, a loan by the New York city
  housing development corporation or tax exemption  or  both  and  is  not
  aided  by  any  state mortgage loan or any mortgage loan made by the New
  York state housing finance agency or  any  mortgage  loan  made  by  the
  Battery  Park city authority or any mortgage loan insured by the federal
  government made for the purpose of refinancing  a  mortgage  loan  other
  than  a  municipal mortgage loan or a mortgage loan made by the New York
  city housing development corporation.
    18. "Neighborhood unit." A primarily residential district  having  the
  facilities  necessary  for  well-rounded family living, such as schools,
  parks, playgrounds, parking areas and local shopping districts.
    19. "Persons of low income" and "families of low income."  Persons  or
  families  who  are in the low income groups and who cannot afford to pay
  enough to cause private enterprise in  their  municipality  to  build  a
  sufficient supply of adequate, safe and sanitary dwellings.
    20.  "Plan."  A  plan or undertaking for the clearance, replanning and
  reconstruction or rehabilitation of a substandard and insanitary area or
  areas  and  for  recreational  and  other   facilities   incidental   or
  appurtenant  thereto  to  effectuate the purposes of article eighteen of
  the constitution.
    21. "Planning commission." Any agency of a municipality authorized  to
  prepare,  adopt  or  amend  the  map of the municipality or empowered to
  prepare, adopt and from time to time modify a  comprehensive  or  master
  plan  of  the  municipality,  if  there be one, or if there be none, the
  local legislative body of the municipality.
    22. "Project." A specific work or improvement to effectuate all or any
  part of a  plan.  The  term  shall  include  the  lands,  buildings  and
  improvements   acquired,   owned,   constructed,   managed  or  operated
  hereunder, to provide dwelling accommodations for persons of low income,
  and such stores, offices and other non-housing  facilities  as  well  as
  social,  recreational  or  communal  facilities, as may be deemed by the
  authority or municipality to be incidental or appurtenant to a  project.
  Subject  to  the provisions of article eighteen of the constitution with
  respect to state projects, such dwelling accommodations may be  provided


 in  any  section  of  the  municipality, whether or not such section has
  insanitary or substandard housing conditions.
    22-a.   "State  urban  development  corporation  project".  A  project
  acquired, owned, constructed, managed or operated by a company organized
  pursuant to articles two, four or eleven of  this  chapter  which  is  a
  subsidiary  of  the New York state urban development corporation, as the
  term "subsidiary" is defined in the New  York  state  urban  development
  corporation act.
    22-b.   "Battery  Park  city  project."  A  project  acquired,  owned,
  constructed, managed or operated by  a  company  organized  pursuant  to
  article  two, article four or article eleven of this chapter and located
  within the Battery Park project area, as defined  in  the  battery  park
  city authority act.
    23.  "Project cost." The cost of any or all undertakings necessary for
  planning,  financing  (including  payment  of  carrying  charges),  land
  acquisition,  demolition,  construction, equipment, and site development
  of new buildings,  reconstruction,  repair  or  remodeling  of  existing
  buildings, but not beyond the point of physical completion; and the cost
  of tenant placement service in connection with a project.
    24.  "Real  property"  or  "property."  Lands and improvements and any
  fixtures, equipment and article of personal property affixed to or  used
  in  connection  therewith,  lands  under water, waterfront property, the
  water of any lake, pond or stream, and any and all easements, franchises
  and hereditaments, corporeal or incorporeal, and every estate,  interest
  and  right  therein,  legal and equitable, in lands or water, and right,
  interest, privilege,  easement  and  franchise  relating  to  the  same,
  including  terms  for  years  and  liens by way of judgment, mortgage or
  otherwise.
    25. "State." The state of New York.
    26. "State-aided project". Any project other than a  municipally-aided
  limited  profit housing company project, a redevelopment company project
  or a redevelopment corporation project.
    27. "Total carrying charges". All charges paid to the housing  company
  by  a person or family living in a project under a lease for ninety-nine
  years renewal, or in perpetuity, or by reason of ownership of  stock  in
  such  company.  The word "rental" shall mean and be interchangeable with
  "total carrying charges" when used in connection with a mutual company.
    28. "Veterans' organization." Any organization  of  persons  who  have
  served in the armed forces of the United States during time of war which
  has  been  duly  chartered as a veterans' organization under the laws of
  the United States or of the state of New York.
    29. "Annual income" or "income". The total income as reported  in  the
  New  York  state  income  tax  return, less such personal exemptions and
  deductions for medical expenses as are actually taken by  the  taxpayer.
  Provided,  however,  that  federal  old  age,  survivors, and disability
  insurance benefits shall not be deemed income in articles two, four  and
  eleven  of  this  chapter. This definition shall be employed in articles
  two, four, eight and eleven  of  this  chapter  in  the  computation  of
  "probable aggregate annual income" as therein defined.
    30. "Climate resiliency improvements." Improvements for the purpose of
  protecting  land or any structures thereon from damage resulting from or
  which may result from changes in climate, including, but not limited to,
  extreme weather events, abnormal temperatures, and sea level rise, or of
  reducing the impact of the  operation  of  such  structures  on  climate
  change,  including,  but not limited to, improvements that reduce energy
  consumption or promote the efficient use of natural resources.
    31. "Private lender." One or more banking organizations,  foundations,
  labor   unions,   credit   unions,  employers'  associations,  veterans'


 organizations, colleges, universities, educational  institutions,  child
  care  institutions,  hospitals,  medical  research institutes, insurance
  companies, trustees or fiduciaries, trustees of pensions and  retirement
  funds  and  systems,  corporations,  partnerships,  individuals or other
  entities or any combination of the  foregoing,  and  shall  include  any
  public  benefit  corporation and the United States of America and any of
  its agencies and departments. As used  in  this  definition,  the  terms
  "trustees"  and "fiduciaries" shall include any fiduciary or fiduciaries
  holding funds for investment and the term "banking organizations"  shall
  have  the  same  meaning  as in subdivision eleven of section two of the
  banking law.




   §  10.  Short  title. This article shall be known and may be cited and
  referred to as the "limited-profit housing companies law."




   § 11. Policy and purposes of article. It is hereby declared that there
  exists  in municipalities in this state a seriously inadequate supply of
  safe  and  sanitary  dwelling  or  non-housekeeping  accommodations  for
  families  and  persons  of  low  income,  including  accommodations  for
  handicapped persons of low income and aged care accommodations for  aged
  persons  of  low income; that such conditions are due, in large measure,
  to over-crowding and concentration of the population, improper planning,
  excessive land coverage, lack of proper light, air and  space,  improper
  sanitary  facilities  and  inadequate protection from fire hazards; that
  such conditions constitute an  emergency  and  a  grave  menace  to  the
  health,  safety,  morals, welfare and comfort of citizens of this state,
  necessitating speedy relief which cannot  readily  be  provided  by  the
  ordinary  unaided  operation  of  private  enterprise  and  require that
  provision be made by which private free enterprise may be encouraged  to
  invest in companies regulated by law as to rents, profits, dividends and
  disposition  of  their  property  or franchises and engaged in providing
  such housing facilities and other facilities incidental  or  appurtenant
  thereto for families or persons of low income; that it is necessary that
  provision be made for participation by the state, its municipalities and
  the  New  York  state  housing  finance  agency in the financing of such
  housing, for the acquisition by such companies of real property required
  for such purposes and for public assistance to  such  companies  by  the
  granting  of  tax  exemptions;  that  the  cooperation of the state, its
  subdivisions and the New York state housing finance agency is  necessary
  to  accomplish  such purposes; that the provision of such adequate, safe
  and  sanitary  housing  accommodations  by  such  companies  jointly  or
  severally  are  public  uses  and purposes for which public money may be
  loaned and private property may be acquired by and  for  such  companies
  and tax exemptions granted; that such conditions require the creation of
  the  companies  hereinafter  prescribed for the purpose of attaining the
  ends herein recited; and the necessity in the public  interest  for  the
  provisions  hereinafter  enacted  is  hereby  declared  as  a  matter of
  legislative determination.




   §  11-a.  Additional  policy  and purposes of article. 1. It is hereby
  declared that the elimination of conditions causing a  deterioration  of
  the  quality  of  urban  life  in  municipalities  of  the State and the
  revitalization and improvement of the quality  of  urban  life  in  such
  municipalities  through comprehensive programs and projects constituting
  a total attack upon such  conditions  are  the  most  critical  problems
  facing the municipalities, the state and the federal government, and are
  vital   to   the  health,  well-being,  safety  and  prosperity  of  the
  inhabitants of the municipalities and the people of the  state.  Neither
  the  municipalities  nor the state have adequate resources to undertake,
  develop and operate the comprehensive programs  and  projects  necessary
  for  the  accomplishment  of  such  purposes. The ordinary operations of
  private enterprise cannot rectify such  conditions  or  accomplish  such
  purposes.  The elimination of such conditions and accomplishment of such
  purposes   require   the   participation   and   cooperation   of    the
  municipalities,  the  State, the Federal government, private enterprise,
  institutions of higher learning, community and civic  groups,  fraternal
  and   labor   organizations,  foundations,  and  all  other  responsible
  components of the community.
    2. Among the conditions causing such deterioration are: the  residence
  of  large  numbers  of  families,  adults  and children in slum ghettos;
  insanitary and inadequate  housing  or  other  physical  environment;  a
  severe  shortage  of decent healthful housing accommodations to meet the
  needs of large numbers  of  families,  adults  and  children;  economic,
  educational or community imbalance resulting from excessive migration of
  economic  or  other  groups  to or from communities; depletion of job or
  business opportunities because of migration  of  business  and  industry
  from  communities;  and  the existence of physical, social, and economic
  blight and crime. Such conditions create and  perpetuate  slum  ghettos,
  blight  and  crime,  cause a progressive deterioration of the quality of
  urban life for all persons in the municipalities and the  State,  render
  or  tend  to  render  the  municipalities undesirable places in which to
  live, work and raise families, impair the sound economic,  cultural  and
  social  growth of municipalities and communities thereof, break down the
  ability of  municipalities  or  communities  thereof  to  grow,  expand,
  develop  or  continue  as  viable  municipalities  or  communities,  and
  threaten the life, health, well-being,  safety  and  prosperity  of  all
  persons in municipalities and the people of the State.
    2-a.  It  is hereby found that improvement of the physical environment
  and revitalization of the quality of urban life in  such  municipalities
  would  be  promoted  by cooperative action by tenants who are persons or
  families of low income to acquire ownership of their  dwellings  and  to
  operate  them  on a nonprofit basis; that such cooperative undertakings,
  with their consequent pride and responsibility of ownership, would  help
  to   stem   the  abandonment  of  deteriorating  but  structually  sound
  buildings, which contributes  to  a  substantial  loss  of  much  needed
  housing  stock,  and  would  lead  to  the  stabilization and renewal of
  deteriorating neighborhoods. It is found necessary, in order  to  assure
  the  feasibility  of such cooperative undertakings, to make available to
  such tenants long-term financing on a favorable basis and tax  exemption
  to  enable them to purchase and maintain their dwellings at a reasonable
  cost.
    3. The rehabilitation or redevelopment of slum ghettos and other areas
  into sound healthy balanced viable communities, the enhancement  of  the
  physical  environment,  health, and social well-being of the inhabitants
  and the expansion of their social and economic opportunity require among
  other measures the attraction to the neighborhoods of  varying  economic
  classes  in  addition  to  persons  of  low  income and the availability


 therein of a wide choice of housing from the standpoint  of  design  and
  amenities.
    4.  It  is  hereby  further  found  that  there  are  certain parts of
  municipalities where conditions of blight are so extensive in area that,
  notwithstanding a continued  shortage  of  safe  and  sanitary  dwelling
  accommodations  in  the municipality for low and middle income families,
  it is not economic  for  private  enterprise  to  build  limited  profit
  housing  in  such  areas since it cannot supply proper housing at prices
  within the economic reach of low-income families in such blighted  areas
  or  attract  tenants  or  buyers  from other areas by offering rents and
  prices which are competitive with rents and prices of housing  in  areas
  of  the  municipality which are not blighted. It is found that there are
  other locations in such  municipalities  where  housing  development  is
  desirable  for  sound  community  growth,  but, similarly, where private
  enterprise cannot build limited  profit  housing  which  is  within  the
  economic reach of persons in the area who require such housing.
    5.  It  is  the  purpose  of  this article to enable municipalities to
  undertake  projects  directly  or  in  combination  with   the   Federal
  government,   private  enterprise  and  any  of  the  other  responsible
  components of the community, to accomplish the  public  purposes  herein
  described  through  the  most effective and economical concentration and
  coordination of Federal, State, local and private resources and efforts.
    6. It is hereby further found and determined that  the  accomplishment
  of  the  purposes  herein  described  is  a  matter of public concern, a
  governmental purpose, a city, town, and village purpose,  and  a  public
  purpose  and  a public use for the accomplishment of which (a) the money
  and property of a city,  town  or  village,  may  be  given,  loaned  or
  expended, (b) indebtedness may be contracted by a city, town or village,
  and  (c)  eminent  domain  exercised  by  a  city,  town  or village, as
  hereinafter provided.




   §  12. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall
  mean and include:
    1. "Areas." A section of a  municipality  in  which  there  is  to  be
  located  a project approved by the municipality as provided in paragraph
  (a) of subdivision one and in subdivision five of section twenty-six  of
  article two of this chapter.
    2.  "Company".  A  limited-profit  housing  company  duly incorporated
  pursuant to the provisions of this article, or  a  company  incorporated
  pursuant  to the not-for-profit corporation law and this article for the
  purpose of providing housing and auxiliary facilities for staff members,
  employees or students of a college, university, hospital or  child  care
  institution  and  their  immediate  families  or for aged or handicapped
  persons of low income, pursuant to this article, or a  municipally-aided
  non-profit  company  as  hereinafter defined, or a low income non-profit
  housing company as hereinafter defined.
    2-a. "Home owners purchase note." A  promissory  note  accepted  by  a
  mutual  company  as  consideration for the issuance of stock entitling a
  person or family to occupancy of an apartment in a project, payable over
  or within a period of ten years.
    2-b. "Mutual company." A company whose  dwelling  facilities,  to  the
  extent  of  at  least  eighty  per  centum,  are  occupied by persons or
  families who are entitled to such occupancy by reason  of  ownership  of
  shares  in  such company; provided however that a company that was not a
  mutual company prior to July first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-five  may
  become  a mutual company if its dwelling facilities, to the extent of at
  least fifty per centum, are occupied by  persons  or  families  who  are
  entitled  to  such  occupancy  by  reason of ownership of shares in such
  company. The commissioner or supervising agency shall provide procedures
  for such conversion of a company to a mutual company on  or  after  July
  first,  nineteen  hundred ninety-five; such procedures shall require the
  submission of a plan for attaining eighty per centum owner occupancy.
    2-c. "Urban Rental Company." A company whose project is located in  or
  adjacent to a municipality and whose housing accommodations are occupied
  by persons or families who do not own the shares in such company.
    3.  "Occupancy  date."  The  date  defined  in  the contract between a
  company and a municipality or the state, as the case may be, as the date
  upon which the project is to be deemed ready for occupancy, or  if  such
  term  is  not  defined  in  such  contract,  the date of issuance of the
  temporary certificate of occupancy.
    4. "Plan." A plan or undertaking of an area or areas for providing low
  rent housing for  persons  of  low  income,  and  for  other  facilities
  incidental and appurtenant thereto.
    5.  "Project."  A  specific  work  or  improvement,  including  lands,
  buildings and improvements acquired, owned, constructed,  rehabilitated,
  improved,   managed   or   operated  by  a  company  providing  dwelling
  accommodations,    non-housekeeping    accommodations,     aged     care
  accommodations  or  accommodations  for  handicapped persons pursuant to
  this article, or undertaken, planned, developed,  constructed  or  owned
  pursuant  to  section  thirty-six-a  of this article, and such business,
  commercial,  cultural,  recreational,  communal,  dining,  medical   and
  nursing  treatment, day care or residential child care facilities or any
  combination thereof, or  other  facilities  as  may  be  deemed  by  the
  commissioner with respect to a project aided by a state loan or New York
  state  housing  finance  agency  loan  or by the supervising agency with
  respect to a municipally-aided project or a project undertaken, planned,
  developed, constructed or owned pursuant to section thirty-six-a of this
  article, to be incidental and appurtenant thereto.  In  the  case  of  a
  state  loan  or  New  York  state housing finance agency loan, a project


 shall effectuate all or part of a plan,  provided,  however,  that  such
  dwelling  accommodations,  non-housekeeping  accommodations,  aged  care
  accommodations or accommodations for handicapped persons may be provided
  in  any  section  of  the  municipality, whether or not such section has
  insanitary or substandard housing conditions.
    5-a.  "State  urban  development  corporation  project".   A   project
  acquired,  owned,  constructed,  managed or operated by a limited-profit
  housing company which is a  subsidiary  of  the  New  York  state  urban
  development  corporation, as the term "subsidiary" is defined in the New
  York state urban development corporation act.
    5-b.  "Battery  Park  city  project."  A  project   acquired,   owned,
  constructed, managed or operated by a company organized pursuant to this
  article  and located within the Battery Park project area, as defined in
  the Battery Park city authority act.
    6. "Project cost". The sum total of all costs incurred  by  a  company
  and,  as  approved  by  the  commissioner  in  the case of a state-aided
  project or a project aided by the New York state housing finance  agency
  or  by the supervising agency in the case of a municipally-aided project
  as reasonable and necessary for carrying out all works and  undertakings
  for  the  development  of  a  project.  These  shall include but are not
  necessarily limited to the  carrying  charges  during  construction  and
  before  physical  completion  or  rehabilitation,  working  capital  not
  exceeding three per cent of the estimated total cost or three  per  cent
  of  the  actual  total  final cost, whichever is larger, the cost of all
  necessary studies, surveys,  plans  and  specifications,  architectural,
  engineering,  or other special services, the cost of acquisition of land
  and  any  buildings   thereon,   site   preparation   and   development,
  construction,  reconstruction  and  equipment;  the  reasonable  cost of
  financing incurred by the investor in the course of development  of  the
  project, up to and including the occupancy date; the fees imposed by the
  commissioner or by the supervising agency or by both; other fees charged
  in  the course of the development of the project up to and including the
  occupancy  date,  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  this  article;  the
  necessary  expenses  in  connection  with  the  initial occupancy of the
  project and where applicable, the cost of such training services as will
  assist the residents of the project to acquire ownership and to  operate
  the  project in an efficient and harmonious manner; and the cost of such
  other items, including tenant relocation, as the  commissioner,  in  the
  case  of  a state-aided project or a project aided by the New York state
  housing finance agency or the supervising  agency,  in  the  case  of  a
  municipally-aided project shall determine to be reasonable and necessary
  for the development of the project, less any and all net rents and other
  net  revenues  received  from  the  operation  of  the  real or personal
  property on the project site, or any part thereof, by the company on  or
  after  the  date on which the contract between the company and the state
  or the New York state housing finance agency or municipality was entered
  into and prior to the  occupancy  date.  In  the  case  of  any  project
  purchased  or  leased  by  a company from a municipality pursuant to the
  provisions of section thirty-six-a of this article, project  cost  shall
  include  the value of the lease or the purchase price paid or to be paid
  by such company to such municipality.
    7. "Local and municipal  taxes".  Taxes  levied  by  a  county,  city,
  village,  town,  school  and  special  district  but  shall  not include
  assessments for local improvements.
    8. "Child Care Institution"--A private, non-profit,  resident  agency,
  association,  corporation,  institution  or other organization, which is
  incorporated or organized under the laws of this state for the care  and
  treatment of children, which actually has its place of business or plant


 in   this  state  and  which  submits  and  consents  to  the  approval,
  visitation, inspection and  supervision  of  the  Department  of  Social
  Welfare, or a similar administrative department of the State of New York
  as  to any and all acts in relation to the welfare of children performed
  or to be performed thereby.
    9. "Housing". As used in this article the term includes:
    (a) "Dwellings". "Dwelling accommodations". A room or rooms,  with  or
  without  cooking  facilities, arranged for occupancy as a self-contained
  unit.
    (b)  "Non-housekeeping  accommodations".  A  room  or  rooms,  without
  cooking facilities, and with or without board designed for the occupancy
  of  staff  members,  employees  or  students of a college, university or
  hospital.
    (c) "Aged care accommodations".  Non-housekeeping  accommodations  for
  aged  persons  with board and aged care service as may be provided as an
  incident to occupancy, provided however, that no such service  shall  be
  of  such  a nature, kind or quality as to require licensing by the state
  department of health under article twenty-eight  of  the  public  health
  law.
    (d)  "Accommodations for handicapped persons." Dwelling accommodations
  designed for the occupancy of handicapped  persons  or  non-housekeeping
  accommodations  designed  for  the occupancy of handicapped persons with
  board and such service as may be provided as an incident  to  occupancy,
  provided  however,  that no such service shall be of such a nature, kind
  or quality as to make the facility subject to the  jurisdiction  of  any
  other agency of the state.
    10.  "Persons  of low income" and "families of low income". Persons or
  families who are in the low income groups and who cannot afford  to  pay
  enough  to  cause  private  enterprise  in their municipality to build a
  sufficient  supply   of   adequate,   safe   and   sanitary   dwellings,
  non-housekeeping accommodations or aged care accommodations.
    11.  "Preliminary  Costs".  Project  costs approved by the supervising
  agency as appropriate  expenditures  which  may  be  incurred  prior  to
  commitment  and initial advance of the proceeds of a mortgage loan under
  this article, including but not limited to: (a) payments for options  to
  purchase  properties  on  the proposed housing project site, deposits on
  contracts of purchase, or with prior approval of the supervising agency,
  payments  for  the  purchase  of  such   properties;   (b)   legal   and
  organizational  expenses,  including payment of attorneys' fees, project
  manager and clerical staff salaries, office rent  and  other  incidental
  expenses;  (c)  payment  of fees for preliminary feasibility studies and
  advances for planning, engineering and architectural work; (d)  expenses
  for  tenant  surveys  and market analyses; (e) necessary application and
  other fees; and (f) such other expenses incurred by  the  limited-profit
  housing  company  as  the  supervising  agency  may  deem appropriate to
  effectuate the purposes of this article.
    12.  "Municipally-aided  non-profit  company."  A  non-profit  housing
  company duly incorporated pursuant to the not-for-profit corporation law
  and this article, which is aided by a municipal mortgage loan, a loan by
  the  New  York  city housing development corporation or tax exemption or
  both and is not aided by any state mortgage loan or any mortgage loan by
  the New York state housing finance agency or a mortgage loan insured  by
  the  federal  government  made for the purpose of refinancing a mortgage
  loan other than a municipal mortgage loan or a mortgage loan made by the
  New York city housing development corporation.
    13. "Municipally-aided mutual company."  A  mutual  company  which  is
  aided  by a municipal mortgage loan, a loan by the New York city housing
  development corporation or tax exemption or both and is not aided by any


 state mortgage loan or any mortgage loan by the New York  state  housing
  finance agency or a mortgage loan insured by the federal government made
  for  the  purpose  of refinancing a mortgage loan other than a municipal
  mortgage  loan  or  a  mortgage  loan  made by the New York city housing
  development corporation.
    14. "Low income non-profit  housing  company."  A  non-profit  housing
  company duly incorporated pursuant to the not-for-profit corporation law
  and  this  article,  whose  principal  purpose is to provide housing for
  persons of low income and families of low income and which is aided by a
  state mortgage loan or mortgage loan  by  the  New  York  state  housing
  finance  agency or a municipal mortgage loan or municipal tax exemption,
  or both, or a mortgage loan insured by the federal government.
    15. "Residual indebtedness."  Where  a  mortgage  loan  is  refinanced
  pursuant  to  section  twenty-three-a  or  subdivision  twenty-two-a  of
  section six hundred fifty-four of this  chapter,  residual  indebtedness
  shall  be  the  indebtedness  of  a company due on the original mortgage
  loan, including all unpaid principal and all interest  accrued  thereon,
  less an amount equal to the principal amount, when made, of the mortgage
  insured  by  the  federal government in connection with the refinancing.
  Such  indebtedness  shall  be  secured  by  a  mortgage  which  may   be
  subordinate  to  the  lien  of  any  mortgage  insured  by  the  federal
  government and may contain such terms and  conditions  not  inconsistent
  with  this  article  as may be approved by the supervising agency and as
  the supervising agency may deem necessary or  desirable  to  secure  the
  repayment of such residual indebtedness. Residual indebtedness shall not
  be  restricted  by  the  provisions  of this article relating to project
  cost.
    16.  "Residual  receipts  obligations".  Where  a  mortgage  loan   is
  refinanced   pursuant   to   section   twenty-three-a   or   subdivision
  twenty-two-a of section six hundred fifty-four of this chapter, residual
  receipts obligations shall mean the amount of any additional loan  to  a
  company,  and  any  amounts paid other than by the company, to establish
  escrow accounts or reserves or to satisfy minimum property standards  or
  to install life safety devices for the issuance of mortgage insurance by
  the  federal  government  in  connection  with the refinancing. With the
  approval of the supervising agency  and  the  consent  of  the  company,
  residual  receipts  obligations may be evidenced by non-interest bearing
  residual receipts notes. Residual receipts obligations shall be  payable
  only  after  the  payment in full of all residual indebtedness. Residual
  receipts obligations shall not be restricted by the provisions  of  this
  article  relating  to  project  cost  and  shall not include any amounts
  deposited under an agreement with the federal government for the sharing
  of claims paid by the federal government  on  account  of  insurance  of
  mortgages.




   §  13. Limited-profit housing companies; how created. A company may be
  created by three or more  persons,  approved  by  the  commissioner,  by
  making,  subscribing,  acknowledging  and  filing  with the secretary of
  state a certificate which shall be entitled and endorsed "Certificate of
  Incorporation of  (name  of  company)  pursuant  to  the  Limited-Profit
  Housing  Companies Law"; provided that if the company is to be organized
  to undertake a municipally-aided  project  the  commissioner  shall  not
  approve  such  persons unless they shall have been first approved by the
  supervising agency; provided further that no company shall be created to
  provide aged  care  accommodations  or  accommodations  for  handicapped
  persons   under   this  article,  except  under  this  article  and  the
  not-for-profit corporation law. The certificate shall state:
    1. The name of the proposed company.
    2. The purposes for which it is to be formed which shall include among
  other  things  a  provision  that  the  company  is  to  plan,  acquire,
  construct, own, maintain, and operate projects pursuant to the terms and
  provisions of this article.
    3.  Except  in the case of a not-for-profit corporation, the amount of
  the capital shares, and if  any  be  preferred  shares,  the  preference
  thereof.
    4.  Except  in the case of a not-for-profit corporation, the number of
  shares of which capital shall consist, all of which  shall  have  a  par
  value.
    5. The municipality, as well as the county within this state, in which
  its principal business office is to be located, and the address to which
  the  secretary  of  state  shall mail a copy of process in any action or
  proceeding against the corporation which may be served upon him.
    6. Its duration, which shall be: (a) not  less  than  the  period  for
  which  the  loans  contracted  for  under  this article and the interest
  thereon remain unpaid in whole or in part; and (b)  not  less  than  the
  period   for   which  tax  exemption  is  granted  pursuant  to  section
  thirty-three of this article;  and  (c)  in  any  event  not  less  than
  thirty-five  years  from the date of occupancy of any project, except as
  may be provided in sections thirty-five and thirty-six of this article.
    7. The number of directors, which shall not be  less  than  three  nor
  more  than  twenty-one,  and who shall be elected by the stockholders or
  members of the  corporation.  Unless  required  by  the  certificate  of
  incorporation  or  the  by-laws,  directors  need  not  be stockholders.
  Directors appointed by the commissioner pursuant to subdivision  fifteen
  of  this  section or by the supervising agency pursuant to paragraph (c)
  of subdivision sixteen of this section need not be stockholders or  meet
  other  qualifications  which  may  be  prescribed  by the certificate of
  incorporation or the by-laws. In a corporation undertaking a state-aided
  project one additional director may be designated by  the  commissioner,
  and,  in  the  case of all state-aided mutual companies, such additional
  director shall be designated by the commissioner at the creation of  the
  company and shall serve from the time of such designation at least until
  a  board  of  directors  has  been  elected  by  the tenants entitled to
  occupancy in the project by  reason  of  ownership  of  shares  in  such
  company.  In  a  corporation undertaking a municipally-aided project one
  additional director may be designated by the supervising agency, and, in
  the case of all  municipally-aided  mutual  companies,  such  additional
  director  shall  be designated by the supervising agency at the creation
  of the company and shall serve from the  time  of  such  designation  at
  least  until  a  board  of  directors  has  been  elected by the tenants
  entitled to occupancy in the project by reason of ownership of shares in
  such  company.  The  director  appointed  by  the  commissioner  or  the
  supervising   agency   need   not   be   a  stockholder  or  meet  other


 qualifications  which  may  be  prescribed   by   the   certificate   of
  incorporation  or  the by-laws. In the absence of fraud or bad faith the
  director appointed by the  commissioner  hereunder  or  the  supervising
  agency  or  the  directors  appointed  by  the  commissioner  or  by the
  supervising agency pursuant to subdivision fifteen or paragraph  (c)  of
  subdivision sixteen respectively of this section shall not be personally
  liable  for  the  debts,  obligations or liabilities of the corporation.
  Directors of a mutual housing company are  to  serve  in  that  capacity
  without  salary  but  may  be  reimbursed for expenses incurred directly
  relating to the duties of the director's office.
    8. The names and post-office addresses  of  the  directors  until  the
  first annual meeting.
    9.  The  names  and  post-office  addresses  of the subscribers to the
  certificate, and a statement of the number of shares of stock which each
  agrees to take in the company.
    10. That, except in the case of a company to be aided by a  loan  from
  the  federal  government or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or if
  the mortgage or mortgage bonds which are to be  used  in  financing  the
  company's  project  are  to  be insured by the federal government or any
  agency or instrumentality thereof, the entire amount to be paid in  cash
  or property by the shareholders and income debenture holders shall be at
  least five per centum of the project cost in the case of an urban rental
  company  and  a mutual company. The provisions of this subdivision shall
  not  apply  to  a  non-profit  company  incorporated  pursuant  to   the
  provisions  of  the  not-for-profit corporation law and this article for
  the purpose  of  providing  housing  for  staff  members,  employees  or
  students  of  a  college, university, hospital or child care institution
  and their immediate families, or for aged or handicapped persons of  low
  income,   nor  to  a  municipally-aided  non-profit  company  nor  to  a
  municipally-aided mutual company, nor to a low income non-profit housing
  company.
    11. That, so long as this  article  shall  remain  applicable  to  any
  project   of   the  company,  its  real  property  shall  not  be  sold,
  transferred, encumbered or assigned except as permitted by the terms and
  provisions of this article.
    12. That all of the subscribers to the certificate are  of  full  age,
  that  at least two-thirds of them are citizens of the United States, and
  that at least one of the persons named as director is a citizen  of  the
  United States and a resident of the state of New York.
    13.  That the company has been organized to serve a public purpose and
  that it shall be and remain subject to the supervision  and  control  of
  the  commissioner,  or,  if  the  company  is  organized  to undertake a
  municipally  aided  project,  of  the  supervising  agency,  except   as
  otherwise  provided  in  this  article,  so long as this article remains
  applicable to any project of the company; that  all  real  and  personal
  property  acquired by it, and all structures erected or rehabilitated by
  it, shall be deemed to be acquired, rehabilitated  or  created  for  the
  proper  effectuation  of  the  purposes  of  this  article, and that the
  directors and subscribers of such company shall be deemed to have agreed
  that they shall at no time  receive  or  accept  from  such  company  in
  repayment of their investment in its stock any sums in excess of the par
  value  of  the stock, together with such dividends or other compensation
  as are prescribed by or permitted under this  article,  and  that,  upon
  dissolution  of  the company, any surplus remaining after the payment of
  all its obligations shall be distributed and disposed of  and  title  to
  the property may be conveyed in fee, only as prescribed by this article.
    14.  The  certificate  may  provide  that  in  the  event  that income
  debentures are issued by the company the owners thereof may be given the


 same right to vote as they would have if possessed  of  certificates  of
  stock of the amount and par value of the income debentures held by them.
  If  provision  is  made  for  the issuance of income debentures interest
  shall  be  paid  by  the  company  on  income debentures only out of net
  earnings of the company that would be applicable to payment of dividends
  if there were no income debentures.
    15. That in the event of a violation by a state-aided company  of  any
  provision  of  the certificate of incorporation or of law or of the loan
  or mortgage contract or any order of the commissioner or  of  any  rules
  and  regulations  duly  promulgated  pursuant  to the provisions of this
  article the commissioner may remove any or all of the existing directors
  of the company and appoint such person or persons whom the  commissioner
  deems  advisable,  including  officers  and employees of the division of
  housing and community renewal, as new directors to serve in  the  places
  of  those  removed;  that directors so appointed by the commissioner who
  are officers or employees of  the  division  of  housing  and  community
  renewal  shall serve in such capacity without compensation; and that any
  directors so appointed by the commissioner shall serve only for a period
  coexistent with the duration of such violation or until the commissioner
  is assured in a manner satisfactory  to  him  against  violations  of  a
  similar nature.
    16.  If  the  company  is  organized  to undertake a municipally-aided
  project, such certificate shall contain:
    (a) A declaration that the original directors,  officers,  subscribers
  and  income  debenture  holders  possessing  the right to vote, shall be
  deemed at the time of accepting such  offices,  or  subscribing  to  the
  stock or income debentures to have agreed not to resign from the company
  and not to sell their stock or income debentures prior to the completion
  of the project and the certification of the total actual project cost by
  the  supervising  agency,  except  with  the  consent of the supervising
  agency.
    (b) A declaration that the shares of stock and the  income  debentures
  of  the  company shall be issued only in such amounts and form as may be
  approved by the supervising agency and that no stock shall be  redeemed,
  purchased or retired and no income debentures shall be redeemed prior to
  their  dates  of  maturity or purchased or retired by the company during
  the period in which the loan by the municipality  is  in  force  or  for
  which  tax exemption is granted pursuant to section thirty-three of this
  article, except with the consent of the supervising agency.
    (c) A provision that in the event of a violation by the company of any
  provision of the certificate of incorporation or of law or of  the  loan
  or  mortgage  contract  or of any rules and regulations duly promulgated
  pursuant to the provisions of this article, the supervising  agency  may
  remove  any  or all of the existing directors of the company and appoint
  such person  or  persons  which  the  supervising  agency  in  its  sole
  discretion  deems  advisable,  including  officers  or  employees of the
  supervising agency, as new directors to serve in  the  places  of  those
  removed;  that  directors so appointed by the supervising agency who are
  officers or employees of the supervising  agency  shall  serve  in  such
  capacity  without  compensation;  and that any directors so appointed by
  the supervising agency shall serve only for a period coexistent with the
  duration of such violation or until the supervising agency is assured in
  a manner satisfactory to it against violations of a similar nature.
    (d) A provision that the supervising agency  or  its  duly  authorized
  representative  shall be notified in writing of and shall have the right
  to attend all meetings of the board of directors or of the  stockholders
  and income debenture holders of the company.


   (e) A provision that the sale of stock by a stockholder or the company
  or the sale of income debentures, the holders of which possess the right
  to  vote,  by  any  such  holder or the company, shall be subject to the
  consent of the supervising agency.
    (f)   Such  other  provisions,  not  inconsistent  with  law,  as  the
  supervising agency may deem necessary to protect the investment  of  the
  municipality and to carry out the purposes of this article.
    17.   The   certificate  of  incorporation  of  a  non-profit  company
  incorporated  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of   the   not   for-profit
  corporation law and this article shall, in addition to all other matters
  required by law to be stated therein, state:
    a. That its purpose is to provide housing and auxiliary facilities for
  staff  members,  employees  or  students  of  any  college,  university,
  hospital, child care institution and their immediate families, for  aged
  or  handicapped  persons  of  low  income,  or  for any one of the above
  purposes, or to provide housing accommodations pursuant to the terms and
  provisions of this article in the case of a municipally-aided non-profit
  company, or to provide housing accommodations pursuant to the provisions
  of this article in the case of a low income non-profit housing company;
    b. That the directors or trustees  are  and  at  all  times  shall  be
  officers, directors or trustees of such college, university, hospital or
  child  care  institution,  or,  in  the  case  of  a  non-profit company
  providing housing for aged or handicapped persons of low income or of  a
  municipally-aided  non-profit  company  providing housing accommodations
  pursuant to the terms and provisions of this article, or of a low income
  non-profit housing company providing housing accommodations pursuant  to
  the  provisions  of this article, of a corporation organized pursuant to
  the provisions of the not-for-profit corporation law;
    c. That the property of such company shall upon  dissolution  vest  in
  such   college,   university,   hospital,  child  care  institution,  or
  not-for-profit corporation, and
    d. That no part of the  net  earnings  of  such  college,  university,
  hospital,  child  care  institution  or not-for-profit corporation shall
  inure to the benefit of any private individual.
    18. That the secretary of state is designated  as  the  agent  of  the
  company  upon whom process in any action or proceeding against it may be
  served.






	   §  13-a.  The  applicability of not-for-profit corporation law. 1. The
  not-for-profit corporation law applies to every  company  heretofore  or
  hereafter  formed  under this article and the not-for-profit corporation
  law, provided that:
    (a) If any provision of the not-for-profit corporation  law  conflicts
  with  any provision of this article, the provision of this article shall
  prevail and the conflicting provision of the not-for-profit  corporation
  law  shall  not apply in any such case. If any provision of this article
  relates to a matter embraced in the not-for-profit corporation  law  but
  is not in conflict therewith, both provisions shall apply.
    (b)  The  following  provisions  of the not-for-profit corporation law
  shall not apply to companies formed pursuant to  this  article  and  the
  not-for-profit corporation law:
    Paragraphs  (7)  and  (8)  of  subdivision  (a) of section one hundred
  twelve, section one hundred  thirteen,  section  one  hundred  fourteen,
  section  two  hundred  one,  section  three  hundred four, section three
  hundred seven, section four hundred four, subdivision (3)  of  paragraph
  (a)  of  section five hundred ten, section six hundred nine, section six
  hundred seventeen, paragraphs (a) and (b) of section eight hundred four,
  article nine, section ten hundred eleven, section  ten  hundred  twelve,
  article thirteen, article fourteen.
    2.  Every  corporation  to which the not-for-profit corporation law is
  made applicable by this section is a charitable corporation  as  defined
  in  paragraph  (a)  of  section  one  hundred  two  (Definitions) of the
  not-for-profit corporation law for all purposes of that law.




   §  13-b.  Verification  of  papers  filed with supervising agency. Any
  document required to be filed  with  the  supervising  agency  regarding
  rental  units,  either  state or municipal, shall be duly verified under
  oath of the corporation or individual filing the same. The  commissioner
  or   head   of   such  supervising  agency  may  restrict  the  required
  verification to such documents as relate to financial statements and all
  other data submitted in support of an application  for  an  increase  of
  rents.




   § 13-c. Voting, election and referendum procedures. 1. Any shareholder
  vote  involving  the election of board members, by-law amendments, or on
  dissolution or reconstitution or conversion of a mutual housing  company
  including  any  votes  for a special assessment pursuant to subdivisions
  one, two or three of section thirty-five-a  of  this  article  shall  be
  conducted  using secret ballots. Such ballots shall be cast in-person by
  tenants entitled to vote in the project; unless such tenant  casts  such
  ballot  using  an  absentee ballot issued pursuant to subdivision two of
  this section.
    2. Any shareholder entitled to vote may request an absentee ballot  to
  cast  a  ballot  in any shareholder vote. Such an absentee ballot may be
  delivered or mailed  only  to  the  primary  residence  address  of  the
  shareholder  entitled  to  vote  in the project. An absentee ballot cast
  pursuant to this subdivision shall be sealed within  two  envelopes  and
  shall  be mailed or delivered to a neutral third party not running for a
  position on the board of directors. The outer  envelope  containing  the
  ballot  shall  instruct  the shareholder to affix their signature to the
  outer envelope only, and further instruct the shareholder  not  to  sign
  the ballot itself.
    3.  Proxy  voting shall not be permitted in a vote for a position on a
  board of directors, for dissolution  or  reconstitution  of  the  mutual
  housing  company,  for the authorization of a feasibility study, for the
  authorization to develop and submit to the attorney general an  offering
  plan  for  dissolution and reconstitution of the mutual housing company,
  for the authorization to develop and submit to the  attorney  general  a
  proxy statement or any other documents permitted by the attorney general
  instead of such offering plan, or any other vote relating to dissolution
  or  reconstitution  required  by  the regulations of the commissioner or
  supervising agency, or for an assessment approved  pursuant  to  section
  thirty-five-a  of  this  article  to  fund  the development, submission,
  completion, or distribution of any of the aforementioned documents.
    4. All ballots shall produce a paper or electronic record which may be
  audited in the case of a contested election result.
    5. No otherwise-eligible  person  shall  be  prevented  from  being  a
  candidate  for,  being  elected  to,  or serving on a board of directors
  based solely on that person owing or having owed any amount of any  form
  of  arrears  to  the  mutual  housing  company,  unless,  at the time of
  nomination, that person currently owes an amount of arrears greater than
  the equivalent of two  months  of  that  person's  monthly  maintenance.
  Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to require or mandate any
  mutual  housing  company to adopt bylaws, rules, policies, or procedures
  restricting any person's eligibility to be nominated, elected, or  serve
  on  a  board of directors. No grounds other than the above arrearages in
  excess of two months maintenance shall be a basis in itself to deny such
  eligibility  to  any  person   unless   specifically   incorporated   in
  regulations promulgated by or procedures approved by the commissioner or
  supervising   agency.   Neither   a   mutual  housing  company  nor  the
  commissioner or the supervising agency may modify in any way  the  above
  limitation  so as to restrict eligibility on the basis of fewer than two
  months of arrears.




   § 13-c. Voting, election and referendum procedures. 1. Any shareholder
  vote  involving  the election of board members, by-law amendments, or on
  dissolution or reconstitution or conversion of a mutual housing  company
  including  any  votes  for a special assessment pursuant to subdivisions
  one, two or three of section thirty-five-a  of  this  article  shall  be
  conducted  using secret ballots. Such ballots shall be cast in-person by
  tenants entitled to vote in the project; unless such tenant  casts  such
  ballot  using  an  absentee ballot issued pursuant to subdivision two of
  this section.
    2. Any shareholder entitled to vote may request an absentee ballot  to
  cast  a  ballot  in any shareholder vote. Such an absentee ballot may be
  delivered or mailed  only  to  the  primary  residence  address  of  the
  shareholder  entitled  to  vote  in the project. An absentee ballot cast
  pursuant to this subdivision shall be sealed within  two  envelopes  and
  shall  be mailed or delivered to a neutral third party not running for a
  position on the board of directors. The outer  envelope  containing  the
  ballot  shall  instruct  the shareholder to affix their signature to the
  outer envelope only, and further instruct the shareholder  not  to  sign
  the ballot itself.
    3.  Proxy  voting shall not be permitted in a vote for a position on a
  board of directors, for dissolution  or  reconstitution  of  the  mutual
  housing  company,  for the authorization of a feasibility study, for the
  authorization to develop and submit to the attorney general an  offering
  plan  for  dissolution and reconstitution of the mutual housing company,
  for the authorization to develop and submit to the  attorney  general  a
  proxy statement or any other documents permitted by the attorney general
  instead of such offering plan, or any other vote relating to dissolution
  or  reconstitution  required  by  the regulations of the commissioner or
  supervising agency, or for an assessment approved  pursuant  to  section
  thirty-five-a  of  this  article  to  fund  the development, submission,
  completion, or distribution of any of the aforementioned documents.
    4. All ballots shall produce a paper or electronic record which may be
  audited in the case of a contested election result.
    5. No otherwise-eligible  person  shall  be  prevented  from  being  a
  candidate  for,  being  elected  to,  or serving on a board of directors
  based solely on that person owing or having owed any amount of any  form
  of  arrears  to  the  mutual  housing  company,  unless,  at the time of
  nomination, that person currently owes an amount of arrears greater than
  the equivalent of two  months  of  that  person's  monthly  maintenance.
  Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to require or mandate any
  mutual  housing  company to adopt bylaws, rules, policies, or procedures
  restricting any person's eligibility to be nominated, elected, or  serve
  on  a  board of directors. No grounds other than the above arrearages in
  excess of two months maintenance shall be a basis in itself to deny such
  eligibility  to  any  person   unless   specifically   incorporated   in
  regulations promulgated by or procedures approved by the commissioner or
  supervising   agency.   Neither   a   mutual  housing  company  nor  the
  commissioner or the supervising agency may modify in any way  the  above
  limitation  so as to restrict eligibility on the basis of fewer than two
  months of arrears.




   §  14.  Consent  of  commissioner  to incorporation. Whenever any such
  certificate shall be presented to the secretary of state, he  shall  not
  file   such   certificate  unless  there  shall  accompany  the  same  a
  certificate of the commissioner that he consents to the filing  of  such
  certificate; nor shall any amendment to the certificate of incorporation
  be  filed  unless it is accompanied by a certificate of the commissioner
  consenting thereto. If a company has entered  into  a  contract  with  a
  municipality  for  the  construction of a municipally aided project, the
  commissioner shall not issue a certificate consenting to an amendment of
  the certificate of incorporation of such company, unless the supervising
  agency has given its written consent to such amendment.




   §  15.  Participation  by certain corporations and individuals. 1. (a)
  One or more banking organizations, foundations, labor unions, employers'
  associations,   veterans'   organizations,    colleges,    universities,
  educational  institutions,  child  care institutions, hospitals, medical
  research institutes, insurance companies, trustees, fiduciaries  or  any
  combination of the foregoing, shall have the power to organize a company
  pursuant  to the provisions of this article, and to purchase for cash or
  to receive and hold in exchange for property, and to own the bonds of  a
  company  and  to  invest,  singly  or  jointly,  or  with the state or a
  municipality or the New York state housing finance  agency  or  the  New
  York  city  housing development corporation in a bond or note and single
  participating mortgage, or in separate bonds or notes and mortgages,  in
  an  amount  not greater than ninety-five per centum of the total project
  cost in the case  of  a  mutual  company,  urban  rental  company  or  a
  non-profit  company  incorporated  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of the
  not-for-profit corporation law and  this  article  for  the  purpose  of
  providing housing for staff members, employees or students of a college,
  university,  child  care  institution,  or  hospital and their immediate
  families and in the case of a non-profit company  incorporated  pursuant
  to  the  not-for-profit corporation law and this article for the purpose
  of providing housing for aged persons of low income or in the case of  a
  low  income  non-profit  housing  company  such  investment shall not be
  greater  than  the  total  project  cost.  Where  one  or  more  banking
  organizations,   foundations,  labor  unions,  employers'  associations,
  veterans'    organizations,    colleges,    universities,    educational
  institutions,  child  care  institutions,  hospitals,  medical  research
  institutes, insurance companies, trustees, fiduciaries, or the state  or
  a  municipality  or the New York state housing finance agency or the New
  York city housing development corporation, shall participate in  a  loan
  to  a  company secured by a single participating mortgage or by separate
  mortgages, the interest of each shall have equal priority as to lien  in
  proportion to the amount of loan so secured, but need not be equal as to
  interest  rate,  time  or  rate  of  amortization  or otherwise. Banking
  organizations,  foundations,  labor  unions,  employers'   associations,
  veterans'    organizations,    colleges,    universities,    educational
  institutions,  child  care  institutions,  hospitals,  medical  research
  institutes,   insurance   companies,  trustees,  fiduciaries  or  groups
  thereof, may exercise any such power on such conditions, however, as  to
  banking  organizations  and as to insurance companies only to the extent
  and  upon  such  conditions  as  may  be   authorized   by   the   state
  superintendent  of  financial services. As used in this subdivision, the
  terms "trustees"  and  "fiduciaries"  shall  include  any  fiduciary  or
  fiduciaries   holding  funds  for  investment,  and  the  term  "banking
  organizations" shall have the same meaning as in subdivision  eleven  of
  section two of the banking law.
    (b)   Notwithstanding   the   provisions  of  paragraph  (a)  of  this
  subdivision or of any general, special or local law, for the purpose  of
  completing   the  financing  of  project  cost,  in  the  event  that  a
  municipality has made or contracted to make a loan to a company or to  a
  public benefit corporation to provide moneys to finance the project cost
  of  a  project (1) the construction of which commenced prior to December
  first, nineteen hundred seventy-five,  (2)  for  which  a  temporary  or
  permanent  certificate  of  occupancy  was  not  issued prior to January
  first, nineteen hundred seventy-three, and (3) which is  assisted  by  a
  contract  with  the  secretary  of  housing and urban development of the
  United States pursuant to section two hundred thirty-six of the national
  housing act, as amended, covering all dwelling  units  therein,  one  or
  more   banking  organizations  as  defined  in  paragraph  (a)  of  this


 subdivision,  foundations,  labor  unions,  credit  unions,   employers'
  associations,    veterans'    organizations,   colleges,   universities,
  educational institutions, child care  institutions,  hospitals,  medical
  research  institutes,  insurance  companies,  trustees or fiduciaries as
  defined in paragraph (a) of this subdivision, trustees  of  pension  and
  retirement  funds  and systems, corporations, partnerships, individuals,
  or other entities or any combination of the  foregoing  shall  have  the
  power  to  participate in such loan or make or participate in a new loan
  secured by a bond or note and a single  participating  mortgage,  or  by
  separate  bonds or notes and separate mortgages, or to invest, singly or
  jointly,  with  the  municipality  in  a  bond  or   note   and   single
  participating mortgage or in separate bonds or notes and mortgages, upon
  such  terms and conditions as may be approved by the supervising agency,
  including but not limited to provisions providing that (i) priority  may
  be given to the payment of the principal of and interest on that portion
  of  the mortgage indebtedness attributable to participation in a loan or
  an investment made by one or more of  such  entities  or  organizations,
  (ii)  the  interest  of the municipality created as a result of making a
  mortgage loan may be subordinated to the interest that one  or  more  of
  such  organizations  or  entities  may  have  upon such participation or
  investment, (iii) the  interest  of  each  upon  such  participation  or
  investment  need not be of equal priority as to lien, nor be equal as to
  interest rate, time or rate of amortization  of  principal  or  time  of
  payment of interest, or otherwise, provided, however, that the aggregate
  amount  of  the  loan or loans or investment made by one or more of such
  organizations or entities shall not exceed thirty per  centum  of  total
  project cost and, further provided that the aggregate amount of the loan
  or  loans  to  a  company  does  not exceed such amount as is authorized
  pursuant to paragraph (a) of  this  subdivision.  All  or  part  of  the
  proceeds  of such participation or investment pursuant to this paragraph
  (b)  may  be  applied  to  reduce  or  prepay  the  loan  made  by   the
  municipality.  The  provisions  of  subdivisions one and five of section
  twenty-six of this article shall not apply to such  participation  in  a
  loan  or  investment  pursuant  to  this  paragraph (b) if undertaken in
  connection with a project theretofore approved pursuant to said  section
  twenty-six.
    Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  this  article or of any general,
  special or local law, in the event that a municipality has made  a  loan
  pursuant  to  this  article  prior to any participation pursuant to this
  paragraph, the  supervising  agency  shall  have  the  power,  upon  the
  mortgagor's  consent, to modify the terms and conditions of the original
  bond or bonds or note or notes and  mortgage  and  any  other  documents
  executed in connection with such initial loan, as the supervising agency
  may  deem  necessary  or  desirable,  to provide for such participation,
  including but not limited to  modification  of  the  rate  and  time  of
  payment  of  the interest on the initial loan or rate of amortization of
  principal thereof, and provision for the additional borrowing  cost,  if
  any,   with  respect  to  that  portion  of  the  mortgage  indebtedness
  attributable to such participation, provided, that except to the  extent
  of any increase in the maximum principal amount of the original mortgage
  loan,  with  regard  to  a  company  that  has  obtained  a temporary or
  permanent certificate of occupancy for part or all of a project financed
  by a loan pursuant to this article before such participation in  a  loan
  or investment is made, the sum of the payments of interest and principal
  on  the mortgage loan or loans which the company is obligated to make in
  any year as a result of such modification and participation in a loan or
  investment made pursuant to this paragraph, shall not exceed the sum  of
  the payments of interest and principal that such company would have been


 obligated  to  make  in  such  year  under  the  original  mortgage loan
  agreement if the project had been  fully  financed  under  the  original
  mortgage loan agreement by the municipality at an interest rate equal to
  the maximum rate per annum prescribed by the superintendent of financial
  services  pursuant  to  section  fourteen-a  of  the  banking  law as of
  December nineteenth, nineteen hundred seventy-five, or such higher  rate
  of  interest  as  the  secretary of housing and urban development of the
  United States shall approve pursuant to an agreement  to  make  interest
  reduction  payments  pursuant  to  section two hundred thirty-six of the
  national housing act, as amended, with respect to such project and  that
  the  rental  or carrying charges in such projects shall not be increased
  as a result of such participation in a loan or  investment  and  further
  provided,   that   the  company  shall  not  seek  or  accept  from  the
  municipality any subsidy, direct or  indirect,  excluding  existing  tax
  exemption, to offset any increased borrowing costs, if any.
    (c)  Where  the  state  or  a municipality shall join with one or more
  organizations of the  kind  hereinabove  mentioned,  in  making  a  loan
  secured by a single participating mortgage or by separate mortgages, the
  state  or  a  municipality  is  authorized,  through the commissioner of
  housing, or the  supervising  agency,  as  the  case  may  be,  to  make
  provision, either in the mortgage or mortgages or by separate agreement,
  for  the  performance  of  such services as are generally performed by a
  banking institution or insurance company which itself owns and  holds  a
  mortgage  or  by  a trustee under a trust mortgage. The commissioner and
  the supervising agency are hereby authorized to act  as  trustee  or  to
  consent  to  the  appointment  of  a  banking institution to act in such
  capacity. Any agreement made by the commissioner  under  this  provision
  shall  be  subject  to  the  approval  by  the state comptroller and the
  attorney general as to form.
    (d) In connection with any  participation  in  a  loan  or  investment
  pursuant  to  paragraph  (b)  of this subdivision the municipality shall
  have the power to assign or pledge, in whole or in part, to one or  more
  of  the  organizations or entities participating in such loan its right,
  title and interest in and to any mortgage held pursuant to this  article
  and  any contract or arrangement for the payment of subsidy with respect
  to such loan and the right to receive and apply  to  repayment  of  such
  loan  and  the interest thereon any payments made under such mortgage or
  under such contract or arrangement.
    2. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any banking institution
  or insurance company or a group thereof operating a company,  or  owning
  all  of  the bonds of a company may exercise all the powers conferred by
  this section and may enter into contracts contemplated by  this  article
  and  agree  with  the  commissioner  not  to  sell, assign, or otherwise
  transfer such project or bonds or bond and mortgage or interest  therein
  of  such  company  provided  for  pursuant  to  this article without the
  consent of the commissioner.




   §   16.   Limited-profit  housing  companies;  partnership  relations.
  Notwithstanding any provisions in this  article  to  the  contrary,  but
  subject  to such regulations as may be prescribed by the commissioner or
  the supervising agency, as the case may be:
    1. (a) Any company  may  be  a  partner  (general  or  limited)  in  a
  partnership  (general  or  limited)  formed for the purpose of providing
  such company with capital. Any  company  incorporated  pursuant  to  the
  provisions  of this article may, with the consent of the commissioner or
  the supervising agency as the case may be, become a partner (general  or
  limited)  in  a partnership (general or limited) upon the consent of the
  company to the refinancing of its original mortgage loan by  a  mortgage
  loan  insured  by  the Federal government; such a partnership shall have
  the same powers and duties as provided by this article as a  partnership
  formed for the purpose of providing a company with capital.
    (b)  Any  partner  (general or limited) of any partnership (general or
  limited) in which a company is a partner (general or limited) may be the
  owner or holder of any shares, bonds, income debentures, notes or  other
  securities of such company.
    (c)  Any  company  which is a partner (general or limited) in any such
  partnership (general or limited) may exercise all the rights and  powers
  and  shall  be subject to all the duties and obligations of a company in
  accordance with this article.
    2. The capital structure of a company which is a partner  (general  or
  limited)  in  a  partnership  (general  or  limited)  formed pursuant to
  paragraph  (a)  of  subdivision  one  of  section  sixteen  may  include
  withdrawals from the capital of such a partnership (general or limited).
    The   provisions  of  this  article  relating  to  shares  and  income
  debentures shall be deemed to include withdrawals from the capital of  a
  partnership  (general  or  limited)  of  which  a  company  is a partner
  (general or limited).
    3. For the purposes of this section, the term partner shall be  deemed
  to  include  a  member  of  a  limited  liability  company, and the term
  partnership shall be deemed to  include  a  limited  liability  company,
  provided  there  is  disclosure  of the identity of the managing member,
  including the identity of the natural person who is responsible for  the
  housing  development.  Notwithstanding  any provision of this section to
  the contrary, any change in general partner of a partnership or managing
  member of a limited liability company shall be  subject  to  the  prior,
  written approval of the commissioner or supervising agency.




   § 17. Powers. 1. Subject to the limitations of this article, a company
  heretofore  or  hereafter  organized  under  this chapter shall have the
  powers and be subject to  the  limitations  contained  in  the  business
  corporation  law  or the not-for-profit corporation law, as the case may
  be, and shall have the following additional specific powers:
    (a) To make and execute contracts and other instruments  necessary  or
  convenient in the exercise of its powers;
    (b)  To  acquire  or  contract  to  acquire  from  any  person,  firm,
  corporation, municipality, federal or state agency, by grant,  purchase,
  condemnation  or otherwise, leaseholds, real, personal or mixed property
  or any interest  therein,  and  to  sell,  assign,  exchange,  transfer,
  mortgage or encumber the same;
    (c)  To  own,  hold,  clear  and improve, leasehold, real, personal or
  mixed property or any interest therein;
    (d) To construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate, improve, alter or  repair
  or provide for the construction, reconstruction, improvement, alteration
  or repair of any project;
    (e) To lease or rent any of the housing or other accommodations or any
  of  the  lands,  buildings,  structures  or  facilities  embraced in any
  project and establish and revise the rents or charges  therefor;  or  to
  purchase  or  lease  a  project  or  a  part  thereof from an authority,
  pursuant to the provisions of section fifty-eight or article twelve-b of
  this chapter.
    (f) To arrange or contract  with  a  municipality  for  the  planning,
  replanning,  opening,  grading  or  closing of streets, roads, roadways,
  alleys or other places or for the furnishing of facilities  or  for  the
  acquisition  by a municipality of property or property rights or for the
  furnishing of property or services in connection with a project;
    (g) To insure  or  provide  for  the  insurance  of  its  property  or
  operations  as  required  by law and also against such other risks as it
  may deem advisable;
    (h) To limit by contract the exercise of any of its powers;
    (i) To invest any funds held in reserves  or  sinking  funds,  or  any
  funds  not required for immediate disbursement in property or securities
  in which savings  banks  may  legally  invest  funds  subject  to  their
  control;
    (j) To sue and be sued;
    (k) To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure;
    (l)  To make and from time to time amend and repeal by-laws, rules and
  regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this article;
    (m) To sell, lease, or otherwise convey all or any part of  a  project
  to  an  authority upon such terms and conditions as shall have the prior
  approval of the commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case  may
  be;
    (n)  A  non-profit company incorporated pursuant to the not-for-profit
  corporation law and this article for the purpose  of  providing  housing
  and auxiliary facilities for staff members, employees or students of any
  college,   university,   hospital,  child  care  institution  and  their
  immediate families; for aged or handicapped persons of low income or for
  any one of the above purposes, may, with the prior  written  consent  of
  the  commissioner  or  the supervising agency, as the case may be, lease
  its  project  or  any  part  thereof  to  any  colleges,   universities,
  hospitals,  child  care  institutions  or not-for-profit corporations. A
  lessee of a project may sublease all or  any  part  of  the  project  to
  institutions  and not-for-profit corporations which would be an eligible
  sponsor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and to staff members,
  employees, and students of any college, university, hospital, child care
  institution, and to aged and handicapped  persons  of  low  income.  Any


 property  so  leased or subleased shall remain subject to the provisions
  of this article and to the rules and regulations of the commissioner, or
  supervising agency, as the case may be.  A  lease  or  sublease  of  the
  entire project may provide for the assumption by the lessee or sublessee
  of the management and control of the project, and all of the obligations
  thereof,  as well as the right to collect all revenues accruing thereto.
  In any event, the lessee shall pay rental in an amount at least equal to
  the interest and amortization due upon the mortgage of the  property  so
  leased.
    (o) To lease to any authority, or to a municipality in connection with
  any  federally-aided  program  to  provide  dwelling  accommodations for
  persons of low income, one or more dwelling units in a project upon such
  terms and conditions as shall have the prior  written  approval  of  the
  commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case may be.
    (p)  To  lease, with or without an option to purchase, all or any part
  of a project to any person, firm,  partnership,  trust  or  corporation,
  subject  to  the  prior  written  consent  of  the  commissioner  or the
  supervising agency, as the case may be. Any  property  so  leased  shall
  remain  subject  to  the provisions of this article and to the rules and
  regulations of the commissioner or the supervising agency, as  the  case
  may  be.  Such lease may provide for the assumption by the lessee of the
  management and control of the project, as  well  as  the  right  of  the
  lessee to collect all revenues accruing thereto.
    To  do  all  other  things  necessary  or  convenient to carry out its
  powers.
    2. A company shall file  with  the  commissioner  or  the  supervising
  agency,  as  the  case may be, a copy of any by-laws, rules, regulations
  and amendments thereto adopted by it from  time  to  time,  which  shall
  become effective upon approval by the commissioner or by the supervising
  agency;  provided,  however, that if the commissioner or the supervising
  agency shall fail to approve or disapprove such proposed by-laws  within
  three months after such filing, such by-laws shall become effective upon
  the  expiration  of  such  three  month  period.  These  by-laws, rules,
  regulations and amendments shall contain such provisions relating to the
  management of its business, the regulation of its affairs,  the  calling
  of  meetings,  the manner of selection of officers and trustees and such
  other provisions as may be reasonable and necessary.
    3. Notwithstanding the provisions of any law, general  or  special,  a
  mutual  company  may,  with  the  approval  of  the  commissioner or the
  supervising agency, as the case may be,  require  a  standard  form  and
  procedure  for  the casting of proxies or absentee ballots in any matter
  requiring a shareholder vote.
    4. Notwithstanding the provisions of any law, general  or  special,  a
  board  of  directors of a mutual housing company created pursuant to the
  provisions of this article shall:
    (a) Hold at least four meetings of the board  of  directors  annually.
  Such  meetings  shall  be open to all shareholders and residents, except
  that they may include executive sessions open only to directors for  the
  sole  purpose  of discussing confidential personnel issues, legal advice
  and counsel from an attorney to whom the mutual  housing  company  is  a
  client,  or  confidential  issues  affecting  individual shareholders or
  residents, or contract negotiation. Any such board of directors meetings
  held in addition to the minimum number  of  four  as  required  by  this
  section  shall be open to shareholders and residents, and subject to the
  aforementioned exception regarding executive sessions.
    (b) Maintain a record of any vote  on  a  resolution  of  such  board,
  including specification of how each director voted. Such record shall be
  a  matter  of public record which will be made available as a paper copy


 at the request of a shareholder and will also be  posted  on  a  website
  that  is  accessible  by  all  shareholders  maintained  by the board of
  directors, provided however, that there may be redactions to the  extent
  minutes would reflect the discussions held in executive session.
    (c)  Promptly  post  on  a  website  available to all shareholders and
  maintained by the board of directors to communicate  with  shareholders,
  (i) any request by the mutual housing company to the commissioner or the
  supervising  agency,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  any final resolution
  regarding such  request,  when  the  request  relates  to  a  change  in
  regulations,  a  change  in  its real estate taxation, in a refinancing,
  financing being offered by the commissioner, supervising agency, or  any
  other  agency  or,  a  proposed dissolution and reconstitution, (ii) any
  deficiency letters issued by the office of the attorney general  to  the
  mutual  housing  company  regarding an offering plan for dissolution and
  reconstitution of the mutual housing  company,  any  deficiency  letters
  issued  by  the  office  of  the  attorney general to the mutual housing
  company regarding a proxy statement or any other documents permitted  by
  the  attorney  general  instead  of  such  offering plan, and any of the
  mutual housing company's resubmissions of such offering  plan  or  proxy
  statement  or  any  other  documents  permitted  by the attorney general
  instead of such offering plan in response  to  such  deficiency  letters
  issued  by  the  office  of  the attorney general, or (iii) any offer of
  financing from the commissioner, supervising agency, or any other agency
  to the mutual housing company.
    5. (a) No mutual housing company shall interfere with the right  of  a
  shareholder  or  tenant  to  form,  join  or  participate  in the lawful
  activities of any group,  committee  or  other  organization  formed  to
  protect  the  rights  of  shareholders and tenants; nor shall any mutual
  housing company harass, punish,  penalize,  diminish,  or  withhold  any
  right,  benefit  or  privilege  of  a  shareholder or tenant under their
  proprietary lease or tenancy for exercising such right.
    (b)  Shareholder  and/or  tenants'   groups,   committees   or   other
  shareholder  and/or  tenants' organizations shall have the right to meet
  without being required to pay a fee in  any  location  on  the  premises
  including  a community or social room where use is normally subject to a
  fee which is devoted to  the  common  use  of  all  shareholders  and/or
  tenants   in   a  peaceful  manner,  at  reasonable  hours  and  without
  obstructing access to  the  premises  or  facilities.  Nothing  in  this
  subdivision  shall  be construed to limit or impede the authority of the
  board of directors to act on behalf of the  mutual  housing  company  or
  regulation by the commissioner or supervising agency with respect to the
  recognition  of  a  tenant group representing all tenants, or to require
  the continued recognition of  a  cooperators'  advisory  council  formed
  pursuant to subdivision one of section thirty-two-a of this article when
  superseded by the election of a board of directors.




   §  18. Designation of and service of process on secretary of state and
  registered agent. The provisions of sections three hundred  four,  three
  hundred five and three hundred six of the business corporation law shall
  apply  to  companies  heretofore  or hereafter organized pursuant to the
  provisions of this article.




   § 19. Consideration for issuance of stock, bonds or income debentures.
  No  company  shall  issue  stock, bonds, or income debentures except for
  money or property actually received for the use and lawful  purposes  of
  the  company,  provided,  however, that a mutual company may issue stock
  for home owners purchase notes if the purchase transaction has  received
  the   written   endorsement  of  the  commissioner  in  accordance  with
  supplementary rules and regulations of the  commissioner  made  therefor
  and  if at least two hundred dollars in money or property is received by
  such company toward the issuance of  such  stock.  No  stock,  bonds  or
  income  debentures  shall be issued for property except upon a valuation
  approved by the supervising agency or by the commissioner, as  the  case
  may  be, and such valuations shall be used in computing the estimated or
  actual project cost.




   §  20. Mortgages, mortgage bonds and notes. 1. Any company, subject to
  the approval of the commissioner or of the supervising  agency,  as  the
  case  may  be, may borrow funds and secure the repayment thereof by bond
  or note and mortgage or by an issue of bonds under a trust indenture.
    2. Each loan made to a company shall relate to one or  more  specified
  projects  and  shall  be  secured  by  a  mortgage  upon all of the real
  property of which the project or projects, to which  the  loan  relates,
  consists,  and  upon  all  fixtures  and  articles  of personal property
  attached to or used in connection with the operation of such project  or
  projects.  Such  mortgages may contain such other clauses and provisions
  as shall be approved by the commissioner, or the supervising agency,  as
  the  case  may  be, including the right to assignment of rents and entry
  into possession in case of default; but the operation of such project or
  projects, in the event of such entry by a mortgagee or receiver,  except
  in  the  case  of  a  mortgage  loan  insured  or  held  by  the federal
  government,  shall  be  subject  to  regulations  promulgated   by   the
  commissioner  or the supervising agency. Provisions for the amortization
  of the mortgage indebtedness  and  residual  indebtedness  of  companies
  formed  under  this  article  shall  be  subject  to the approval of the
  commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case may be. In the  case
  of  an instrument or instruments evidencing residual indebtedness issued
  pursuant to section  twenty-three-a  or  section  forty-four-b  of  this
  chapter,  the principal amount of such instrument or instruments and the
  interest thereon, if any, shall be repaid over  a  period  of  time  not
  exceeding  the  term over which the mortgage loan insured by the federal
  government is to be repaid, plus ten years, which period of  time  shall
  commence  at  such  time  as  the commissioner or the supervising agency
  shall approve, provided, however, that such period  of  time  shall  not
  expire  more  than  fifteen years after the mortgage loan insured by the
  federal government has been satisfied.




   §   21.   Capital  structure.  The  capital  structure  of  a  company
  undertaking a project and the proportionate amount of the  project  cost
  to  be  represented  by  mortgages,  bonds, notes, income debentures and
  shares shall be subject to the approval of the  commissioner  except  as
  otherwise   provided   in   section   twenty-three  with  respect  to  a
  municipally-aided project. The shares and income debentures issued by  a
  mutual  company or urban rental company, other than a non-profit company
  incorporated  pursuant  to  the   provisions   of   the   not-for-profit
  corporation  law  and  this article for the purpose of providing housing
  for staff members, employees  or  students  of  a  college,  university,
  hospital  or  child care institution and their immediate families or for
  aged  or  handicapped  persons  of  low  income,  and   other   than   a
  municipally-aided  non-profit  company  or  a  municipally-aided  mutual
  company, and other than a low income non-profit housing  company,  shall
  not  be  less than the total of five per centum of the project cost. The
  shares, bonds or notes, income debentures  and  mortgages  covering  any
  project shall not exceed the actual project cost.
    The  provisions  of  this  section  with  respect to the proportionate
  amount of the project cost to be represented by mortgages, bonds, notes,
  income debentures and shares shall not  be  applicable  to  any  housing
  company  project,  if  funds made available by the federal government or
  any agency or instrumentality thereof are used in financing the project,
  in whole or in part, or if a mortgage  or  mortgage  bonds  issued  with
  respect  to  such  project  are insured by the federal government or any
  agency or instrumentality thereof.




   §  22.  State  loans. 1. The commissioner may enter into contracts for
  loans to a company.  All such contracts shall be subject to approval  by
  the state comptroller and by the attorney general as to form.
    2.  Loans  by  the  state  under such a contract shall be secured by a
  first mortgage lien, and no such loan shall be made in an amount greater
  than ninety-five per centum of the total project cost in the case  of  a
  mutual   company,   urban   rental   company  or  a  non-profit  company
  incorporated  pursuant  to  the   provisions   of   the   not-for-profit
  corporation  law  and  this article for the purpose of providing housing
  for staff members, employees  or  students  of  a  college,  university,
  hospital  or  child care institution and their immediate families and in
  the  case  of  a  non-profit  company  incorporated  pursuant   to   the
  not-for-profit  corporation  law  and  this  article  for the purpose of
  providing housing for aged or handicapped persons of low  income  or  in
  the case of a low income non-profit housing company such loans shall not
  be  made  in an amount greater than the total project cost. In case of a
  loan in an amount greater than  ninety-five  per  centum  of  the  total
  project   cost,   the   commissioner   may  in  his  discretion  require
  satisfactory  independent  guarantees  that  the  loan  will  be  repaid
  according  to  the  terms  of  the  company's bond or note and mortgage.
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, if the company proposes  to
  sell  or convey any part or parts of the mortgaged premises prior to the
  sale by the state of the definitive bonds providing the  funds  for  the
  state  loan,  the  comptroller,  upon the application of the company and
  with the prior written consent of the commissioner, may release from the
  first mortgage lien any part or parts  of  the  mortgaged  premises  not
  acquired through condemnation and not required for the project, provided
  that  any  net proceeds from the sale or conveyance of the said property
  will be held by the  company  for  the  sole  purpose  of  reducing,  in
  accordance  with  the  requirements of the commissioner and comptroller,
  the principal amount of the state loan outstanding, and provided further
  that the unpaid principal amount of the state loan then outstanding,  as
  it  may be reduced by the net proceeds, if any, derived from the sale or
  conveyance, would not be in  an  amount  greater  than  ninety-five  per
  centum of the total project cost and in the case of a non-profit company
  incorporated   pursuant   to   the   provisions  of  the  not-for-profit
  corporation law and this article for the purpose  of  providing  housing
  for  aged  or  handicapped persons of low income or in the case of a low
  income non-profit housing company such amount shall not be greater  than
  the  total  project  cost. The comptroller shall execute such release in
  the usual form, which, when  acknowledged,  shall  be  recorded  by  the
  county  clerk and a minute thereof made upon a margin of the mortgage. A
  company may, with the prior written consent  of  the  commissioner,  and
  subject  to  the approval of the state comptroller and to the provisions
  of any contract with noteholders and bondholders, lease any property not
  acquired through condemnation and not required for the project, and  may
  apply  the  income  of  such  lease  to any use authorized for any other
  rental income. Such lease shall  contain  restrictions  to  protect  and
  preserve the project.
    3.  The commissioner may make temporary loans or advances to a company
  in anticipation of any permanent loans and no such  temporary  loans  or
  advances  shall  be  deemed  to  constitute part of such permanent loans
  unless such temporary loans or  advances  have  been  made  out  of  the
  proceeds  of  definitive  housing  bonds  sold  by the state pursuant to
  chapters four hundred seven of the laws of nineteen  hundred  fifty-five
  and nine hundred fifty-six of the laws of nineteen hundred fifty-eight.
    4.  The state shall have the power to invest jointly with the New York
  state housing finance agency in a bond or note and single  participating


 mortgage,  or  in  separate  bonds  or  notes and mortgages of a company
  organized pursuant to the provisions of this article.  The  interest  of
  each shall have equal priority as to lien in proportion to the amount of
  loan so secured, but need not be equal as to interest rate, time or rate
  of  amortization  or  otherwise.  In  such a case the state, through the
  commissioner of housing, is authorized to make provision, either in  the
  mortgage  or  mortgages or by separate agreement, for the performance of
  such services as are generally performed by the New York  state  housing
  finance  agency itself owning and holding a mortgage. Any agreement made
  by the commissioner under this  subdivision  shall  be  subject  to  the
  approval of the state comptroller and the attorney general as to form.




   §  22-a.  Redevelopment  loans.  Notwithstanding any provision of this
  article to  the  contrary,  where  a  state-aided  project  undergoes  a
  comprehensive  redevelopment  plan,  the commissioner may approve a loan
  and encumbrance of such project in an amount in excess of actual project
  cost within the meaning of section twenty-one of this article,  provided
  that  such amount represents cost of capital improvements, redevelopment
  or acquisition by a new owner,  any  consequent  rent  increase  is  not
  unduly  burdensome  to  the  tenants,  and  the  company  enters into an
  agreement to remain subject to the provisions  of  this  article  for  a
  period  of no less than an additional fifteen years from issuance of the
  loan and encumbrance.




   §  22-b.  Loans  for  state-aided limited-profit housing companies. 1.
  Notwithstanding any provision of  this  article  to  the  contrary,  the
  commissioner  may  for  a  period of one year from the effective date of
  this act approve a loan and encumbrance in excess of the actual  project
  cost  of a state-aided project comprising more than five thousand rental
  units, provided that: (a) the rents paid  by  the  tenants  may  not  be
  increased to pay for any consequent increase in indebtedness that is not
  attributable  to  project cost; (b) the company enters into an agreement
  to continue to remain subject to the provisions of this  article  for  a
  period  of  no less than an additional thirty years from issuance of the
  loan and encumbrance; and (c) the greater of twenty-five percent of  the
  amount  of  such  loan  which  exceeds such actual project cost or forty
  million dollars of the proceeds  of  such  loan  must  be  dedicated  to
  capital improvements to existing structures and facilities.
    2.  Any company that enters into a loan pursuant to subdivision one of
  this section shall create a plan within one year of the approval of  the
  loan.  The  plan  shall include details of all capital improvements that
  will occur as a result of the loan.  Such  company  shall  obligate  the
  funds  dedicated  to  the capital improvements within three years of the
  approval of the loan. Such company shall  submit  a  copy  of  the  plan
  within  one  year  of the approval of the loan and within three years of
  the approval of the loan, a report that details  the  use  of  the  loan
  funds  to  the governor, the commissioner of the division of housing and
  community renewal, the temporary president of the senate, the speaker of
  the assembly, the minority leader of the senate, the minority leader  of
  the  assembly,  the  chair of the senate finance committee, the chair of
  the assembly ways and means committee, the chair of the senate  housing,
  construction,  and community development committee, and the chair of the
  assembly housing committee.
    3. Such company shall participate in bimonthly meetings  with  elected
  officials  and  the  members  of the project's residents' association or
  other tenant organization that represents the majority of tenants in the
  project in order to hear any advice or comments on the implementation of
  the plan. The meetings shall occur on a regular basis until all  of  the
  money  set-aside  for  capital  improvements  in subdivision one of this
  section has been spent.




   §   23.   Municipal   loans  and  municipally  aided  projects.  1.  A
  municipality may make or contract to make loans to a  company  or  to  a
  public   benefit   corporation  providing  housing  for  staff  members,
  employees or students of a college, university, hospital or  child  care
  institutions  and  their  immediate families in an amount not to exceed,
  except in the case of a non-profit company incorporated pursuant to  the
  provisions  of  the  not-for-profit corporation law and this article for
  the purpose of providing housing for aged or handicapped persons of  low
  income,  and  except  in  the  case  of  a  company  or  public  benefit
  corporations providing housing for staff members, employees or  students
  of  a  college, university, hospital or child care institution and their
  immediate families, and  except  in  the  case  of  a  municipally-aided
  non-profit  company or of a municipally-aided mutual company, and except
  in the case of a low income non-profit housing company, ninety-five  per
  centum  of the project cost to be secured, except as provided in section
  fifteen of this article, by a first mortgage lien and may make temporary
  loans or advances to a company in anticipation of a permanent  municipal
  loan.  In  the case of a non-profit company incorporated pursuant to the
  provisions of the not-for-profit corporation law and  this  article  for
  the  purpose of providing housing for aged or handicapped persons of low
  income and in the case of  a  company  or  public  benefit  corporations
  providing housing for staff members, employees or students of a college,
  university,  hospital  or  child  care  institution  and their immediate
  families, and in the case of a municipally-aided non-profit  company  or
  of  a  municipally-aided mutual company, and in the case of a low income
  non-profit housing company, such loans may not exceed the total  project
  cost.  Notwithstanding  the foregoing, such loans to a municipally-aided
  mutual company to assist in financing the acquisition of a  building  by
  residents  thereof  may not exceed ninety-five per centum of the project
  cost. Such mortgage, or bonds or notes secured thereby and such contract
  may  contain  such  terms  and  conditions  not  inconsistent  with  the
  provisions  of  this  article  as  the  local  legislative body may deem
  necessary or desirable to secure repayment of  its  loan,  the  interest
  thereon and other charges in connection therewith. In the case of a loan
  in  an  amount  greater than ninety-five per centum of the total project
  cost the supervising agency may in its discretion  require  satisfactory
  independent  guarantees  that  the  loan will be repaid according to the
  terms of the company's bond or note and mortgage.
    1-a. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article or any  other
  law, any such loan may be made to a company at such rate of interest, if
  any,  as  the  local legislative body may deem necessary or desirable to
  carry out the policy and purposes of this article.
    2. The supervising agency shall have  exclusive  power  to  promulgate
  such   supplementary   rules   and   regulations   with   respect  to  a
  municipally-aided project and a company formed to undertake  or  operate
  any  such  project,  as  may be necessary to carry out the provisions of
  this article. No assignment for collateral or pledge by  a  municipality
  of  its mortgage interest in a municipally-aided project to the state or
  to any political subdivision thereof shall either affect  the  power  of
  the  supervising  agency granted herein or authorize the commissioner to
  exercise any powers not otherwise granted in this article.
    3. Prior to the date of approval by the local legislative body of  the
  contract  between  a  municipality and a company for a municipally aided
  project, the total estimated project cost of such project, the estimated
  capital requirements of the company formed to undertake or operate  such
  project,   the   initial   capital  structure  of  such  company  and  a
  modification of any of the foregoing items,  shall  be  subject  to  the
  approval   of   the   supervising   agency  and  the  commissioner.  Any


 modification of any of the foregoing  items  made  after  such  date  of
  approval  of the contract shall be subject solely to the approval of the
  supervising agency. If after such date of approval of the contract,  any
  change is made in such contract which requires the approval of the local
  legislative  body,  such  change  shall  also  be  subject  to the prior
  approval of the commissioner.
    4. The commissioner shall  have  the  power,  prior  to  the  date  of
  approval  by  the local legislative body of a contract between a company
  and the municipality for a municipally aided  project,  to  approve  the
  proposed  maximum average of the rentals to be charged for the dwellings
  in the project,  or  any  modifications  thereof.  After  such  date  of
  approval  of  the contract, the supervising agency shall have sole power
  to increase or reduce the rental rate for the dwellings in  the  project
  in  the  manner prescribed by section thirty-one of this article for the
  variance of the rental rates. However, if a variance in such rental rate
  is made necessary because of a change in the project which requires  the
  approval  of  the  local  legislative  body,  the  prior approval by the
  commissioner of such variance of the rental rate shall also be obtained.
    5. The commissioner and the supervising agency shall  each  have  full
  power to investigate into and order a company undertaking or operating a
  municipally  aided  project  to  furnish such reports and information as
  each may require concerning  the  planning,  construction,  acquisition,
  rehabilitation, management or operation of the project.
    6.  The  commissioner  shall  have  the  power to audit the books of a
  company undertaking or operating a municipally aided project  solely  as
  to  the  legality  of  the  expenditures and to disallow any expenditure
  which the commissioner shall find has been made in violation of  law  or
  any  rule  or  regulation  duly  issued  pursuant  to  this article. The
  supervising agency shall have the full power to audit the books  of  any
  such  company  as  to  the  legality, reasonableness or necessity of its
  expenditures. Any expenditure disallowed  by  the  commissioner  or  the
  supervising  agency  on  such  audits  shall  not  be  included  in  any
  construction, management or  operating  costs  in  connection  with  any
  application  to  increase  or  reduce the rents or carrying charges in a
  project.
    7. (a) At the direction of the supervising agency,  with  the  consent
  and  approval  of  the mayor the municipality shall establish and keep a
  separate fund known as the limited-profit mortgage reserve fund for  the
  purposes  of  insuring  the municipality against any loss resulting from
  the  making  of  a  mortgage  loan,  temporary  loan  or  advance  to  a
  municipality-aided  project and to protect the municipality in the event
  of delinquency in the repayment of such mortgage loan, temporary loan or
  advance.
    (b) There shall be paid into such fund the portions of fees  allocated
  to  and  directed to be deposited in such fund by the supervising agency
  with  the  consent  and  approval  of  the  mayor  as  provided  for  in
  subdivision  seven of this section. In addition, there shall be credited
  to and deposited in such fund any  portion  of  the  unexpended  balance
  remaining in the housing fund as the supervising agency with the consent
  and  approval  of the mayor may determine to be in excess of the amounts
  needed to meet expenditures required to be paid from the housing fund.
    (c) The monies in the limited-profit mortgage reserve  fund  shall  be
  deposited  in one or more of the banks or trust companies designated, in
  the manner provided by  law,  as  depositories  of  the  funds  of  such
  municipal  corporation.  The comptroller or the chief fiscal officer may
  invest the monies in such fund in obligations specified in  paragraph  d
  of this subdivision. Any interest earned or capital gain realized on the
  money  so  deposited or invested shall accrue to and become part of such


 fund. The separate identity of such fund shall be maintained whether its
  assets consist of cash or investments or both.
    (d)  Monies  in  such fund may be invested (1) in special time deposit
  accounts in, or certificates of deposit  issued  by,  a  bank  or  trust
  company  located  and authorized to do business in this state, provided,
  however, that such time deposit account or certificate of deposit  shall
  be  payable  within  such  time  as  the  proceeds may be needed to meet
  expenditures for which such monies were obtained  and  provided  further
  that such time deposit account or certificate of deposit be secured by a
  pledge  of obligations of the United States of America or obligations of
  the state of New York  or  obligations  of  any  municipal  corporation,
  school district or district corporation of the state of New York; or (2)
  in obligations of the United States of America, obligations of the state
  of  New  York  or  obligations  of  the  municipal corporation which has
  established such mortgage insurance fund provided: (i) such  obligations
  are not tax exempt; (ii) such obligations shall be payable or redeemable
  at  the  option  of  the  owner within such times as the proceeds may be
  needed to meet  expenditures  for  purposes  for  which  the  monies  so
  invested were obtained, and (iii) such obligations, unless registered or
  inscribed  in  the  name  of  the  municipal  corporation for which such
  investment is made, shall be purchased through, delivered to and held in
  custody of a bank or trust company in this state and shall  be  sold  or
  presented  for  redemption or payment only by such bank or trust company
  upon written instructions from the comptroller or chief fiscal officer.
    (e)  An  expenditure  shall  be  made  from  such  fund  only  by   an
  authorization of the supervising agency with the consent and approval of
  the mayor and only for one or more of the following purposes:
    (i) Payment of expenses of establishing and administering the fund;
    (ii)  Payment  of a delinquent installment or installments of interest
  and principal due to the municipality under a mortgage  loan,  temporary
  loan or advance to a municipally-aided project;
    (iii) Payment of any loss sustained by the municipality as a result of
  the  making  of a loan, temporary loan or advance to a municipally-aided
  project, whether such loss consists of a  deficiency  upon  a  mortgage,
  foreclosure  sale  as authorized by sections thirty-four and ninety-four
  of this chapter or otherwise; except that in the event the  municipality
  acquires  title to the project, payment for any loss or deficiency shall
  be deferred until such time when the municipality shall dispose of title
  to the project; any such loss or deficiency shall be diminished  by  the
  municipality  to  the  extent  of the amount derived by the municipality
  from such disposition plus any  net  operating  income  derived  by  the
  municipality  during  its  period of ownership or less any net operating
  loss sustained by the municipality  during  such  period  and  less  any
  amount  of  interest  paid  by  the  municipality  to  retire any bonded
  indebtedness incurred in connection with the loan made to such project.
    (iv) Payment of all costs entailed in procuring mortgage insurance  in
  such  amounts,  and  from  such insurers as the supervising agency deems
  desirable to insure the municipality against any loss resulting from the
  making of a mortgage loan to a municipality-aided project.
    The  payment  from  such  fund  of  any  delinquent   installment   or
  installments  due  the  municipality  under  a  mortgage  as provided in
  subsection (ii) of this  paragraph  e  shall  not  be  deemed  either  a
  remission or waiver of the right to such installment or installments and
  such installment or installments shall continue to be due and payable to
  the municipality and shall be deposited, together with interest accrued,
  in the mortgage insurance fund when paid.
    (f)  The  comptroller  or  chief  fiscal officer shall keep a separate
  account for the mortgage insurance fund. Such account shall show:


   (i) The date and amount of each sum paid into the fund;
    (ii) The interest earned by the fund;
    (iii)  The  capital  gains  or  losses  resulting  from  the  sale  of
  investments of the fund;
    (iv) The interest or capital gains which have accrued to the fund;
    (v) The amount and date of each withdrawal from the fund;
    (vi) The assets of the fund indicating the cash balance therein and  a
  schedule of the amounts invested.
    The comptroller or chief fiscal officer shall render a detailed report
  of  the  operation  and condition of such fund to the supervising agency
  annually each fiscal year and at such other  times  as  the  supervising
  agency or the mayor may require.
    8.  Whenever  reference is made in this article to a municipal loan, a
  loan by a municipality, a loan from a municipality,  a  contract  for  a
  loan  between  a  municipality  and a company, or any similar term, with
  respect to the territorial limits of the city  of  New  York  such  term
  shall  be construed to refer to a loan made or to be made either by such
  municipality or by the New York city  housing  development  corporation,
  whichever is applicable.
    9.  The  city  of  New  York shall have the power to invest jointly or
  participate in a  loan  with  the  New  York  city  housing  development
  corporation  or  with one or more organizations or entities mentioned in
  section fifteen in a bond or note and single participating mortgage,  or
  in separate bonds or notes and separate mortgages of a company organized
  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  this  article  upon  such  terms  and
  conditions as are provided in said section fifteen of this article.
    10. A municipality with a population of less than one million may,  by
  action  of  its local legislative body concurred in by the commissioner,
  provide for the supervision  and  regulation  of  any  municipally-aided
  project and the company carrying out such project by the commissioner in
  lieu  of  the  supervising  agency. With respect to any such project and
  company, the commissioner shall have, from and after the effective  date
  of  such  action,  all  of the powers and duties of a supervising agency
  pursuant to this article. The company  shall  pay  to  the  commissioner
  fees,  as  prescribed  by  the  commissioner,  to  cover the expenses of
  examination, audit, and supervision of  the  company  and  the  project.
  Notwithstanding  any other provision of law, funds collected pursuant to
  such fees shall be deposited to the credit of the general fund.
    The provisions of subdivisions one and eight  of  this  section  shall
  apply  only to projects financed in whole or in part by a mortgage loan,
  temporary  loan  or  advance  by  a  municipality.  The  provisions   of
  subdivisions two, three, four, five, six and seven hereof shall apply to
  all  municipally-aided  projects including projects financed in whole or
  in part by a mortgage loan from the federal government or any agency  or
  instrumentality  thereof  or  by a mortgage or mortgage bonds insured by
  the federal government or any agency or instrumentality thereof.




   § 23-a. Mortgage modifications, evidence of pre-existing indebtedness.
  1.  Notwithstanding  the  provision  of any law, general or special, the
  supervising agency shall have the power to:
    (i) assign or pledge or contract to  assign  or  pledge  any  mortgage
  securing  a  loan,  including  any loan to finance the construction of a
  project, and any note or bond evidencing indebtedness thereon,  made  by
  the  municipality in accordance with the provisions of this article, and
  any  contract  or  arrangement,  including  any  subsidy   contract   or
  arrangement,  relating  to such mortgage, and the receipts to be derived
  from any of the foregoing, and may reacquire or accept and  contract  to
  reacquire   or  accept  any  such  mortgage,  note,  bond,  contract  or
  arrangement, including any mortgage, note, bond, contract or arrangement
  made in substitution thereof, and the receipts to be derived  therefrom,
  or
    (ii)  consent to and contract for the modification of any of the terms
  of a mortgage, and note  or  bond  secured  thereby,  made  pursuant  to
  section  twenty-three  of  this  chapter  for  the  purpose of obtaining
  insurance of such mortgage loan by the federal government  in  order  to
  refinance all or any part of the indebtedness evidenced by such mortgage
  and note or bond, or
    (iii)  satisfy  such mortgage in order to enable the company to obtain
  insurance by the federal government of a  mortgage  loan  made  for  the
  purpose  of refinancing all or any part of the indebtedness evidenced by
  such mortgage and note or bond.
    2. In the event that the existing mortgage loan is satisfied  pursuant
  to  this  section,  the  supervising  agency may in consideration of the
  issuance of such satisfaction accept a new mortgage  and  note  or  bond
  insured  by  the  federal  government  in an amount equal to the maximum
  principal amount of a mortgage loan the federal government  will  insure
  or  accept  the proceeds available to the housing company as a result of
  the refinancing.
    3. In the event that  there  is  residual  indebtedness,  the  housing
  company  shall  make  and  the  supervising  agency  shall  accept  such
  instruments evidencing such indebtedness  as  may  be  required  by  the
  supervising  agency as are consistent with the provisions of subdivision
  fifteen of section twelve of this chapter, in such form  and  upon  such
  terms as the supervising agency may approve. In the event that there are
  residual  receipts  obligations,  the  housing  company may make and the
  supervising agency may accept instruments evidencing such obligations in
  accordance with the provisions of subdivision sixteen of section  twelve
  of this chapter.
    4.  Notwithstanding  any  other  provisions  of  this  article  or any
  general, special or local law, where the supervising agency has made the
  findings required in subdivision one of section  twenty-six  or  section
  twenty-six-a   and  where  a  project  has  been  approved  pursuant  to
  subdivision five of section twenty-six of this chapter, the  supervising
  agency  may  make  or contract to make a mortgage loan or exercise other
  related powers pursuant to this section  or  section  twenty-three-b  or
  subdivision  twenty-two-a  of  section  six  hundred  fifty-four of this
  chapter without further findings by the supervising  agency  or  further
  approval by the local legislative body.
    4-a.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions of this article or any general,
  special or local law to the contrary, where an existing mortgage loan is
  modified or satisfied pursuant  to  this  section  and  the  supervising
  agency has approved a new or modified mortgage or mortgages, including a
  mortgage  and  note  or  bond  insured  by  the federal government and a
  mortgage to secure residual indebtedness,  the  supervising  agency  may
  sell,  assign,  or  otherwise  dispose of, at public or private sale, on


 such terms  and  conditions  as  shall  be  deemed  appropriate  by  the
  supervising  agency  subject to the approval of the comptroller or chief
  fiscal officer of the municipality wherein such agency is located,  such
  new or modified mortgage or mortgages and related instruments.
    4-b.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions of this article or any general,
  special or local law to the contrary, where an existing mortgage loan is
  modified or satisfied pursuant to this section, the  supervising  agency
  may pay or incur fees, costs, expenses and other amounts, whether or not
  any  amounts  have  been  appropriated  therefor  in order to (1) meet a
  municipality's  obligations  under  an  agreement   with   the   federal
  government   on   account   of   mortgage  insurance,  provided  that  a
  municipality's share of any mortgage insurance claim paid by the federal
  government shall not exceed fifty percent of the insurance benefits paid
  by the federal government, and further provided  that  a  municipality's
  share  of  such  claims  under  any  contract  or contracts entered into
  between a municipality and the federal government shall not exceed  five
  percent  of  the  outstanding  principal  amount of all mortgages of the
  municipality at any time insured by the federal government and  included
  within  such  contract, (2) make loans for, or establish escrow accounts
  for the issuance of mortgage insurance, (3) absorb discounts  associated
  with  any  sale,  assignment  or other disposition of a mortgage note or
  bond insured by the federal government, (4) pay  fees  required  by  the
  federal   government  as  a  condition  for  the  issuance  of  mortgage
  insurance, (5) install such life safety devices and satisfy such minimum
  property standards, as may be required by the federal  government  which
  devices  or  standards are in addition to any requirement imposed by the
  municipality as mortgagee and to make loans for such purposes,  (6)  pay
  closing and other costs related to obtaining mortgage insurance from the
  federal  government,  (7)  permit  the municipality to issue obligations
  secured by such mortgage or mortgages, (8) meet such other costs as  the
  federal government may from time to time impose, (9) pay any amounts not
  previously  advanced under a mortgage or mortgages modified or satisfied
  pursuant to this section, and (10) hold an amount not to  exceed  twenty
  million  dollars at any one time in a revolving account for a period not
  to exceed eighteen months from the time of the first deposit therein, to
  pay fees, costs, expenses and other amounts attributable to  making  and
  insuring  mortgages  pursuant to this section or attributable to issuing
  obligations secured by such mortgages.   If the municipality  sells  any
  such mortgages insured by the federal government for an amount in excess
  of  the  principal  amount  thereof  at the time of such sale, or if the
  municipality issues obligations secured by any such  mortgages  and  the
  yield  on  such  mortgages is greater than the yield on such obligations
  (the yield on such mortgages and obligations having been  calculated  in
  accordance  with  section one hundred three of the internal revenue code
  of the United States and regulations thereunder), then any such  premium
  and any such differential may be used by the municipality for any lawful
  purpose,  provided,  however,  that an amount equal to the annual sum of
  such premium and such differential, to the extent such  differential  is
  not paid to or for the benefit of the holders of such obligations, shall
  be credited annually by the municipality, at such times as determined by
  the  supervising  agency, as a payment by all municipally-aided projects
  then having residual  indebtedness,  of  the  then  accrued  and  unpaid
  interest  on  such  residual  indebtedness.  To the extent that any such
  credit otherwise allocable to a  project  in  any  year  exceeds  unpaid
  interest on the residual indebtedness of such project in that year, such
  excess  credit  shall  be  allocated  among  all other eligible projects
  having accrued and unpaid interest  on  residual  indebtedness  in  that
  year.  Notwithstanding  the provisions of the foregoing sentence of this


 subdivision, if an eligible project has made cash payments in  any  year
  for  the  sum  of  (i)  interest on and principal of a federally insured
  mortgage and (ii) interest on and principal of residual indebtedness and
  (iii)  all other payments on account of such insured mortgage, including
  mortgage insurance premium and reserves, at least equal to  the  sum  of
  (i)  interest  and  principal  which would have been due annually on the
  original mortgage loan for the project, at the interest rate  in  effect
  at  the  time  the  project  is  refinanced, and (ii) all other required
  annual payments on account of  such  original  mortgage  loan,  such  as
  reserve  requirements, then any excess credit allocable to such eligible
  project shall be credited in the next succeeding year as  a  payment  of
  interest  on  residual  indebtedness  of  such  project  before any cash
  payment is required to  be  made  for  such  interest.  Subject  to  the
  provisions  of  the preceding sentence of this subdivision, if the total
  of such credit in any year available for all eligible  projects  exceeds
  the  total  of  all accrued and unpaid interest in that year on residual
  indebtedness of all eligible projects then having residual indebtedness,
  an amount equal to such excess  credit  shall  be  carried  forward  and
  credited  in future years as a payment of accrued and unpaid interest on
  residual indebtedness of eligible projects in future  years  until  such
  time  as no further interest remains unpaid with respect to any residual
  indebtedness of eligible projects.  The supervising agency shall  divide
  such  credit  among  eligible  projects  on  the basis of the respective
  original  principal  amounts  of  the  federally  insured  mortgages  on
  eligible   projects;  provided,  however,  that  such  credit  shall  be
  allocated to projects which receive federal subsidies only to the extent
  that  such  subsidies  are  not  thereby  reduced.  When  there   is   a
  participation, new loan or investment pursuant to section twenty-three-b
  of this article for which the consent of a company is required and which
  will  be  substantially  equivalent to a refinancing pursuant to section
  twenty-three-a  or  subdivision  twenty-two-a  of  section  six  hundred
  fifty-four  of  this  article, then for purposes of this subdivision the
  interest of the municipality  after  such  participation,  new  loan  or
  investment  which  is  secured  by  a mortgage shall be deemed to be the
  equivalent of residual indebtedness and  the  interest  of  entities  or
  organizations  other  than  the  municipality in such participation, new
  loan or investment shall be deemed to be the equivalent of  a  federally
  insured mortgage.
    5.  No  company  shall  accept  a  mortgage  loan to be insured by the
  federal government made for the  purpose  of  refinancing  the  existing
  mortgage  loan  of  a company which shall exceed the amount which can be
  supported by the income derived from the operation of the project at the
  rental rate determined by the supervising agency that would be necessary
  to meet all necessary payments  to  be  made  by  the  company,  of  all
  expenses  including fixed charges, sinking funds, reserves and dividends
  on outstanding stock, as authorized by the supervising  agency,  if  the
  principal amount of the original mortgage loan of the company were to be
  fully  repaid  over the term of such mortgage loan by constant and equal
  payments of principal and interest and  if  the  interest  rate  on  the
  company's  original  mortgage  loan  was  eight and one-half percent per
  annum or, where the original mortgage loan provides for the  payment  of
  interest  at  a maximum rate of less than eight and one-half percent per
  annum, such maximum amount.
    6. A company shall not accept a mortgage to be insured by the  federal
  government for the purpose of refinancing an existing mortgage loan of a
  municipally-aided  project  unless  the  sum  of  interest and principal
  payable in respect of  such  mortgage  to  be  insured  by  the  federal
  government and in respect of any residual indebtedness, over the term of


 such  mortgage  and residual indebtedness, shall be no more than the sum
  of interest and principal that  would  be  payable  in  respect  of  the
  existing mortgage loan, over the term of such existing mortgage loan, at
  an  interest  rate  of eight and one-half percent per annum or where the
  existing mortgage loan provides for a maximum interest rate of less than
  eight and one-half percent, at such maximum interest rate.
    7. The terms of any  mortgage  securing  residual  indebtedness  of  a
  municipally-aided  project  shall include a provision to the effect that
  so long as the project is subject to a mortgage insured or held  by  the
  federal  government  (a)  interest  on  and  principal  of such mortgage
  securing residual indebtedness shall be  payable  only  if  and  to  the
  extent  to  which  surplus  cash,  as  defined in a regulatory agreement
  excecuted  by  the  housing  company  and  the  federal  government,  is
  available,  and  (b)  the  failure to pay interest and principal on such
  mortgage securing residual indebtedness shall not constitute an event of
  default unless surplus  cash  is  available  and  not  applied  to  such
  payments of interest and principal.
    8.  Ten  days  before an initial application is filed with the federal
  government to obtain insurance by the federal government of  a  mortgage
  for  the purpose of refinancing all or any part of a mortgage loan for a
  municipally-aided  project  pursuant  to   section   twenty-three-a   or
  subdivision  twenty-two-a  of  section  six  hundred  fifty-four of this
  chapter, the supervising agency shall (a) mail to the president or other
  representative of the  tenants'  association  or  cooperators'  advisory
  council, recognized by the supervising agency for such municipally-aided
  project, written notice of the proposed refinancing, including a copy of
  such   initial  application,  and  (b)  make  a  copy  of  such  initial
  application  available  at  its  offices  during  business  hours,   for
  inspection  and  copying  by  the  residents  of  such municipally-aided
  project. Ten days before the closing of a  proposed  participation,  new
  loan  or investment with respect to a municipally-aided project pursuant
  to section twenty-three-b of this article, the supervising agency  shall
  (a)  mail  to  the  president  or  other  representative of the tenants'
  association  or  cooperators'  advisory  council,  recognized   by   the
  supervising agency for such municipally-aided project, written notice of
  such proposed participation, new loan or investment, including a summary
  of  the  principal  terms and conditions thereof, and (b) make a copy of
  such summary  available  at  its  offices  during  business  hours,  for
  inspection  and  copying  by  the  residents  of  such municipally-aided
  project. The unintentional failure of the supervising agency  to  comply
  with  the  foregoing provisions of this subdivision shall not invalidate
  or otherwise affect any such refinancing of a mortgage loan or any  such
  participation, new loan or investment.




   § 23-b. Participation in loan or investment. Notwithstanding any other
  provisions  of  this  article  or  of any general, special or local law,
  where a municipality has made or contracted to make a mortgage loan to a
  company to finance a project:  one  or  more  banking  organizations  as
  defined  in  subdivision  eleven  of  section  two  of  the banking law,
  educational  institutions,  hospitals,  medical   research   institutes,
  insurance  companies,  trustees  or  fiduciaries,  including fiduciaries
  holding funds for investment, the  New  York  city  housing  development
  corporation,   other   public  corporations,  or  other  entities  which
  purchase, invest, or deal in first mortgage loans in the  normal  course
  of  their  business, or any combination of the foregoing, shall have the
  power to participate in such loan or make or participate in a  new  loan
  secured  by  a  bond  or note and a single participating mortgage, or by
  separate bonds or notes and separate mortgages, or to invest, singly  or
  jointly,   with   the   municipality  in  a  bond  or  note  and  single
  participating mortgage or in separate bonds or notes and mortgages or in
  a new mortgage or mortgages with respect to all or a portion of the loan
  by a municipality to a company; and the supervising  agency  shall  have
  the  power,  upon  the  mortgagor's  consent,  to  modify  the terms and
  conditions of the original bond or bonds or note or notes  and  mortgage
  or  mortgages  and  any other documents executed in connection with such
  original loan, as the supervising agency may deem necessary or desirable
  to provide for such participation, new loan or investment as provided in
  this section, including but not limited to (i) modification of the  rate
  and time of payment of interest on the original loan or rate and time of
  amortization  of  principal  thereof,  (ii)  providing  for priority for
  payment of the principal of and interest on that portion of the mortgage
  indebtedness attributable to such participation, new loan or  investment
  by one or more of such entities or organizations, (iii) subordination of
  the  interest of the municipality to the interest of one or more of such
  organizations or entities in such participation, new loan or investment,
  and (iv) otherwise  providing  that  the  interest  of  each  upon  such
  participation,  new  loan or investment need not be of equal priority as
  to lien, or be equal as to interest rate, time or rate  of  amortization
  of  principal  or  time  of  payment of interest or otherwise; provided,
  however, that the aggregate amount of the loan or  loans  to  a  company
  does  not  exceed the amount authorized pursuant to section twenty-three
  of this  article.  When  consent  of  a  company  is  required  for  any
  participation,  new loan or investment pursuant to this section and such
  participation, new loan or investment will be  substantially  equivalent
  to  a  refinancing of indebtedness pursuant to section twenty-three-a or
  subdivision twenty-two-a of  section  six  hundred  fifty-four  of  this
  chapter,  then;  (i)  the  provisions of this article, including without
  limitation the provisions  of  section  twenty-three-a,  limiting  total
  indebtedness  of  a  company  after  a  refinancing shall apply to total
  indebtedness of the  company  after  such  participation,  new  loan  or
  investment; (ii) the provisions of this article applicable to a mortgage
  of  a  company insured by the federal government in connection with such
  refinancing shall apply to a mortgage securing the interest of  entities
  or  organizations other than the municipality in such participation, new
  loan or investment; (iii) the  provisions  of  this  article  concerning
  residual indebtedness, such residual indebtedness having been calculated
  as  if  the  mortgage referred to in clause (ii) of this sentence were a
  federally  insured  mortgage,  shall  apply  to  an  interest   of   the
  municipality  after  such participation, new loan or investment which is
  secured by a mortgage; (iv) the provisions of  this  article  concerning
  residual  receipts  obligations  shall  apply  to  an  interest  of  the
  municipality after such participation, new loan or investment  which  is


 unsecured,  and  (v)  the  provisions  of  subdivision four-b of section
  twenty-three-a of this article concerning the credit referred to therein
  shall apply in a manner consistent with such subdivision.  For  purposes
  of  the  foregoing  sentence  of  this  section,  the  term surplus cash
  (referred to in subdivision seven  of  section  twenty-three-a  of  this
  article)  shall  be  applied  by  the  supervising  agency  in  a manner
  consistent with the definition of such  term  in  regulatory  agreements
  with  the  federal  government  for  the  refinancing of indebtedness of
  municipally-aided projects.  The provisions of subdivisions one and five
  of  section  twenty-six  of  this  article  shall  not  apply  to   such
  participation  in  a  loan  or  investment  pursuant  to this section if
  undertaken in connection with a project theretofore approved pursuant to
  section twenty-six of this article. Where the  municipality  shall  join
  with  one  or  more  organizations of the kind hereinabove mentioned, in
  making a loan secured by a single participating mortgage or by  separate
  mortgages,  the  municipality  is  authorized,  through  its supervising
  agency, to make provision, either in the mortgage  or  mortgages  or  by
  separate  agreement,  for  the  performance  of  such  services  as  are
  generally performed by a banking institution or insurance company  which
  itself owns and holds a mortgage or by a trustee under a trust mortgage.
  The  supervising  agency  is  hereby  authorized to act as trustee or to
  consent to the appointment of a  banking  institution  to  act  in  such
  capacity.   In connection with any participation in a loan or investment
  pursuant to this  section,  the  municipality  through  its  supervising
  agency shall have the power to assign or pledge, in whole or in part, to
  one  or more of the organizations or entities participating in such loan
  or investment its right, title and interest in and to any mortgage  held
  by  it  pursuant to this article and any contract or arrangement for the
  payment of subsidy relating to such mortgage,  including  the  right  to
  receive and apply to repayment of such loan and the interest thereon any
  receipts to be derived by it from such mortgage or from such contract or
  arrangement.




   §  23-c.  Mortgage modifications. 1. For the purposes of this section,
  the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:
    (a)  "Existing  mortgage"  shall  mean  any  mortgage  held   by   the
  municipality  securing  a  loan  made by such municipality in accordance
  with the provisions of this article, and any  note  or  bond  evidencing
  indebtedness  thereon, including, but not limited to, any mortgage, note
  or bond securing residual indebtedness and any mortgage,  note  or  bond
  securing a loan to finance the construction of a project.
    b.  "Non-recoverable  debt  service"  shall  mean, with respect to any
  increase in indebtedness executed or approved pursuant to  this  section
  that  is  not attributable to project cost, all payments of interest and
  principal on such portion of the indebtedness.
    (c) "Restrictive agreement" shall mean a binding agreement  between  a
  company  and the supervising agency, which (i) prohibits the dissolution
  of the company pursuant to the provisions of section thirty-five of this
  article for not less than six years from the date of such agreement, and
  (ii) prohibits the consideration of non-recoverable debt service in  any
  rent  increase  pursuant to the provisions of section thirty-one of this
  article at any time subsequent to the date of such agreement.
    2. Notwithstanding the provisions of this article or the provisions of
  any law, general or special, a company that enters  into  a  restrictive
  agreement  on  or  after  the effective date of a chapter of the laws of
  2004 which added this  subdivision,  may,  with  the  approval  of  such
  supervising agency:
    (a)  substitute  a new mortgage approved by the supervising agency for
  any existing mortgage;
    (b) extend or modify any existing mortgage in such manner and for such
  term as shall be determined by the supervising agency;
    (c) subordinate any existing mortgage in any manner  approved  by  the
  supervising  agency to the lien of any mortgage held by a lender that is
  authorized to participate in loans pursuant to section twenty-three-b of
  this article; and
    (d) borrow funds and secure the repayment thereof by note and mortgage
  or in any other manner approved by the supervising agency.
   §  24.  Income  debentures.  1.  With  the approval of the supervising
  agency or of the commissioner, as the case may be,  the  certificate  of
  incorporation,  or  an amended certificate may authorize the issuance of
  income debentures bearing no greater interest than six  per  centum  per
  annum   except   as  otherwise  provided  in  this  article.  After  the
  incorporation of a company, the directors thereof may, with the  consent
  of  two-thirds  of  the  holders  of  the  preferred  stock  issued  and
  outstanding offer to the stockholders of the company, the  privilege  of
  exchanging  their  stock  in such quantities and at such times as may be
  approved by the supervising agency or the commissioner, as the case  may
  be,  for  such income debentures. In no event, shall the amount of stock
  of the company be less than a per centum  of  the  total  of  stock  and
  income  debentures,  to  be  fixed  by  the supervising agency or by the
  commissioner, as the case may be.
    2. Such income debentures and any  instrument  under  which  they  are
  issued  may  contain  such  other  provisions,  including  provision for
  amortization by serial maturities, through the operation  of  a  sinking
  fund  or  otherwise,  as may be approved by the supervising agency or by
  the commissioner, as the case may be.




   §  25. Working capital. The supervising agency or the commissioner, as
  the case may be, may permit stock or income debentures to be issued  for
  working  capital to be used in connection with such project to an amount
  not exceeding three per centum of the  estimated  project  cost  or  the
  actual project cost, whichever is larger.




   §  26.  Conditions and security for loans. 1. No loan shall be made by
  the state, the New York state housing finance agency, a municipality  or
  the   New   York   city   housing  development  corporation  unless  the
  commissioner, with respect to a project aided by a  state  loan  or  New
  York  state housing finance agency loan, or the supervisory agency, with
  respect to a municipally-aided project, finds that:
    (a)  The  municipality  has  approved  the  project  as  provided   in
  subdivision  five  of  this  section  and  has  enacted  or  will  enact
  regulations  or  appropriate  restrictions  adequately  protecting   the
  project  against  future  uses  likely to depreciate unduly the value of
  such project;
    (b) The estimated revenues of the project will be sufficient to  cover
  all  probable  costs  of operation and maintenance, of fixed charges and
  operating reserves and depreciation reserves if any;
    (c) The plans and specifications conform to the  requirements  of  all
  laws  applicable thereto, and assure adequate light, air, sanitation and
  fire protection;
    (d) If the project is aided by a state  loan,  or  a  New  York  state
  housing  finance  agency loan, the commissioner shall also find that the
  project is in conformity with a plan or undertaking  for  providing  low
  rent housing facilities for persons of low income and for the clearance,
  replanning,  reconstruction  or  rehabilitation  of  a  substandard  and
  insanitary area  or  areas,  and  for  other  facilities  incidental  or
  appurtenant thereto as may be approved by the commissioner.
    1-a.  No  company  may be aided pursuant to this article by a mortgage
  loan or tax exemption or both to finance the acquisition of  a  building
  by  residents thereof unless the commissioner or the supervising agency,
  as the case may be, finds that:
    (a) the condition of such building is deteriorating and  the  building
  is  located  in  a  deteriorating  area  or  in  an area threatened with
  deterioration  by  reason  of  economic,  social  or  physical   changes
  occurring therein or in nearby areas;
    (b) the building is not yielding sufficient revenues to cover costs of
  operation and maintenance, of fixed charges and of reserves, if any, and
  also a reasonable profit to the owner;
    (c)  the  making  of  such loan will prevent further deterioration and
  abandonment;
    (d) at least two-thirds of  the  present  residents  consent  to  such
  acquisition;
    (e) financing for such acquisition is otherwise unavailable because of
  the  neighborhood, the age of the buildings, or other factors indicating
  an inability of the private sector unaided to cause such acquisition  to
  be effected;
    (f)  the  proceeds of such loan will not be used to refinance existing
  debt in excess of a reasonable relationship to current value; and
    (g) the term for repayment of such loan does not exceed the  remaining
  useful life of the building.
    2.  The  principal  of a loan made by the state shall be repaid by the
  company over a period of not to exceed fifty years except in the case of
  a loan to rehabilitate an existing building, in which  case  the  period
  shall  not  exceed  thirty-five  years,  or  the  estimated  life of the
  project, whichever is shorter,  in  annual  installments  equal  to  the
  amount  payable  by  the  state  on the moneys borrowed for the project.
  Such annual installment of principal need not be uniform in amount,  but
  may  be so varied that the total payment of principal and interest shall
  be approximately equal and constant during the period of the loan.  Each
  payment of principal and interest shall be made to the state comptroller
  not  later  than five days before each payment by the state is required.


 The loan shall bear the same rate of interest paid or to be paid by  the
  state  for  the definitive housing bonds issued on account of such loan.
  The company shall pay to the state comptroller a proportionate share  of
  the  cost  of  borrowing  not  later  than  thirty  days after the state
  comptroller has certified the amount of such share.
    3. Any bonds or notes issued by the company and any mortgages relating
  thereto may authorize  the  company,  with  the  consent  of  the  state
  comptroller  in  the  case  of a state-aided project, or the supervising
  agency in the  case  of  a  municipally-aided  project,  to  prepay  the
  principal  of  the  loan.  Such bonds or notes and mortgages may contain
  such other clauses and provisions as the commissioner in the case  of  a
  state-aided  project  or  the  supervising  agency  in  the  case  of  a
  municipally-aided project, shall require. Notwithstanding the provisions
  of any general, special or local law, the principal of  any  loans  made
  pursuant  to  subdivision  one of section fifteen of this article or the
  principal of a loan made by a municipality pursuant to this article  and
  secured  by  a mortgage lien subordinate to the lien of a first mortgage
  made pursuant to paragraph (b) of subdivision one of section fifteen  of
  this  article  may be amortized at such time or times or at such rate as
  the supervising agency shall approve.
    4. With respect to a state-aided project the commissioner  may  charge
  the  company  reasonable fees for financing, regulation, supervision and
  audit. Fees collected for such services shall be paid into and disbursed
  from such fund or funds as may be provided by law.
    5. (a) In a municipality where there is  a  planning  commission,  the
  project  shall  first  be submitted to it for approval. Where changes in
  the city map and zoning amendments or variances are necessitated by such
  project, such amendments,  variances  and  changes  shall  be  submitted
  together  with  such  project  and  considered  as  a part thereof. Such
  planning commission, not later than ten  weeks  from  the  date  of  the
  referral  of  the  project  to  it,  after  a public hearing held on due
  notice, notice of which shall be  published  at  least  ten  days  prior
  thereto  in  the  official  publication  of the municipality, or if none
  exists, in a newspaper circulating in the municipality, shall submit its
  report  to  the  local  legislative  body  certifying  its   unqualified
  approval,    its   disapproval,   or   its   qualified   approval   with
  recommendations for modifications therein.
    After public hearing held on  due  notice  and  after  the  report  is
  received or due from the planning commission, the local legislative body
  may:
    (i)  if  the  planning commission shall have certified its unqualified
  approval, approve the project by a majority vote;
    (ii) if the planning commission shall have certified  its  disapproval
  or  shall  have failed to make its report within ten weeks from the date
  such project was submitted to it, nevertheless approve the project,  but
  only by a three-fourths vote;
    (iii)  if  the  planning commission shall have certified its qualified
  approval together with recommendations for  modifications,  approve  the
  project  together  with  the  modifications  recommended by the planning
  commission by a majority vote,  or  approve  the  project  without  such
  modifications but only by a three-fourths vote.
    (b)  In  a  municipality  where  there  is  no planning commission the
  project shall be submitted to the local legislative  body  which,  after
  public  hearing held on due notice, may either approve or disapprove the
  project.
    (c) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, changes  in  the  city
  map,  zoning  amendments,  or  variances  contained in the plan shall be
  deemed approved by the local  legislative  body  when  it  approves  the


 project.  Any  such  changes  in  the  city  map,  zoning amendments, or
  variances shall become effective on the date on  which  the  supervising
  agency  shall  file  a  resolution  with  the  local legislative body in
  implementation thereof.
    6.  The  provisions of subdivisions one and five of this section shall
  not apply to a state urban development corporation  project  or  to  any
  loan  made  by  the  state  or  the state housing finance agency to such
  project, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein.
    7. Notwithstanding anything to the  contrary  contained  therein,  the
  provisions  of subdivisions one and five of this section shall not apply
  to a Battery Park city project or to any loan made by the state  or  the
  New York state housing finance agency to such project.




   § 26-a. Findings for municipally-aided projects.
    No  municipally-aided  project  aided solely by tax exemption shall be
  approved by the supervising agency unless the agency shall have made the
  findings set forth in subdivision one of section twenty-six.






   §  26-b.  Special  provisions  with respect to state urban development
  corporation projects. 1. No loan shall be made by  the  state,  the  New
  York  state  housing  finance  agency,  or  the  state urban development
  corporation   for   the   acquisition,   construction,   reconstruction,
  rehabilitation  or  improvement of a state urban development corporation
  project, nor shall any such project be  approved  by  the  commissioner,
  unless the commissioner finds that:
    (a)  the estimated revenues of the project will be sufficient to cover
  all probable costs of all operations and maintenance, of  fixed  charges
  and operating reserves and depreciation reserves, if any;
    (b) the plans and specifications of the project assure adequate light,
  air, sanitation and fire protection;
    (c)  the  project  is  in  conformity  with  a plan or undertaking for
  providing low rent housing facilities for persons of low income and  for
  the   clearance,  replanning,  reconstruction  or  rehabilitation  of  a
  substandard and insanitary  area  or  areas  and  for  other  facilities
  incidental   or   appurtenant   thereto   as  may  be  approved  by  the
  commissioner.
    2. Any state urban development corporation project shall  comply  with
  the   requirements   of  local  laws,  ordinances,  codes,  charters  or
  regulations   applicable   to    the    construction,    reconstruction,
  rehabilitation,  alteration or improvement of such project, except where
  the state urban development corporation, in its discretion,  finds  such
  compliance  not  feasible  or  practicable,  in which event such project
  shall comply with the requirements of the  state  building  construction
  code,  formulated by the state building code council pursuant to article
  eighteen  of  the  executive  law,  applicable  to  such   construction,
  reconstruction,  rehabilitation,  alteration  or improvement. No county,
  city, town or village shall have power to modify or change the drawings,
  plans  or   specifications   for   the   construction,   reconstruction,
  rehabilitation,  or improvement of any such project or the construction,
  plumbing, heating, lighting or other mechanical branch of work necessary
  to complete the work in question, nor to require that any  person,  firm
  or  corporation employed on any such work shall perform any such work in
  any other or different manner than  that  provided  by  such  plans  and
  specifications, nor to require that any such person, firm or corporation
  obtain   any   other   or  additional  authority,  approval,  permit  or
  certificate from such county, city, town or village as  a  condition  of
  doing such work, nor shall any condition whatever be imposed by any such
  county,  city,  town  or village in relation to the work being done, and
  the doing of any such  work  by  any  person,  firm  or  corporation  in
  accordance  with  the  terms  of such drawings, plans, specifications or
  contracts shall not subject said person,  firm  or  corporation  to  any
  liability  or penalty, civil or criminal, other than as may be stated in
  such contracts or incidental to  the  proper  enforcement  thereof;  nor
  shall  any  county, city, town or village have power to require that any
  subsidiary of the New York state urban development corporation,  or  any
  lessee  therefrom  or successor in interest thereto, obtain any other or
  additional authority, approval, permit, certificate  or  certificate  of
  occupancy  from  such  county,  city,  town or village as a condition of
  owning, using, maintaining, operating or occupying any project acquired,
  constructed,  reconstructed,  rehabilitated  or  improved  by  any  such
  subsidiary of the New York state urban development corporation.
    3. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, in the case of
  a state urban development corporation project financed or to be financed
  by  a loan from the state urban development corporation, the corporation
  shall exercise, with respect to such project and  with  respect  to  the
  company  carrying  out  such  project,  all  of  the  powers  and duties


 exercised by the commissioner pursuant to this article with  respect  to
  projects  financed  by  the  New York state housing finance agency until
  such project, or any part thereof, is ready  for  initial  occupancy  as
  determined by the commissioner, and thereafter, upon the issuance by the
  commissioner of a certificate of assumption of supervision, such project
  shall  be subject to the supervision and control of the commissioner and
  the New York state division of  housing  and  community  renewal,  which
  shall  have  the  same  powers and responsibilities with respect to such
  project as they would have if such project were aided by a loan from the
  state or the New York state housing finance agency  under  this  article
  and  which  shall assume the additional powers and responsibilities with
  respect to such project theretofore conferred on the corporation by  law
  or  contract.  The  corporation  and  the  commissioner  of  housing and
  community renewal shall take such actions and execute such documents  as
  may be necessary to implement this subdivision.




   § 26-c. Special provisions with respect to Battery Park city projects.
  1.  No  loan  shall  be  made by the state or the New York state housing
  finance  agency  for  the  acquisition,  construction,   reconstruction,
  rehabilitation  or improvement of a Battery Park city project, nor shall
  any  such  project  be  approved  by  the   commissioner,   unless   the
  commissioner finds that:
    (a)  the estimated revenues of the project will be sufficient to cover
  all probable costs of all operations and maintenance, of  fixed  charges
  and operating reserves and depreciation reserves, if any;
    (b) the plans and specifications of the project assure adequate light,
  air, sanitation and fire protection;
    (c)  the  project  is  in  conformity  with  a plan or undertaking for
  providing low rent housing facilities for persons of low income.
    2. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, in  the  case
  of a Battery Park city project financed or to be financed by a loan from
  Battery  Park city authority, all approvals, findings and consents which
  are required to be given or made by the commissioner  pursuant  to  this
  article  shall  be given or made instead by Battery Park city authority,
  and the authority shall exercise, with respect to such project and  with
  respect  to the company carrying out such project, all of the powers and
  duties exercised by the  commissioner  pursuant  to  this  article  with
  respect  to  projects  financed  by  the  New York state housing finance
  agency.






   § 27. Limitations. No company shall:
    1. Acquire any real property or interest therein unless it shall first
  have  obtained  from  the commissioner or the supervising agency, as the
  case may be,  a  certificate  that  such  acquisition  is  necessary  or
  convenient for the public purpose defined in this article.
    2.  Pay  interest upon its income debentures at a rate higher than six
  per centum per annum except as otherwise provided in this article.
    3. Issue its stock, income debentures and bonds covering  any  project
  in an amount greater in the aggregate than the actual project cost.
    4.   Without   first  having  obtained  the  written  consent  of  the
  commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case may be:
    (a)  Construct,  reconstruct,  rehabilitate,  improve  or  alter   any
  project, or enter into any contract therefor.
    (b)  Sell,  transfer  or assign any real property, except that no such
  consent shall  be  necessary  in  any  sale  in  foreclosure  as  herein
  provided.
    (c)  Except  as otherwise provided in this article, encumber, lease or
  rent all or any part of its real property.
    (d) Enter into contracts for the operation of the project.
    (e) Make a guaranty of payment.
    (f) Voluntarily dissolve.
    (g) Enter into contracts for the payment of salaries  to  officers  or
  employees.
    5. Pay interest on its mortgage indebtedness at a rate higher than six
  per  centum per annum, or at such higher rates as may be approved by the
  commissioner, or the supervising agency, as the case may be, but  in  no
  event  shall any such rate exceed the rate of interest prescribed by the
  superintendent of financial services pursuant to section  fourteen-a  of
  the  banking  law  or, in the case of a mortgage loan insured or held by
  the federal government, the rate approved  by  the  federal  government;
  provided,  however,  that  in the case of a company carrying out a state
  urban development corporation project or in the case of an instrument or
  instruments securing the  residual  indebtedness  of  a  company,  which
  indebtedness is secured by a mortgage on the real property of a project,
  such  rate  shall  not  exceed  the  rate  of interest prescribed by the
  superintendent of financial services pursuant to section  fourteen-a  of
  the  banking  law or nine per centum per annum, whichever is the higher;
  and further provided, however, that, in the case of a company that is  a
  mortgagor  under a mortgage assigned to or acquired by the New York city
  housing development corporation pursuant to  subdivision  twenty-one  of
  section  six  hundred  fifty-four  of  this chapter and whose project is
  aided by a subsidy from the federal government, such rate shall  be  the
  rate of interest approved by the supervising agency. Notwithstanding the
  foregoing  provisions  of  this  section,  the  rate  of interest that a
  company shall have the power to pay on  that  portion  of  its  mortgage
  indebtedness  attributable  to  an investment or participation in a loan
  made pursuant to subdivision one of section fifteen by  an  organization
  or  entity  mentioned in such subdivision, shall be the rate of interest
  approved by the commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case  may
  be.
    6.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision five of this section
  twenty-seven, a company, which has obtained a mortgage loan from the New
  York city housing development corporation or the New York state  housing
  finance  agency  and where it is necessary for additional bonds or notes
  to be issued by the New York city housing development corporation or the
  New York state housing finance agency (i) in order to  obtain  funds  to
  fulfill the mortgage loan commitment to such company, as such commitment
  may  be  amended  or (ii) to refund or renew notes issued in fulfillment


 thereof, for a project partially or temporarily  financed  by  bonds  or
  notes  issued,  in  the  case  of  the New York city housing development
  corporation,  prior  to  the  first  day  of  August,  nineteen  hundred
  seventy-five,  and  in  the  case  of the New York state housing finance
  agency, prior to the thirty-first  day  of  December,  nineteen  hundred
  seventy-five  ,  may  pay  interest  on  that  portion  of  its mortgage
  indebtedness, the funds for which were obtained by  the  New  York  city
  housing  development  corporation  or the New York state housing finance
  agency through the issuance of such additional  or  refunding  bonds  or
  notes,  at a rate not in excess of the cost of financing incurred by the
  New York city housing development corporation  or  the  New  York  state
  housing  finance agency, as the case may be, to issue such additional or
  refunding bonds or notes, provided that, with respect to  the  New  York
  city  housing  development corporation, such corporation determines that
  such cost of  financing  is  reasonable  and  the  commissioner  or  the
  supervising  agency,  as  the  case  may  be, shall approve such cost of
  financing.




   §  28.  Payments from earnings. 1. There shall be paid annually out of
  the earnings of the company, after providing for all taxes,  assessments
  and  expenses,  a  sum  for interest on and amortization of the mortgage
  indebtedness of all mortgages of the company, depreciation  charges  and
  reserves if, when and to the extent deemed necessary by the commissioner
  or  the  supervising  agency, as the case may be, plus a dividend of six
  per centum on outstanding stock  and  interest  not  exceeding  six  per
  centum  on  the  outstanding  income  debentures  of  the  company;  the
  obligation in respect of such payments  shall  be  cumulative,  and  any
  deficiency  in  interest,  amortization, depreciation, reserves, if any,
  and dividends in any year shall be paid either  from  any  cash  surplus
  derived from earnings remaining in the treasury of the company in excess
  of  the  amount necessary to provide such cumulative annual sums or from
  the first available earnings in subsequent years. If, at the end of  any
  three  year  period,  the  gross  receipts should exceed the payments or
  charges necessary for the purposes of the project or  projects  and  are
  not  needed  for a sinking fund, reserves or other purposes, the balance
  may be paid in further reduction of any indebtedness to the  extent  and
  upon  terms  and  conditions  approved by the commissioner and the state
  comptroller or by the supervising agency, as the case may be. A  sinking
  fund may be authorized by the commissioner or the supervising agency, to
  purchase  and retire bonds, income debentures or stock of the company at
  a price approved by the commissioner or the supervising agency,  as  the
  case  may  be,  not  exceeding  par value thereof with accrued or unpaid
  dividends or interest or if it be not practical to purchase  such  stock
  or  income  debentures at a price so approved, the money in such sinking
  fund may be added to the surplus of such company. Any  stock  or  income
  debentures  purchased  out  of  such sinking fund shall be cancelled and
  shall not be reissued.
    2. Anything contained in this article to the contrary notwithstanding,
  a company which receives a loan from  the  state,  the  New  York  state
  housing  finance  agency  or  a  municipality after July first, nineteen
  hundred sixty-nine, or a mutual company which has been  duly  authorized
  to  issue  income debentures to finance the modernization or replacement
  of project improvements or the acquisition and  installation  of  energy
  saving equipment and which is otherwise authorized to pay dividends upon
  its  shares  or  interest  upon  its  income  debentures,  may, with the
  approval of the commissioner or the supervising agency as the  case  may
  be,  pay  such  dividends  or  interest  in excess of six per centum per
  annum, but in no event shall any such  rate  exceed  the  interest  rate
  prescribed  by  the  superintendent  of  financial  services pursuant to
  section fourteen-a of the banking law, provided, however, if the  voting
  stock of a mutual company has not been issued and delivered to the stock
  subscribers, then the additional authorization of such stock subscribers
  is required to be obtained by a majority vote.
    3.  No  director  or  officer  of a company shall receive, directly or
  indirectly, any salary, compensation or emolument from such company,  as
  such  director or officer or in any other capacity, unless authorized by
  the commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case may be.




   § 29. Acquisition of property.
    (a)  After a project, other than a state urban development corporation
  project, has been been approved by the commissioner or  the  supervising
  agency   and  the  local  legislative  body,  the  commissioner  or  the
  supervising agency as  the  case  may  be,  shall  issue  a  certificate
  declaring  that  the  acquisition  of  the property is necessary for the
  public purpose defined in this article and the company may  acquire  the
  property needed for the project or the municipality may, with respect to
  a municipally-aided project or a project aided either by a state loan or
  a  loan from the New York state housing finance agency, take property by
  condemnation for the company, pursuant to the provisions of article nine
  of this chapter.
    (b) after a state  urban  development  corporation  project  has  been
  approved  by  the  commissioner,  the  commissioner  shall authorize the
  company undertaking the project to acquire the property needed for  such
  project.
    (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision (a) of this section,
  in the case of a Battery Park city project financed or to be financed by
  a loan from Battery Park city authority, the approval of the project and
  the  certificate  declaring  that  the  acquisition  of  the property is
  necessary for the public purposes  defined  in  this  article  shall  be
  issued by Battery Park city authority.




   § 30. Transfer of real property. 1. Notwithstanding any requirement of
  law to the contrary, every executor, administrator, trustee, guardian or
  other  person,  holding  trust  funds or acting in a fiduciary capacity,
  unless the instrument under which such  fiduciary  is  acting  expressly
  forbids,  the  state, its subdivisions, municipalities, all other public
  bodies, all public  officers,  persons,  partnerships  and  corporations
  organized  under  and  governed  as to investments by or pursuant to the
  provisions of the banking law or  organized  under  or  subject  to  the
  provisions  of  the  insurance  law,  the  superintendent  of  financial
  services as conservator, liquidator or rehabilitator of any such person,
  partnership or corporation, owning or  holding  any  real  property  may
  grant,  sell,  lease  or  otherwise transfer any such real property to a
  company and receive and hold any cash, stock, bonds,  notes,  mortgages,
  or  other  securities  or  obligations,  secured or unsecured, exchanged
  therefor by such company and may execute such instruments  and  do  such
  acts  as  may  be deemed necessary or desirable by them or it and by the
  company in connection with a project or  projects.  Notwithstanding  the
  provisions  of  any general, special or local law, charter or ordinance,
  such grant, sale, lease or transfer may be made without  public  auction
  or bidding.
    2.  Any  banking  institution,  foundation,  labor  union,  employers'
  association, veterans' organization or insurance company, or  any  group
  thereof,  which  has  undertaken  a  project through direct ownership or
  lease may transfer to the project any real property  which  it  owns  or
  holds  within an area. The market value of such property, as approved by
  the commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case may be, shall be
  included in the estimated or actual project cost.
    3. Notwithstanding the provisions of any  general,  special  or  local
  law, charter or ordinance, the local legislative body of a city having a
  population  of  one million or more may, upon the request of or with the
  approval of the board of  education  of  such  city's  school  district,
  grant,  sell,  lease  or  otherwise  transfer  any  lands  or  rights or
  interests therein or thereto, including fee interest,  easements,  space
  rights or air rights or other rights or interests owned by such city and
  occupied  or  reserved  for  school  purposes  and needed therefor, to a
  company where necessary for the joint development of  a  project  and  a
  school  or  appurtenant  facilities  without  public auction or bidding,
  provided that no such sale, lease or transfer of lands or rights therein
  or thereto is authorized where the development of a project contemplates
  the  erection  of  housing  facilities  over  an  existing   school   or
  playground.  The  term  of  any  such  lease shall not be limited by any
  provision of any general, special or local law or charter applicable  to
  such  city  limiting  the  period  of  time  during which a lease or any
  renewal thereof may run.




   § 31. Rentals and selection of tenants. 1. (a) A company may, with the
  approval  of the commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case may
  be, fix maximum rentals per room to be charged tenants of the dwellings,
  the average of the rentals for the  dwellings  in  any  project  not  to
  exceed the maximum average rentals determined by the commissioner or the
  supervising  agency, as the case may be, before any commitments are made
  by the company for the construction of the project. The commissioner  or
  the  supervising agency, upon his or its own motion, or upon application
  by the company or of  a  stockholder,  lienholder,  a  creditor,  or  of
  holders  of  at  least ten per centum of the bonds of the company, or by
  the federal government where the mortgage loan of the company is insured
  or held by the federal government, may vary such rental rate  from  time
  to  time so as to secure, together with all other income of the company,
  sufficient income for it to meet within reasonable limits all  necessary
  payments  to  be made or projected to be made during the term of a lease
  by the said company, of all expenses including  fixed  charges,  sinking
  funds,  reserves and dividends on outstanding stock as authorized by the
  commissioner or the supervising agency, as the  case  may  be.  Letting,
  subletting or assignment of leases of apartments at greater rentals than
  those  approved  by  the commissioner or the supervising agency shall be
  unlawful. Where the mortgage loan of a company is insured or held by the
  federal  government  or  where  a  project  is  owned  by  the   federal
  government,   rental  rates  shall  be  varied  without  regard  to  the
  provisions of any general, special or local law  which  would  otherwise
  limit  or  control  such  rental rates or the determination or variation
  thereof for so long as such mortgage loan  remains  outstanding  or  the
  project  financed  by  such  a  mortgage  loan  is  owned by the federal
  government. No variation of a rental rate in a  project  financed  by  a
  mortgage  loan  insured  or  held by, or owned by the federal government
  shall be effective unless approved by the federal government.
    (b) Unless any applicable regulation of or regulatory  agreement  with
  the  federal  government  shall  otherwise provide, (i) the tenants in a
  project financed by a mortgage loan  insured  or  held  by  the  federal
  government  shall  be  entitled  and may elect to enter in a lease for a
  term of up to three years at such rental rates as may be established  by
  the commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case may be, pursuant
  to  paragraph  (a)  of  subdivision one of this section, (ii) the rental
  rates to be charged under any such  lease  shall  be  established  after
  consideration  of  the term of such lease and may differ from the rental
  rates to be charged under any other lease of a different term and  (iii)
  the commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case may be, shall in
  establishing  such  rental rates consider the obligations of the company
  under any instruments evidencing or securing any residual  indebtedness.
  Such  leases  shall contain a provision authorizing the variation of the
  rental rates during the term of such leases upon an application made  by
  the  federal  government pursuant to paragraph (a) of subdivision one of
  this section.
    * (c) A company may, with the approval  of  the  commissioner  or  the
  supervising  agency,  as the case may be, fix maximum charges to be paid
  by each occupant for  the  non-housekeeping  accommodations,  aged  care
  accommodations   or   non-housekeeping  accommodations  for  handicapped
  persons, which charges may include payment  for  board  and  such  other
  services  as may be provided as an incident to occupancy, the average of
  such charges for all  the  non-housekeeping  accommodations,  aged  care
  accommodations   or   non-housekeeping  accommodations  for  handicapped
  persons in any project not to exceed the maximum average charges for all
  such  non-housekeeping  accommodations,  aged  care  accommodations   or
  non-housekeeping  accommodations  for  handicapped persons determined by


 the commissioner or the supervising agency as the case  may  be,  before
  any  commitments  are  made  by  the company for the construction of the
  project. The commissioner or the supervising agency upon his or its  own
  motion,  or  upon  application  by the company or of a stockholder, lien
  holder, a creditor or of holders of at least ten (10%) per centum of the
  bonds of the company, may vary such charges from time to time so  as  to
  secure, together with all other income of the company, sufficient income
  for  it  to  meet  within reasonable limits all necessary payments to be
  made by said company, of all expenses including fixed  charges,  sinking
  funds,  reserves and dividends on outstanding stock as authorized by the
  commissioner or supervising agency as the  case  may  be.  It  shall  be
  unlawful    to   make   non-housekeeping   accommodations,   aged   care
  accommodations  or  non-housekeeping  accommodations   for   handicapped
  persons  available  at  greater  charges  than  those  approved  by  the
  commissioner or the supervising agency.
    * NB There are 2 š(c)'s
    * (c)  Disclosure  of  bases.  The  commissioner,   administrator   or
  supervising  agency,  as  the  case  may  be,  shall  make available for
  inspection and copying by the residents in any affected development, all
  items and data and recommendations utilized as the various bases for the
  decision on increases in rental or carrying charges,  upon  notification
  of the decision to the applicant of the action taken.
    * NB There are 2 š(c)'s
    2.  (a)  The dwelling or non-housekeeping accommodations without board
  in a company project shall be available for persons or families  of  low
  income  whose  probable aggregate annual income at the time of admission
  and during the period of occupancy does not exceed, the greater  of  (i)
  the  median  income  for  such  persons or families for the metropolitan
  statistical area in which the project is located, or  if  a  project  is
  located  outside  a metropolitan statistical area, the median income for
  such persons or families for the county in which the project is located,
  as most recently determined by the United States department  of  housing
  and  urban  development,  in  which  case  any person or family becoming
  eligible for admission pursuant to this subparagraph shall pay, from the
  time of admission, a rental surcharge as  provided  for  in  subdivision
  three  of  this section, computed on the basis of the income limitations
  applicable  to  such  persons  or  families  in  the  absence  of   this
  subparagraph,  or  (ii)  eight  times the rental, including the value or
  cost to them of heat, light, water and cooking fuel,  of  the  dwellings
  that  may  be  furnished to such persons or families, except that in the
  case of families with three or more dependents,  such  ratio  shall  not
  exceed  nine  to  one.  Persons  or families with two or less dependents
  eligible for admission or continued occupancy pursuant  to  subparagraph
  (ii)  of  this paragraph or subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph prior to
  the effective date of a chapter of the laws  of  two  thousand  nineteen
  that  amended  subparagraph  (ii)  of this paragraph, shall pay a rental
  surcharge computed on the basis of an income limitation of  seven  times
  the  rental  and  families  with  three  or more dependents eligible for
  admission or continued occupancy pursuant to subparagraph (ii)  of  this
  paragraph  or subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph prior to the effective
  date of a chapter of the laws of  two  thousand  nineteen  that  amended
  subparagraph  (ii)  of  this  paragraph,  shall  pay  a rental surcharge
  computed on the basis of an income limitation of eight times the cost of
  the rental, including in each instance the value or cost to the  persons
  or  families  of  heat,  light, water and cooking fuel, of the dwellings
  furnished to such persons or families.
    The "probable  aggregate  annual  income"  in  the  case  of  dwelling
  accommodations  means  the annual income of the chief wage earner of the


 family, plus all other income of other members of the  family  over  the
  age  of  twenty-one  years,  plus  a  proportion  of income of gainfully
  employed members under the age of twenty-one years, the proportion to be
  determined  by  the  company  as  approved  by  the  commissioner or the
  supervising agency, as the case may be, excluding therefrom a  deduction
  of fifteen thousand dollars from the income of secondary wage earners of
  the  family or a larger deduction if approved by the commissioner or the
  supervising agency, as the case may be,  except  that  the  company,  as
  approved  by the commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case may
  be, may exclude a proportion of the  income  of  other  members  of  the
  family  over  the age of twenty-one years for the purpose of determining
  eligibility for admission or continued occupancy,  or  for  establishing
  the rental of such family, or for all such purposes; in the case of such
  non-housekeeping  accommodations  it  means  the  annual  income  of the
  occupant, provided that the commissioner or supervising agency,  as  the
  case  may  be, may make rules and regulations relative to the allocation
  of the income of a family among the members thereof for the  purpose  of
  determining the income attributable to such occupant.
    (b)  For  the  purpose  of  determining  maximum  income  to establish
  eligibility for admission or continued occupancy of, or  the  imposition
  of  surcharges  upon, tenant-cooperators in a mutual company project, or
  for all such purposes, there may be added to the total  annual  carrying
  charges  an amount equal to six per centum of the investment of a person
  or family in the equity obligations of such housing company  and,  where
  not  included in the carrying charges payable to such company, the value
  or cost to them of heat, light, water  and  cooking  fuel  and,  to  the
  extent  authorized  by the commissioner or the supervising agency as the
  case may be, the value or cost to them of repainting and replacement  of
  fixtures and appliances.
    (c)  The  non-housekeeping  accommodations  with  board  in  a company
  project including non-housekeeping accommodations  with  board  designed
  for  the occupancy of handicapped persons shall be available for persons
  of low income whose probable aggregate annual  income  at  the  time  of
  admission  and during the period of occupancy does not exceed four times
  the annual charges to be paid by such persons and in the  case  of  aged
  care  accommodations  two  times  the  annual charges to be paid by such
  persons.  The "probable aggregate annual income" means the annual income
  of the person occupying such non-housekeeping accommodations, aged  care
  accommodations   or   non-housekeeping  accommodations  for  handicapped
  persons, provided that the commissioner or supervising  agency,  as  the
  case  may  be, may make rules and regulations relating to the allocation
  of the income of a family among the members thereof for the  purpose  of
  determining the income attributable to such occupant.
    (d)  A  company  may,  with  the  approval  of the commissioner or the
  supervising agency, as the case may be, lease dwellings in a project  to
  an  authority,  at  rentals  fixed  for  such  dwellings pursuant to the
  provisions of subdivision  one  of  this  section  less  an  appropriate
  adjustment for the increased tax exemption, if any, attributable to such
  dwellings  pursuant to subdivision three of section thirty-three of this
  chapter, for occupancy by persons and families of  low  income  who  are
  eligible and pay rents therefor pursuant to the provisions of the public
  housing law.
    (e) Notwithstanding the provisions of this subdivision, families whose
  probable aggregate annual income does not exceed one hundred twenty-five
  percent  of  the  limitations  as  to  income  as determined pursuant to
  paragraphs (a) and (b) of this subdivision, shall also be  eligible  for
  admission  to  the  dwelling  or non-housekeeping accommodations without
  board of a  project  on  the  understanding  that  any  family  becoming


 eligible  for  admission  by  reason  hereof shall pay, from the time of
  admission, a rental surcharge as provided for in  subdivision  three  of
  this section, computed on the basis of the income limitations applicable
  to  such  family  in  the  absence  of this subdivision. In applying the
  provisions of subdivision three of this section  to  a  family  becoming
  eligible by reason of this section, the maximum income prescribed by law
  for  admission  or  occupancy shall for all purposes be computed without
  reference to this paragraph.
    2-a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the  commissioner  or
  supervising  agency  shall  authorize  and  make  provision in rules and
  regulations for an immediate downward adjustment  in  surcharge  upon  a
  showing  of  substantial  decrease in income caused by events including,
  but not limited to death, disability or illness.
    3. In the event that the income of a person  or  family  in  occupancy
  should  increase  and exceed the maximum prescribed by law for admission
  or for continued occupancy, based on the latest existing rent,  by  more
  than  twenty-five  per centum, such person or family shall be subject to
  removal from the dwelling, non-housekeeping, aged care accommodations or
  non-housekeeping  accommodations  for  handicapped   persons   provided,
  however,  that  such  person  or  family  may  be permitted to remain in
  occupancy until such income exceeds the maximum  prescribed  by  law  by
  more  than  fifty  per  centum, if the company, with the approval of the
  commissioner or the supervising agency,  shall  determine  that  removal
  would  cause  hardship to such person or family. Any person or family in
  occupancy whose income exceeds the maximum prescribed by law shall pay a
  rental surcharge in accordance with  a  schedule  of  surcharges  to  be
  promulgated  by the company with the approval of the commissioner or the
  supervising agency, as the case may be, provided, however,  such  rental
  surcharge  shall  in  no  event  exceed fifty per centum of the existing
  rent.
    4. Twenty-five per cent of rental  surcharges  collected  pursuant  to
  this section on account of rentals payable prior to July first, nineteen
  hundred  eighty-one  shall  be  paid  by the company to the municipality
  which has granted tax exemption pursuant to section thirty-three of this
  article as a credit against the grant of tax  exemption,  the  value  of
  such  tax exemption and of such credit to be determined on an individual
  dwelling, non-housekeeping, aged care accommodation or  non-housekeeping
  accommodations  for  handicapped  persons  unit basis. In the event that
  such tax exemption has not been granted, or in  the  event  that  a  sum
  equal  to  the  total  of  all  accrued taxes as to individual dwelling,
  non-housekeeping,   aged   care   accommodation   or    non-housekeeping
  accommodations  for  handicapped  persons units where such tax exemption
  was granted have been paid to the municipality, the excess  if  any,  of
  surcharges  and  all  surcharges  imposed after June thirtieth, nineteen
  hundred eighty-one shall be applied to the  expenses  of  operation  and
  management as approved by the commissioner or the supervising agency.
    5.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  this section or of any other
  general, special or local law, persons or families living in  a  project
  under  a  lease for ninety-nine years renewable, or in perpetuity, or by
  reason of ownership of stock in such company may, with the  approval  of
  the  commissioner  or  of the supervising agency, as the case may be, be
  permitted to remain in occupancy for not more  than  three  years  after
  such  increase  in  income exceeds the maximum prescribed by law by more
  than fifty per  centum  unless  such  occupancy  is  extended  with  the
  approval  of  the commissioner or of the supervising agency, as the case
  may be. Any such occupant required to remove from the project because of
  excessive income as herein provided shall be discharged  from  liability
  on any note, bond or other evidence of indebtedness relating thereto and


 shall be reimbursed for all sums paid by such occupant to the company on
  account  of the purchase of stock or income debentures as a condition of
  such occupancy.
    6.  Preference  in  admission  to a project shall be given to families
  displaced by a limited-profit housing project.
    * 7. Preference in admission to a project with an open  waiting  list,
  as  determined  by  the commissioner or the supervising agency, shall be
  given by a mutual company or an urban rental company or by the New  York
  state  housing  finance  agency when subleasing dwellings in projects of
  such companies pursuant to section  forty-four-a  of  this  chapter,  to
  persons or surviving spouses of persons who are veterans as such term is
  defined  pursuant  to  section eighty-five of the civil service law. For
  projects with a closed list, as determined by the  commissioner  or  the
  supervising  agency,  such preference shall be given upon the opening of
  the  waiting  list.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  persons  who  are
  residing  in  a  limited-profit  housing  project  shall  be given first
  priority for an internal transfer in  the  project  in  which  they  are
  residing  in  accordance  with  rules and regulations promulgated by the
  commissioner or the supervising agency.
    * NB Effective until May 8, 2024
    * 7. Preference in admission to a project with an open  waiting  list,
  as  determined  by  the commissioner or the supervising agency, shall be
  given by a mutual company or an urban rental company or by the New  York
  state  housing  finance  agency when subleasing dwellings in projects of
  such companies pursuant to section  forty-four-a  of  this  chapter,  to
  persons or surviving spouses of persons who are veterans as such term is
  defined  pursuant  to  section eighty-five of the civil service law. The
  number of persons given preference as a veteran or a surviving spouse of
  a veteran shall be published adjacent to the application to be  on  such
  waiting  list.  For  projects  with  a closed list, as determined by the
  commissioner or the supervising agency, such preference shall  be  given
  upon  the  opening  of  the waiting list. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
  persons who are residing in a limited-profit housing  project  shall  be
  given  first  priority  for an internal transfer in the project in which
  they are residing in accordance with rules and  regulations  promulgated
  by the commissioner or the supervising agency.
    * NB Effective May 8, 2024
    7-b.  Preference  in  admission  to  projects located in a city with a
  population of one hundred thousand or more shall be given to members  of
  a police force of such city, provided such members otherwise qualify for
  admission  and provided, further, that such city has adopted a local law
  authorizing such program.
    8. Preference in admission to any project or to such  portion  of  any
  project  which  has  been specifically designed for occupancy by aged or
  handicapped persons, as the case may be, shall be given to such persons.
    8-a. A company may rent  one  or  more  dwelling  units  to  a  social
  services official or duly authorized agency, as defined in section three
  hundred  seventy-one  of  the  social services law, for the operation of
  agency boarding homes or group homes or to any public agency as  defined
  in  section  four  hundred  sixty-one of the general municipal law which
  provides residences and social services to dependent aged persons.
    9. (a) For the purpose of enabling lower  income  elderly  persons  to
  continue  in  occupancy  without  paying  rentals  in  excess  of a fair
  proportion of their income, any municipality having a population of less
  than one million is authorized to make and to contract to make  periodic
  payments  to a company in an amount not exceeding the difference between
  the rent or carrying charges for the dwellings occupied  by  such  lower
  income  persons  and  one-third  of  their net probable aggregate annual


 income, where such rent or carrying charges  exceed  such  one-third  of
  income;  provided  that  the aggregate amount of periodic payments to be
  made in accordance with  contracts  entered  into  by  the  municipality
  during any fiscal year thereof pursuant to this subdivision, subdivision
  seven  of  section  eighty-five-a,  section  one  hundred twenty-six and
  section five hundred seventy-seven-a of this chapter  shall  not  exceed
  the  aggregate  amount of all real property taxes paid or payable during
  such fiscal year by all companies organized pursuant  to  this  article,
  article  IV, article V, and article XI of this chapter and the aggregate
  estimated receipts of all such companies in such fiscal year from rental
  surcharges collected or to be collected pursuant to this chapter.
    (b) Such payments shall be made only on account of a person or  family
  in  occupancy  where the head of the household is sixty-two years of age
  or older and is not a recipient of public  assistance  pursuant  to  the
  social  services law, and where the net probable aggregate annual income
  of the person or family in occupancy does not exceed six  thousand  five
  hundred  dollars  a  year. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision
  twenty-nine of section two  of  this  chapter,  net  probable  aggregate
  annual  income  as  used in this subdivision shall mean annual income of
  family members from all sources after deduction of  federal,  state  and
  city  income  taxes;  provided  that  any  municipality may provide that
  increases in benefits under the social security act  which  take  effect
  after  such  person  or  family has assumed occupancy shall not be taken
  into account.
    (c) A company having a contract with the municipality pursuant to this
  subdivision may not collect from persons or  families  in  occupancy  on
  whose  account  such  payments  are  made  any  rentals in excess of the
  amounts specified in such contract.
    10. A housing company shall accept federal reimbursement under section
  eight of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974  in  lieu  of
  such  amount  in rent payment for a person qualifying under such act and
  residing in a project of such  company.  A  housing  company  shall  not
  reject  an  applicant  for  an apartment solely on the basis that all or
  part of the rent shall be paid under section eight of  the  Housing  and
  Community Development Act of 1974.
    11. Every company subject to the provisions of this article shall on a
  form  prescribed  by  the  commissioner  or  supervising agency annually
  certify to such commissioner or supervising agency  that  all  necessary
  steps are being undertaken to ensure that all surcharges due pursuant to
  this section are being properly billed, collected and remitted.
    12. All municipally-aided projects shall post the first and last names
  of  all  persons  on  each  waiting  list maintained by such project, in
  chronological order, by such project's management office, or,  if  there
  is  no  management office on the site of such municipally-aided project,
  in such project's lobby.
    13. The commissioner or supervising agency  shall  develop  a  written
  procedure with regard to how applications for admission to a company are
  processed  and  numbered,  and  how tenants are selected. Such procedure
  shall  be  implemented  and  followed  by  all  limited-profit   housing
  companies  subject to the provisions of this article; provided, however,
  that any limited-profit housing company may elect additional  procedures
  so  long  as  such  procedures  are not inconsistent with the procedures
  developed by the  commissioner  or  supervising  agency  and  any  other
  requirements set forth in this article.
    14.  The  commissioner or supervising agency shall develop a procedure
  whereby applicants are notified in the case that  their  application  is
  rejected  by  a limited-profit housing company subject to the provisions
  of this article, and such procedure  shall  also  include  the  appeal's
 process available to the rejected applicant. The notification that shall
  be  sent  to the applicant shall be in written form, include reasons why
  the applicant was rejected, the appeal's process, and  be  sent  to  the
  applicant  within  sixty  days  after the limited-profit housing company
  decided to reject such applicant. Any limited-profit housing company may
  elect  additional  procedures  so  long  as  such  procedures  are   not
  inconsistent  with  the  procedures  developed  by  the  commissioner or
  supervising agency and any other requirements set forth in this article.
  For purposes of this subdivision,  an  applicant  shall  not  be  deemed
  rejected  if  their  application  is  still active on the limited-profit
  housing company's waiting list and such waiting list is still  open  and
  accepting applications.
    15.  The  commissioner  or  the  supervising  agency shall develop and
  require the use of a publicly available electronic automated system  for
  limited-profit   housing  companies  to  store,  process,  and  maintain
  applications and waiting lists. Waiting lists maintained  by  each  such
  company  shall  use  a  method that protects any personally identifiable
  information of applicants from being publicly disclosed or accessible to
  the public. Such electronic automated system shall also include  general
  information  about each company, including, but not limited to: the name
  and address of the company;  the  management  office  and  address;  the
  number  and  size  of all units in each building; and information on the
  status of  each  waiting  list,  including  whether  the  limited-profit
  housing  company  is  currently  accepting  applications  and  how  long
  applicants may have to wait.




   § 31-a. Resale price of shares. Notwithstanding any other provision of
  this  article  and  subject to any regulation not inconsistent with this
  section which may be promulgated  by  the  commissioner  or  supervising
  agency:
    (a)  The  resale price of shares in a mutual company shall be fixed by
  the mutual company, subject to  the  approval  of  the  commissioner  or
  supervising  agency  and  shall  be  equal  to (1) the consideration the
  selling tenant-cooperator paid for  such  shares  and  (2)  any  capital
  assessments   and   voluntary  capital  contributions  approved  by  the
  commissioner  or  supervising   agency   and   paid   by   the   selling
  tenant-cooperator  to  the  mutual  company,  to  the extent not already
  included in the consideration paid for such shares, and, if  established
  by the mutual company, (3) a proportionate share of the actual aggregate
  amortization  paid on all existing and prior mortgages on the project in
  reduction of total outstanding principal indebtedness during such period
  as shall be fixed by the board of directors of the  mutual  company,  to
  the  extent  not  already  included  in  the consideration paid for such
  shares, and (4) reasonable administrative charges.
    (b) The aggregate amount to be paid to the  selling  tenant-cooperator
  with respect to the sale of the selling tenant-cooperator's shares shall
  be fixed by the board of directors of the mutual company, subject to the
  approval  of  the commissioner or supervising agency, and shall be equal
  to (1) the consideration the selling  tenant-cooperator  paid  for  such
  shares,  (2) any capital assessments and voluntary capital contributions
  approved by the commissioner or  supervising  agency  and  paid  by  the
  selling  tenant-cooperator  to  the  mutual  company,  to the extent not
  already included in the consideration paid for such shares,  and  (3)  a
  proportionate  share  of  the  actual aggregate amortization paid by the
  selling tenant-cooperator on all existing and  prior  mortgages  on  the
  project  in reduction of total outstanding principal indebtedness during
  such period as shall be fixed by the  board  of  directors  pursuant  to
  subdivision  (a)  of this section, to the extent not already included in
  the consideration paid for such shares. To the  extent  that  a  selling
  tenant-cooperator  may  be  entitled  to  an amount less than the resale
  price of his shares, the difference shall  be  retained  by  the  mutual
  company.
    (c)  The  board  of  directors  may,  subject  to  the approval of the
  commissioner or supervising agency, establish a general policy  pursuant
  to  which  a  selling  tenant-cooperator  who had occupied more than one
  dwelling unit is paid an amount measured by his proportionate  share  of
  the actual aggregate amortization paid during his period of occupancy on
  all  existing  or  prior  mortgages on the project. To the extent that a
  selling tenant-cooperator may be entitled to an amount greater than  the
  resale  price  of  shares,  the  difference  may  be paid to the selling
  tenant-cooperator by the mutual company.
    (d) The "proportionate share of the actual aggregate amortization paid
  on all existing and prior mortgages  on  the  project"  referred  to  in
  subdivision  (a)  of  this  section  shall  be in the same ratio to such
  actual aggregate amortization as  the  number  of  shares  held  by  the
  selling  tenant-cooperator at the time of sale bears to the total number
  of shares of issued and outstanding capital stock of the mutual  company
  during such period.
    (e) Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the continued use
  of  any  method  of calculating resale price adopted by a mutual company
  and approved by the commissioner or  supervising  agency  prior  to  the
  effective date of this section.


   (f)   a   mutual   company   shall   provide,   upon   request   of  a
  tenant-cooperator, a written statement providing the  current  value  of
  such tenant-cooperator's shares and equity in such mutual company;




   §   31-b.   Assignment   or  pledge  of  tenant  cooperator's  shares.
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a tenant cooperator's shares
  in a mutual company may be assigned or pledged  as  collateral  for  the
  purpose  of  securing  a  loan  for  the  purchase of such shares.   The
  commissioner or supervising agency, as the case may be, shall promulgate
  regulations which provide that in the event of a default of  such  loan,
  such  shares  may be resold, and the dwelling accommodations represented
  by such shares may be occupied, only in accordance with  the  provisions
  of this article.




   §  31-c.  Tenant-cooperators;  application  of  shares.  1.  No mutual
  company shall require a current tenant-cooperator to use cash,  loan  or
  mortgage  to  make  an initial payment for shares that would entitle the
  tenant-cooperator to occupancy upon transfer to  another  dwelling  unit
  within   the  mutual  company's  facilities,  but  instead,  subject  to
  subdivision two of this section, shall first allow the tenant-cooperator
  the option to apply the value of his or her shares  and  equity  in  the
  mutual  company  toward  any  consideration required to be paid for such
  shares.
    2. Within one hundred eighty  days  of  the  effective  date  of  this
  section,  the  commissioner  and the supervising agency, as the case may
  be,  shall   each   promulgate   regulations   authorizing   a   current
  tenant-cooperator,  entitled  to  occupancy  by  reason  of ownership of
  shares in such mutual company, to apply all or a portion of the value of
  his  or  her  shares  and  equity  in  the  mutual  company  toward  any
  consideration  required  to  be  paid for shares which would entitle the
  tenant-cooperator to occupancy of another unit owned and operated by the
  mutual company,  regardless  of  the  sale  of  the  tenant-cooperator's
  current shares in such mutual company, but subject to such other charges
  due and owing to the mutual company for which such tenant-cooperator may
  be  liable.  Any  dispute  thereof  may  be  determined  by  a  court of
  appropriate jurisdiction and any requirement to waive such  right  as  a
  condition  of  ownership  or  transfer  shall  be void as against public
  policy.




   §  32. Supervision and regulation. The commissioner or the supervising
  agency as the case may be, may:
    1. Examine a company and keep informed as to  its  general  condition,
  its  capitalization and the manner in which its property is constructed,
  acquired,  rehabilitated,  leased,  operated  or  managed,  and  to  its
  compliance  with all provisions of law and orders of the commissioner or
  the supervising agency.
    2. Require every company to file with  him  or  it  an  annual  report
  setting  forth  such  information as the commissioner or the supervising
  agency may require, verified by the oath of any officer, general manager
  or other person in control of the company. Such report  shall  be  in  a
  form,  cover  a  period,  and  be  filed  at a time as prescribed by the
  commissioner or the supervising agency.
    3. From time to time make, amend and repeal  supplementary  rules  and
  regulations  for  carrying  into  effect  the provisions of this article
  provided, however, that such supplementary rules and  regulations  shall
  be  strictly  limited  in  their application to the means and methods of
  compliance with the provisions of  this  article  to  which  such  power
  relates.
    4. Make such agreements with bondholders, mortgagees or creditors of a
  company  to do or refrain from doing any act, not inconsistent with law,
  to protect the investment rights of the state of New York, the New  York
  state  housing  finance  agency,  the  New York city housing development
  corporation or of the municipality.
    5 (a) Administer oaths, take affidavits, hear testimony and take proof
  under oath at public or private hearings; (b) subpoena and  require  the
  attendance   of  witnesses  and  the  production  of  books  and  papers
  pertaining to  any  investigations  and  inquiries  authorized  by  this
  article  and examine them in relation to any matter concerning which the
  power  to  investigate  is  granted;  (c)  issue  commissions  for   the
  examination of witnesses who are out of the state or unable to attend or
  are  excused  from  attendance;  (d)  investigate  into the affairs of a
  company and into the dealings, transactions  or  relationships  of  such
  company  with  third  persons  and into the affairs of any person, firm,
  corporation or other entity having a financial interest, whether  direct
  or  indirect,  in the design, construction, acquisition, reconstruction,
  rehabilitation, improvement,  financing  or  operation  of  any  project
  undertaken  by  a  company;  (e) intervene, as a matter of right, in any
  action or proceeding of  which  notice  shall  be  given  affecting  the
  project  of  a company; (f) take such steps in such action or proceeding
  as may be necessary to protect the public interest.
    With regard to duties and liabilities arising out of this article  the
  state,  the  commissioner  or  the supervising agency may be sued in the
  same manner as a private person. No costs shall be awarded  against  the
  commissioner,  the state, or the supervising agency, as the case may be,
  in any such litigation.
    6. In the event of a violation by a company  of  a  provision  of  the
  certificate  of  incorporation  or  of  law  or  of the loan or mortgage
  contract or of any rules and regulations duly  promulgated  pursuant  to
  the  provisions  of  this  article,  the commissioner or the supervising
  agency, as the case may be, may  remove  any  or  all  of  the  existing
  directors  of  the  company  and  appoint such person or persons who the
  commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case may be,  in  his  or
  its  sole discretion deems advisable, including officers or employees of
  the division of housing and community renewal or the supervising agency,
  as new directors to serve in the places of those removed.  Directors  so
  appointed  need  not  be shareholders or meet other qualifications which
  may be prescribed by the certificate of incorporation or by-laws. In the


 absence of fraud or bad faith,  directors  so  appointed  shall  not  be
  personally   liable   for  debts,  obligations  or  liabilities  of  the
  corporation. Directors so  appointed  shall  serve  only  for  a  period
  coexistent with the duration of such violation or until the commissioner
  or  the  supervising  agency, as the case may be, is assured in a manner
  satisfactory to him or  it  against  violations  of  a  similar  nature.
  Officers  or  employees of the division of housing and community renewal
  or of the supervising agency who are so  appointed  as  directors  shall
  serve  in  such  capacity without compensation. No such removal may take
  place without  written  notice  and  an  opportunity  for  the  affected
  directors  to appear and be heard before the agency or commissioner with
  respect to any alleged violation  and  the  respective  parties  may  be
  represented  by  counsel.  Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of
  any general, special or local law or any  limitation  contained  in  the
  provisions  of  any  city charter, the state or a municipality acting by
  and through the commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case  may
  be,  shall  save  harmless  and indemnify any officer or employee of the
  division of housing and community renewal or the supervising  agency  so
  appointed  as  a director, from financial loss arising out of any claim,
  demand, suit or judgment by reason of alleged negligence or other act by
  such director, provided that such director was acting in  the  discharge
  of  his duties and within the scope of his employment and that such loss
  did not result from the willful and wrongful act or gross negligence  of
  such   director  and  provided  further  that  this  save  harmless  and
  indemnification provision shall not in any way impair, limit  or  modify
  the  rights and obligations of any insurer under any policy of insurance
  and shall inure only to directors so appointed and shall not enlarge  or
  diminish  the rights of any other party. No action or special proceeding
  based on or arising out of alleged  negligence  or  other  act  by  such
  director  may  be  commenced  against such director, municipality or the
  state unless a notice of claim shall have first been served in a  manner
  consistent  with  service  upon a municipality or the state, as the case
  may be.
    7. Whenever the commissioner, in the case of a company undertaking  or
  otherwise operating a state-aided project, or the supervising agency, in
  the   case   of   a   company   undertaking  or  otherwise  operating  a
  municipally-aided project, shall be of the opinion that such company  is
  failing or omitting, or is about to fail or omit to do anything required
  of  it by law or by order of the commissioner or is doing or is about to
  do anything, or permitting anything, or is about to permit  anything  to
  be done, contrary to and in violation of law or of any order, regulation
  or  directive of the commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case
  may be, or which is improvident or prejudicial to the  interest  of  the
  public,   the   lienholders,  the  stockholders,  or  the  tenants,  the
  commissioner or the supervising agency, as the  case  may  be,  may,  in
  addition  to such other remedies as may be available, commence an action
  or proceeding in the supreme court of the state of New York in the  name
  of  the  commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case may be, for
  the purpose of having such violations or threatened  violations  stopped
  and  prevented, and in such action or proceeding the court may appoint a
  temporary or permanent receiver or both. Such action or proceeding shall
  be commenced by a petition to the supreme court, alleging the  violation
  complained  of and praying for appropriate relief. It shall thereupon be
  the duty of the court to specify the time,  not  exceeding  twenty  days
  after  service  of  a  copy  of  the  petition, within which the company
  complained of must answer the petition. In case of any default or  after
  answer   the   court  shall  immediately  inquire  into  the  facts  and
  circumstances in such manner as the court shall direct without other  or


 formal  pleadings,  and  without  respect to any technical requirements.
  Such other persons or  corporations  as  it  shall  seem  to  the  court
  necessary  or  proper  to  join as parties in order to make its order or
  judgment  effective, may be joined as parties. The final judgment in any
  such action or proceeding shall either dismiss the action or  proceeding
  or direct that an order or an injunction, or both, issue, or provide for
  the  appointment  of a receiver as prayed for in the petition, and grant
  such other relief as the court may deem appropriate.
    8. The commissioner or supervising agency may modify supervision of  a
  company  upon  finding that duplicative supervisory functions may impose
  an  undue  regulatory  burden  or  unnecessary  expenditure  of   agency
  resources,  by  taking such actions as are deemed appropriate, including
  consolidating supervisory functions associated with different  programs,
  and entering into memoranda of understanding with other agencies for the
  allocation of supervisory functions.






	   § 32-a. Additional supervision and regulation. The commissioner or the
  supervising agency, as the case may be, shall:
    1. Promulgate   regulations   providing   for   recognition   of  duly
  constituted tenants' associations and cooperators' advisory councils  by
  the  commissioner  or  supervising  agency,  as  the  case  may  be, and
  providing that a housing company shall meet  on  a  regular  basis  with
  representatives  of  such  an  association  or  council  at the specific
  project involved to discuss matters relating  to  the  project.  A  duly
  constituted  cooperators'  advisory council shall only be such a council
  in a mutual company  project  prior  to  the  election  of  a  board  of
  directors by the tenant-cooperators.
    2.  Require  every  company  to  file  with  him,  her or it an annual
  operating budget for each individual project in the manner prescribed by
  the commissioner or supervising agency.
    3. Require every company to file with him, her or  it  semi-annual  or
  quarterly  financial  statements and an annual financial statement. Each
  annual financial statement shall be accompanied by a certificate of  the
  company's   independent  certified  public  accountant.  Such  financial
  statements shall be filed at the times and in the manner  prescribed  by
  the commissioner or supervising agency.
    4.  Afford  tenants  access to and an opportunity to acquire copies of
  all operating budgets or financial statements respecting the project  in
  which  such  tenants  reside,  to  the  extent  that  such  budgets  and
  statements are required by  law  to  be  kept  by  the  commissioner  or
  supervising agency.
    5.  Permit  any  tenant,  duly  constituted tenants' association, duly
  constituted cooperators' advisory council  or  his,  hers  or  its  duly
  authorized  representative to audit the books of the company and to have
  access during normal business hours to the financial records upon  which
  the company's financial statements are based.
    6.  Promulgate  regulations  relating  to  managing  agents, including
  criteria for the eligibility  for  selection  and  the  compensation  of
  managing  agents  by  companies organized pursuant to this article. Such
  regulations shall provide, among other things, that any contract with  a
  managing  agent  entered  into  after  September first, nineteen hundred
  seventy-seven shall be terminable for cause  and  shall  be  terminable,
  with  or  without cause, at least every twelve months after commencement
  of the term thereof, and that promptly  upon  termination  the  managing
  agent  shall  turn  over to the company all project records, rent rolls,
  bills, cancelled checks, bank statements and other papers owned by  such
  company.
    7.  Require  that  every  company file with him, her or it, within six
  months  of  the  effective  date  of   regulations   implementing   this
  subdivision   and   in  such  format  as  shall  be  prescribed  by  the
  commissioner or the supervising agency after consultation with the state
  energy  office,  an  energy  audit  report  which  identifies  potential
  energy-saving     building    improvements,    including    alterations,
  modifications  and  adjustments  to  the  building  structure,  heating,
  cooling,   lighting  and  ventilation  systems;  their  relative  costs;
  potential energy and cost savings; and simple payback periods, which for
  the purpose of this subdivision shall mean that period  of  time  within
  which  the estimated cost of such improvements, exclusive of the cost of
  capital, would be recovered from the savings generated by reduced energy
  consumption resulting from the improvements. The energy audit  shall  be
  conducted  by a public utility, an engineer or architect licensed by the
  state, or the managing agent or other representative of the  company  if
  such individual has attended an energy audit training workshop sponsored
  by  the  commissioner  or  the state energy office. A copy of the energy


 audit report, required herein, shall be given to  any  duly  constituted
  tenant's  association  or cooperator's advisory council and a copy shall
  be available for inspection and copying by  any  individual  tenant  who
  requests  it.  The commissioner or supervising agency shall also require
  that every company  certify  by  March  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred
  eighty-four  that all compatible conservation measures identified in the
  energy audit report which have simple payback periods  of  one  year  or
  less  have  been  implemented; provided, however, if the commissioner or
  supervising agency determines within sixty days of the date  the  energy
  audit  report  is filed that one or more of such identified conservation
  measures cannot be implemented by March thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred
  eighty-four,   given  the  projected  rent  revenues  and  other  monies
  available to the company from reserve funds, loans or  grants  from  the
  state  or  federal government or any other source, the implementation of
  such conservation measures shall be provided for according to a schedule
  prescribed by the commissioner or supervising agency.
    8. Every tenant or resident, or a person acting on behalf of a  tenant
  or  resident,  shall  be  permitted  to copy, by photographic means, any
  document within the scope of this section pertaining to the  project  in
  which  such  tenant  or resident resides. A reasonable fee, subject to a
  maximum therefor prescribed in regulations,  may  be  charged  for  such
  copies.
    * 9.  Require  that  within  ten  days of the filing of any reports or
  financial statements with the commissioner or  supervising  agency,  the
  housing  company  shall  transmit  a  copy  of  said report or financial
  statement to a duly constituted resident  board  of  directors,  and  if
  there  be none, to a cooperator's advisory council or a duly constituted
  tenants association representing the project concerned.  Where  no  such
  council  or  association  exists  in a project, a notice shall be posted
  informing the residents of the location on the premises of  the  project
  where  a  copy  of  said  report or financial statement is available for
  inspection. The notice shall be posted within ten days of filing,  in  a
  prominent place on the premises of the project concerned.
    * NB There are 2 sb 9's
    * 9.  Promulgate regulations to require each tenant use their dwelling
  unit as their primary residence to maintain  their  right  of  continued
  occupancy or be subject to eviction in a court of competent jurisdiction
  by a mutual housing company.
    * NB There are 2 sb 9's
    10.  Require  every  voting member of a board of directors of a mutual
  company subject to the provisions of this article, elected or  appointed
  for a term beginning on or after the effective date of this subdivision,
  to  complete, within the first year of his or her term and at least once
  every three years thereafter, a minimum of two  hours  of  training,  in
  person  or  virtually, as the commissioner or supervising agency, as the
  case  may  be,  may  deem  appropriate  on  the   financial   oversight,
  accountability  and fiduciary responsibilities of a board member; and to
  require every voting member of a board of directors of a mutual  company
  subject  to  the  provisions of this article, elected or appointed for a
  term beginning  before  the  effective  date  of  this  subdivision,  to
  complete  such  training  within  one year of the effective date of this
  subdivision and at least once every three years thereafter.
    11. Require every voting member of a board of directors  of  a  mutual
  company  subject to the provisions of this article, elected or appointed
  for a term beginning on or after the effective date of this subdivision,
  to complete, within the first year of his or her term and at least  once
  every  three  years  thereafter, in addition to the training required by
  subdivision ten of  this  section,  a  training  course,  in  person  or


 virtually,  as  the  commissioner or supervising agency, as the case be,
  may deem appropriate, to acquaint him or her with the powers,  functions
  and  duties  of  a board of directors of a mutual company subject to the
  provisions  of  this  article, as well as the powers and duties of other
  governing and administrative authorities affecting such  companies;  and
  to  require  every  voting  member  of  a board of directors of a mutual
  company subject to the provisions of this article, elected or  appointed
  for  a  term beginning before the effective date of this subdivision, to
  complete such training within one year of the  effective  date  of  this
  subdivision and at least once every three years thereafter.
    12.  Require  each  member of a board of directors of a mutual company
  subject to the provisions of this article to demonstrate compliance with
  the requirements set forth  in  subdivisions  ten  and  eleven  of  this
  section  by filing a certificate of completion of such course or courses
  on a form to be promulgated by the  commissioner.  Such  form  shall  be
  filed  with  the  secretary  of the mutual company and maintained by the
  secretary  as  a  corporate  record  and  distributed  annually  to  the
  shareholders and upon the filing of any director with the mutual company
  of  the  intention to seek re-election to the position. Sixty days prior
  to any scheduled election of members of  the  board  of  directors,  the
  secretary  of  the  mutual company shall furnish the commissioner or the
  supervising authority, as the case may be, with a list of all  incumbent
  directors  indicating  which  individuals  have  submitted  certificates
  required in this subdivision. Such course or courses shall  be  provided
  by  the  commissioner  or  supervising agency, as the case may be, at no
  cost to the trainee or the board to which the trainee has been elected.
    13. Develop the curricula used for training required  by  subdivisions
  ten  and  eleven of this section for which the supervising agency or the
  commissioner  may  request  and  shall  receive  the   cooperation   and
  assistance from any departments, divisions, boards, bureaus, commissions
  or   agencies  of  the  state  and  political  subdivisions  thereof  in
  developing such curricula. These curricula may be offered together as  a
  single  course  or separately. The training required by this section may
  be offered by providers approved  by  the  commissioner  or  supervising
  agency,  as  the  case  may  be.  In approving other providers for these
  trainings, the commissioner  or  supervising  agency  shall  consider  a
  potential  provider's  understanding of cooperative homeownership; laws,
  rules  and  regulations  affecting  mutual  companies  subject  to   the
  provisions  of  this  article; and the fiduciary responsibilities of the
  board of a residential cooperative, as well as  the  experience  of  the
  provider in delivering such training.
    14.  Hold  such  meeting  or  meetings,  in person or virtually as the
  commissioner or supervisory agency  shall  deem  appropriate,  with  the
  board of a mutual company on the financial oversight, accountability and
  fiduciary  responsibilities  of  such  board;  the powers, functions and
  duties of such board; and the powers and duties of other  governing  and
  administrative authorities affecting such company.




   § 32-b. Annual reports. The commissioner shall, on or before the first
  day  of July in each year, submit a report to the legislature, the state
  comptroller, and the attorney general on the implementation  of  article
  two  of  this chapter by the commissioner and the supervising agency and
  the policy included therein.  Such  report  shall  include  and  not  be
  limited  to  rent and carrying charge levels, changes therein, operation
  of the state capital grant program and  federal  subsidy  programs,  tax
  abatement  levels, total capital outlay, amortization, mortgage interest
  rates, income levels served  by  the  housing,  surcharge  billings  and
  collections  and  use  of  surcharge  revenues,  and vacancy rates. Such
  report shall  also  include  information  regarding  any  limited-profit
  housing company that has voluntarily dissolved in the preceding calendar
  year,  and any limited-profit housing company that has filed a notice of
  intent to dissolve in the current calendar year  with  the  commissioner
  and  the  supervising agency. This information shall include, but not be
  limited to, the name and address of the development, the number of units
  in  the  development,  a  range  of  amounts  of  rent  offered  in  the
  development,  the  number  of  tenants  in  the development, the current
  vacancy  rate  in  the  development,  income  levels   served   by   the
  development,   how   long   the   limited-profit   housing  company  has
  participated in the program,  and  any  sales  or  transfers  that  have
  occurred  since  the limited-profit housing company was created. For the
  purpose of preparing such report,  the  commissioner  may  request,  and
  shall  receive, from any municipality or supervising agency such data as
  he deems necessary or desirable and  such  municipality  or  supervising
  agency  shall  furnish  the  requested  data  within  sixty days of such
  request.




   § 33. Tax exemptions. 1. (a) Upon the consent of the local legislative
  body  of any municipality in which a project is or is to be located, the
  real property in a project shall be  exempt  from  local  and  municipal
  taxes,  other  than assessments for local improvements, to the extent of
  all or part of the value of the property included in such project  which
  represents an increase over the assessed valuation of the real property,
  both  land and improvements, acquired for the project at the time of its
  acquisition by the limited-profit housing  company,  provided,  however,
  that   the   real  property  in  a  project  acquired  for  purposes  of
  rehabilitation shall be exempt to the extent of all or part of the value
  of the property included in such project, and further provided that  the
  amount of such taxes to be paid shall not be less than ten per centum of
  the  annual shelter rent or carrying charges of such project except that
  for projects located or to be located in a city of a population  of  one
  million  or  more, upon the consent of the local legislative body of the
  municipality, the amount of such taxes to be paid may be set at not less
  than (i) the taxes payable with respect to the  real  property  in  such
  project  with  respect  to  the year nineteen hundred seventy-three, or,
  (ii) if such project was not occupied in such year, not  less  than  ten
  per  centum  of  the  annual  shelter  rent  or  carrying  charges first
  established pursuant to subdivision one of section  thirty-one  of  this
  article.  Shelter  rent  shall  mean  the  total rents received from the
  occupants of a project less the  cost  of  providing  to  the  occupants
  electricity,  gas,  heat  and other utilities. Total rents shall include
  rent supplements and subsidies received from the federal government, the
  state or a municipality on behalf  of  such  occupants,  but  shall  not
  include  interest  reduction  payments  pursuant  to  subdivision (a) of
  section two hundred one of the Federal Housing and Urban Development Act
  of nineteen hundred sixty-eight. The tax  exemption  shall  operate  and
  continue  so  long  as  the mortgage loans of the company, including any
  additional mortgage loan the proceeds of which are  used  primarily  for
  the  residential  portion  of  the  project,  which  additional  loan is
  approved by the commissioner or the supervising agency, are outstanding.
    (b) Where a municipality acts on behalf of another taxing jurisdiction
  in assessing real property for the purpose of taxation,  or  in  levying
  taxes  therefor,  the  consent  of  the  local  legislative body of such
  municipality shall have the effect of exempting the real property  in  a
  project from local and municipal taxes, other than assessments for local
  improvements, levied by or in behalf of both such taxing jurisdictions.
    As  used  in  this paragraph, the term "taxing jurisdiction" means any
  municipal corporation or  district  corporation,  including  any  school
  district  or  any  special district, having the power to levy or collect
  taxes and benefit assessments upon real property,  or  in  whose  behalf
  such taxes or benefit assessments may be levied or collected.
    (c)  Notwithstanding  the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this
  subdivision, the real property of a state urban development  corporation
  project  acquired,  owned, constructed, managed or operated by a company
  incorporated pursuant to the not-for-profit  corporation  law  and  this
  article  shall  be entitled to all the benefits provided by section four
  hundred twenty-two of the real property tax law. The real property of  a
  state  urban  development  corporation project, other than a state urban
  development corporation project acquired, owned, constructed, managed or
  operated by  a  company  incorporated  pursuant  to  the  not-for-profit
  corporation  law  and  this  article, shall be exempt from all local and
  municipal taxes, other than assessments for local improvements,  to  the
  extent  of  the  value  of  the  property  included  in  such project as
  represents an increase over the assessed valuation of the real property,
  both land and improvements, acquired for the project on the date of  its


 acquisition  by  the  limited-profit  housing company, provided that the
  amount of such taxes to be paid shall not be less than ten per centum of
  the annual shelter rent or carrying charges of such project, as  defined
  in paragraph (a) hereof. The tax exemption shall operate and continue so
  long  as  the  mortgage  loans  of  such limited profit housing company,
  including any additional mortgage loan the proceeds of  which  are  used
  primarily  for  the residential portion of the project, which additional
  loan is approved by the commissioner  or  the  supervising  agency,  are
  outstanding   and   the  project  is  continued  to  be  operated  as  a
  limited-profit housing project. If a state urban development corporation
  project qualifying for tax exemption pursuant to this paragraph is sold,
  with the approval of the commissioner, to another limited-profit housing
  company, such successor company shall be entitled to all the benefits of
  this paragraph. In the event that such sale is to a company incorporated
  pursuant to the not-for-profit corporation law and  this  article,  such
  successor  company  shall  be  entitled  to all the benefits provided by
  section four hundred twenty-two of the real property tax law.
    (d) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b)  of  this
  subdivision, when a project is financed with a mortgage loan pursuant to
  this  article  or  article  three  of  this  chapter  and (i) there is a
  participation, new loan or investment pursuant to section twenty-three-b
  of this article or (ii) such mortgage  loan  is  assigned,  modified  or
  satisfied   pursuant   to  section  twenty-three-a  or  forty-four-b  or
  subdivision twenty-two-a of  section  six  hundred  fifty-four  of  this
  chapter, the real property of the project shall be exempt from all local
  and  municipal  taxes, other than assessments for local improvements, to
  the extent of the value of the real property included  in  such  project
  which  represents  an  increase  over the assessed valuation of the real
  property, both land and improvements, acquired for the  project  on  the
  date  of  its  original  acquisition  for  the  project  by the original
  mortgagor under a mortgage loan pursuant  to  this  article  or  article
  three  of  this chapter, provided that the amount of taxes to be paid on
  the project shall not be less than ten per centum of the annual  shelter
  rent or carrying charges of such project, as defined in paragraph (a) of
  this  subdivision.  Such  tax  exemption shall commence in each instance
  from the date when the project becomes subject to a mortgage insured  by
  the  federal  government  and  shall  operate  and continue so long as a
  mortgage on such project is insured or held by the federal government or
  so long as the project is thereafter owned by the federal government  or
  so  long  as  any  residual  indebtedness  is  outstanding, whichever is
  longer. When there is a participation, new loan or  investment  pursuant
  to  section twenty-three-b of this article, such participation, new loan
  or investment shall be deemed  to  be  the  equivalent  of  a  federally
  insured  mortgage  for  purposes of this paragraph. Nothing contained in
  this paragraph shall be construed  to  limit  or  otherwise  impair  the
  benefits  available  to any company eligible for exemption from taxation
  pursuant to section thirty-one or section thirty-six-a of this  article,
  section four hundred twenty-two or section four hundred sixty-seven-c of
  the  real property tax law, or section fifty-eight of the public housing
  law. The foregoing shall not be  deemed  to  authorize  any  company  to
  receive  the benefits of any exemption from taxation in contravention of
  the provisions of section two of article eighteen of the constitution.
    (e)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  paragraph   (a)   of   this
  subdivision,  a municipality, with the approval of the local legislative
  body, may contract to exclude all or part of any rent subsidies received
  from the federal government pursuant to  section  eight  of  the  United
  States  Housing  Act  of nineteen hundred thirty-seven as amended in the
  computation of total rents received.


   (f)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  paragraph   (a)   of   this
  subdivision,  if  the  number of units occupied by persons receiving the
  benefit of  rental  assistance  payments  from  the  federal  government
  pursuant  to  section eight of the United States Housing Act of nineteen
  hundred  thirty-seven, as amended, with respect to any project increases
  by more than one hundred percent within any  twelve  consecutive  months
  prior to nineteen hundred eighty-five over the number of units for which
  such  subsidies  were  available during the preceding twelve consecutive
  months or as July first, nineteen hundred eighty,  whichever  is  later,
  taxes  payable for such additional subsidized units and subsequent units
  subsidized in the same manner shall be based solely upon that portion of
  total rents received on account of such additional subsidized units that
  is not funded by such rental  assistance  payments,  provided,  however,
  that no project shall receive such additional tax exemption (i) unless a
  minimum  of  seventeen  percent  of the units in the project receive the
  benefit of such subsidies, or (ii) if any mortgage on  such  project  is
  insured  or held by the federal government or if the project is owned by
  the federal government. The amount of exemption to which  a  project  is
  entitled  pursuant  to this paragraph shall be certified annually by the
  commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case may be.
    2. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one hereof,  whenever
  a  dwelling in a project is leased to the New York state housing finance
  agency pursuant to  the  provisions  of  section  forty-four-a  of  this
  chapter,  so  much of the assessed value of such project attributable to
  such dwelling (including a pro rata portion of the value of the land and
  common spaces) as represents an increase over the proportionate assessed
  value of the real property, both land  and  improvements,  acquired  for
  such  project  at  the  time  of original acquisition therefor, shall be
  exempt during the period of such lease from taxation for  county,  city,
  town,  village  and  school  district  purposes  and  special ad valorem
  levies; provided that if in any year the aggregate amount of such  taxes
  and  levies  that  would have been attributable to such dwelling but for
  the exemption provided by this subdivision exceeds  the  amount  payable
  out  of  the  low  rent  lease  account pursuant to subdivision three of
  section forty-four-a of this chapter with respect to the  agency's  rent
  obligation  for  such  dwelling,  the  agency  shall  make  proportional
  payments in lieu of such taxes and levies  to  the  appropriate  county,
  city,  town,  village,  school  district  or  special  district,  or any
  combination thereof as the case may be, in an aggregate amount equal  to
  one half of the sum of (a) the amount of such excess and (b) the amount,
  if any, by which the rent paid to the agency under the sublease for such
  dwelling exceeds the agency's rent obligation for such dwelling. Nothing
  contained in this subdivision shall preclude the increase of the taxable
  assessed  value  attributable  to  such  dwellings  as a result of a net
  increase in the assessed  valuation  of  the  taxable  property  in  the
  assessing  unit as a result of assessing such property at a higher ratio
  of full value.
    3. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one hereof,  whenever
  a  dwelling  in  a  project  is  leased to an authority, pursuant to the
  provisions of sections seventeen and thirty-one of this chapter, so much
  of the assessed value of such  project  attributable  to  such  dwelling
  (including  a  pro  rata  portion  of  the  value of the land and common
  spaces) as represents an increase over the proportionate assessed  value
  of  the  real  property,  both  land and improvements, acquired for such
  project at the time of original acquisition therefor,  shall  be  exempt
  during  the  period  of such lease from taxation for county, city, town,
  village and school district purposes  and  special  ad  valorem  levies.
  Nothing contained in this subdivision shall preclude the increase of the


 taxable  assessed  value  attributable to such dwelling as a result of a
  net increase in the assessed valuation of the taxable  property  in  the
  assessing  unit as a result of assessing such property at a higher ratio
  of full value.
    4.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions of subdivision one hereof, when a
  mutual company  is  organized  under  this  article  to  facilitate  the
  acquisition  of a building by residents thereof, the amount of local and
  municipal taxes, other than assessments for local  improvements,  to  be
  paid  on  the  real  property  included  in  such project, both land and
  improvements, shall not exceed twenty per centum of the  annual  shelter
  rent or carrying charges of such project, as defined in paragraph (a) of
  subdivision  one  hereof; provided, however, that where such acquisition
  of  a  building  by  residents  thereof  involves   the   financing   of
  rehabilitation  or  other  improvement  as well as acquisition, upon the
  consent of the local legislative body of the municipality in  which  the
  project  is  located  the  amount  of  such taxes may be further reduced
  provided that such amount shall not be less than ten per centum  of  the
  annual  shelter  rent  or carrying charges of the project, as defined in
  paragraph (a) of subdivision one hereof; or the company may in  lieu  of
  requesting such consent apply for the benefits of the local law, if any,
  enacted  pursuant  to  section  four  hundred  eighty-nine  of  the real
  property tax law. Such tax exemption, if any, granted pursuant  to  this
  article  shall  operate  and  continue so long as a loan made under this
  article or any subsequent loan  approved  by  the  commissioner  or  the
  supervising agency to enhance the residential portion of the project and
  the  project  is  continued to be operated for the purposes set forth in
  this article is outstanding.
    5. Bonds, mortgages, notes, income debentures  and  obligations  of  a
  company  are declared to be issued for a public purpose and to be public
  instrumentalities and together with interest  thereon  shall  be  exempt
  from  tax  including  but  not  limited  to the mortgage recording taxes
  imposed by article eleven of the tax law.
    6. Any project that received a tax exemption under paragraphs (a), (c)
  and (d) of subdivision one, and subdivision four of  this  section  may,
  upon  the  expiration  of  the  tax  exemption  period,  be  granted  an
  additional tax exemption period of up to fifty years, or until such time
  as the project is no longer operated under the restrictions and for  the
  purposes set forth in this article, whichever is sooner.




   §  34.  Foreclosure  and  judgments.  1.  Any  action or proceeding to
  foreclose a mortgage upon a company project, shall be in accordance with
  the applicable provisions of section ninety-four of this chapter.
    2. In the event of an  unsatisfied  judgment  against  a  company  any
  action  not  pertaining  to  the  collection of a mortgage indebtedness,
  shall  be  in  accordance  with  the  applicable  provision  of  section
  ninety-five of this chapter.
    3.  For  the  purpose  of  this section, wherever reference is made in
  sections ninety-four and  ninety-five  of  this  chapter  to  a  housing
  company,  it  shall  be  deemed to refer to a company as defined in this
  article.




§  35.  Voluntary dissolution. 1. A company aided by a loan made prior
  to May first, nineteen hundred fifty-nine, may voluntarily be dissolved,
  with the consent of the commissioner or of the  supervising  agency,  as
  the  case  may  be,  not less than thirty-five years after the occupancy
  date upon the payment in full of the remaining balance of principal  and
  interest  due  and  unpaid  upon  the  mortgage  held  by the state or a
  municipality pursuant to this article and payment to the municipality of
  a sum equal to the total of all accrued taxes for  which  tax  exemption
  was  granted  and  received  pursuant  to  section  thirty-three of this
  article, provided however that such payment of accrued  taxes  shall  be
  waived  if a company is voluntarily dissolved subsequent to the original
  maturity date of any mortgage  held  by  the  state  or  a  municipality
  pursuant to this article.
    2.  A  company  aided by a loan made after May first, nineteen hundred
  fifty-nine, may voluntarily be dissolved, without  the  consent  of  the
  commissioner  or of the supervising agency, as the case may be, not less
  than twenty years after the occupancy date upon the payment in  full  of
  the  remaining balance of principal and interest due and unpaid upon the
  mortgage or mortgages and of any and all expenses incurred in  effecting
  such voluntary dissolution.
    3.  Upon such dissolution, title to the project may be conveyed in fee
  to the owner or owners of  its  capital  stock  or  to  any  corporation
  designated  by  it  or  them  for  the  purpose,  or  the company may be
  reconstituted pursuant to appropriate laws relating to the formation and
  conduct of corporations, provided,  however,  that  prior  to  any  such
  dissolution  and  conveyance or reconstitution, payment shall be made of
  all current operating expenses,  taxes,  indebtedness  and  all  accrued
  interest  thereon  and  the  par  value  of and accrued dividends on the
  outstanding stock of such company. If after making  such  payments,  and
  after  conveyance  of  the project, a surplus remains in the treasury of
  the company, such surplus, except in the case of a project  aided  by  a
  state loan made after May first, nineteen hundred fifty-nine, shall upon
  dissolution,  be  paid  into  the general fund of the municipality which
  granted tax exemption. After such dissolution and  conveyance,  or  such
  reconstitution,  the  provisions  of  this  article  shall become and be
  inapplicable to any such project and its owner or  owners  and  any  tax
  exemption  granted  with  respect  to  such  project pursuant to section
  thirty-three hereof shall cease and terminate.
    4. (a) Notwithstanding any contrary provision of  subdivision  one  or
  three  of  this  section  or  of  any other law or local law, consent to
  dissolve a company aided by a loan made prior  to  May  first,  nineteen
  hundred fifty-nine shall be given by the commissioner or the supervising
  agency,  as  the  case  may  be,  thirty-five  years  or  more after the
  occupancy date, provided that:
    (i) such company's project or projects is or are located in a city  of
  less than one million and more than three hundred thousand persons;
    (ii)  the dissolution of such company is part of a refinancing plan to
  continue the operation of the existing project or  projects  under  this
  chapter  by  a  new company organized pursuant to the provisions of this
  article in corporate, partnership, or individual ownership form  as  the
  existing stockholders shall agree;
    (iii)  if  the  refinancing  is  done by a new first mortgage, the new
  company shall be bound to pay from the proceeds of such refinancing  the
  remaining balance of the principal and interest on the original mortgage
  and  any interest due to debenture holders if such interest cannot first
  be paid out of the original company's surplus or  reserves;  or  if  the
  refinancing is done by a second mortgage, the new company shall be bound
  to  pay  from  the  proceeds  of  such  refinancing  the interest due to


 debenture holders if such interest cannot  first  be  paid  out  of  the
  original company's surplus or reserves; and
    (iv)  the  new company shall be bound to use at least fifty percent of
  the net proceeds, which remain from such refinancing after  having  paid
  the  legal  fees  and  development  costs  connected therewith and after
  having  made  the  payments  required  by  subparagraph  (iii)  of  this
  paragraph,  to  finance  the  costs of refurbishing the existing housing
  units of the project,  or  to  build  and  operate  under  this  chapter
  additional  housing  units  for persons of low or moderate income or for
  disabled persons, within the  same  municipality  wherein  the  original
  project  is  or projects are located, or to do both such refurbishing of
  existing units and such building and operating of such additional units;
  any portion of the net proceeds remaining after utilization of at  least
  fifty percent thereof for the foregoing purposes shall be distributed or
  used as the stockholders, partners or sole owner (as the case may be) of
  the new company shall decide.
    (b)  The  New  York  state housing finance agency and the state of New
  York mortgage agency are hereby authorized and empowered to finance such
  first or second mortgages for the foregoing  refinancing  purposes  upon
  such terms and conditions as each such agency deems appropriate.
    (c)  A  company which is voluntarily dissolved in accordance with this
  subdivision shall not be required  to  pay  the  taxes  referred  to  in
  subdivision  one  of  this  section  nor  any  surplus  remaining in its
  treasury as referred to in subdivision three  of  this  section  to  the
  municipality  which  grants  the  tax  abatement  for  such  project  or
  projects, but  instead,  such  surplus  and  all  reserve  accounts  and
  debenture  rights,  titles,  interests,  contracts, accounts receivable,
  accounts payable, and all other assets and liabilities of the  dissolved
  company  shall  be  transferred  to  the  new company organized for such
  refinancing purposes pursuant to such refinancing  plan,  and  such  new
  company  shall  be  considered for all the purposes of this chapter as a
  company aided by a loan made subsequent to May first,  nineteen  hundred
  fifty-nine,  with  the  first date of occupancy deemed to be the date of
  the closing of the new first or the second mortgage entered into as part
  of the refinancing plan described in subparagraphs (ii), (iii) and  (iv)
  of  paragraph  (a) of this subdivision; and any tax abatement granted by
  such municipality for such project or  projects  shall  continue  to  be
  applied  unless  or until such municipality shall act to extend, modify,
  enlarge or remove such tax abatement.




   §  35-a.  Requirements regarding dissolution. Mutual housing companies
  considering  dissolution  and/or  reconstitution  pursuant  to   section
  thirty-five   of   this  article  shall  be  subject  to  the  following
  requirements:
    1. Any preliminary vote  to  authorize  a  feasibility  study,  or  to
  approve  a  special  assessment  to  fund  such  feasibility study shall
  require the approval of a minimum of two-thirds of  all  dwelling  units
  for  which  shares  have  been  issued  by  the  mutual housing company,
  regardless of whether  such  dwelling  units  are  occupied  or  vacant,
  provided  however, that where the shareholder of record is deceased, any
  vote attributable to the dwelling unit shall be discounted, both in  the
  number  of  votes  cast  and  in the total number of dwelling units upon
  which the vote is calculated, until such time as a  new  shareholder  of
  record is determined for that dwelling unit.
    2.  Except  as  provided for in subdivision seven of this section, any
  vote to authorize  the  funding,  development,  and  submission  to  the
  attorney  general of an offering plan for dissolution and reconstitution
  of the mutual housing company, or to authorize the funding, development,
  and submission to the attorney general of  a  proxy  statement,  or  any
  other  documents  permitted  by  the  attorney  general  instead of such
  offering  plan,  or  any  other  preliminary  vote  for  review  by  the
  commissioner  or  supervising  agency  relating  to  the  dissolution or
  reconstitution required  by  the  regulations  of  the  commissioner  or
  supervising  agency, shall require the approval of eighty percent of all
  dwelling units for which shares have been issued, regardless of  whether
  such dwelling units are occupied or vacant, provided however, that where
  the  shareholder  of  record  is  deceased, any vote attributable to the
  dwelling unit shall be discounted, both in the number of votes cast  and
  in the total number of dwelling units upon which the vote is calculated,
  until  such  time  as a new shareholder of record is determined for that
  dwelling unit.
    3. No funds from the operating budget of the  mutual  housing  company
  shall  be  used  for  the  preparation  or distribution of a feasibility
  study,  a  preliminary  or  filed  offering  plan  for  dissolution  and
  reconstitution  of  the mutual housing company, a proxy statement or any
  other documents permitted  by  the  attorney  general  instead  of  such
  offering  plan,  or  a  notice  of intent to dissolve, or to pay for any
  services related to evaluation of,  preparation  for,  or  execution  of
  dissolution  and/or  reconstitution  pursuant  to section thirty-five of
  this article, including but not limited  to  legal  services,  but  such
  funds  may  only be raised by special assessment voted on and applicable
  to all shareholders using such procedures as required by regulations  of
  the  commissioner  or  the  supervising  agency  which  shall  not allow
  proxies.
    4. Except as provided for in subdivision seven of  this  section,  any
  vote  authorized  by  the regulations promulgated by the commissioner or
  the supervising agency that constitutes the vote  for  submission  of  a
  certificate  of  no objection, consent to dissolution or reconstitution,
  for  submission  to  the  attorney  general  of  an  offering  plan  for
  dissolution  and  reconstitution  of  the mutual housing company, or for
  submission to the attorney general of a proxy  statement  or  any  other
  documents  permitted  by  the  attorney general instead of such offering
  plan shall require the approval of eighty percent of all dwelling  units
  for  which  shares  have  been  issued  by  the  mutual housing company,
  regardless of whether  such  dwelling  units  are  occupied  or  vacant,
  provided  however, that where the shareholder of record is deceased, any
  vote attributable to the dwelling unit shall be discounted, both in  the
  number  of  votes  cast  and  in the total number of dwelling units upon


 which the vote is calculated, until such time as a  new  shareholder  of
  record is determined for that dwelling unit.
    5.  No  vote  as  set forth pursuant to subdivision one, two, three or
  four of this section, shall occur within five  years  following  a  vote
  undertaken pursuant to such subdivisions that failed to pass. No vote as
  set  forth  pursuant  to  subdivision  seven of this section shall occur
  within  three  years  following  a  vote  undertaken  pursuant  to  such
  subdivision that failed to pass.
    6.  For  any  vote pursuant to subdivision one, two, three or seven of
  this section, the proposal to be voted on shall state that the  cost  of
  the  action  to  be  approved  will  be  paid by a special assessment on
  shareholders, that  approval  of  the  proposal  authorizes  the  mutual
  housing  company  to  impose the assessment, and shall include the total
  dollar amount of the proposed  assessment  and  the  dollar  amount  per
  dwelling unit that will be imposed to fund the action if it is approved.
  Once  an assessment has been so approved by shareholder vote, the mutual
  housing company shall not increase the amount of the approved assessment
  except by further vote subject to the same procedures and threshold  for
  approval   as  were  required  for  the  vote  initially  approving  the
  assessment.
    7. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, any  final  or
  preliminary  vote regarding dissolution and reconstitution that involves
  a conversion to a housing company organized under article eleven of this
  chapter including, but not limited to, votes  on  the  authorization  to
  fund,  develop,  and submit any required filing to the attorney general,
  which pursuant to the conversion shall remain under the  supervision  of
  the commissioner or the supervising agency, shall only require a vote of
  a minimum of two thirds of the dwelling units for which shares have been
  issued by the mutual housing company regardless of whether such dwelling
  units   are  occupied  or  vacant,  provided  however,  that  where  the
  shareholder of record is deceased, any vote attributable to the dwelling
  unit shall be discounted, both in the number of votes cast  and  in  the
  total  number of dwelling units upon which the vote is calculated, until
  such time as a new shareholder of record is determined for that dwelling
  unit. Provided further however, that any dissolution and  reconstitution
  to  a  housing company organized under article eleven of this chapter as
  provided by this subdivision shall not utilize funds from the  operating
  budget  of  such  housing  company  to fund the preparation, creation or
  distribution of any materials required  for  a  vote  to  authorize  any
  dissolution  and  reconstitution  to  a  housing company organized under
  article eleven of this chapter as provided by this subdivision, and  the
  preparation,  creation  or  distribution  of  such  materials  shall  be
  financed  by  special  assessment  voted  on  and  applicable   to   all
  shareholders  as  provided  by subdivision three of this section, unless
  such  housing  company  took   any   actions   toward   dissolution   or
  reconstitution prior to the date this section took effect.




   §  36.  Sale  of  project  prior  to  termination of tax exemption. 1.
  Except as otherwise provided in this article and prior to the expiration
  of thirty-five years from the date of occupancy, a project, other than a
  project  aided  by  a  loan  made  after  May  first,  nineteen  hundred
  fifty-nine,  shall not be sold except to a company organized pursuant to
  the provisions of this article; prior to the expiration of twenty  years
  from  the  date  of  occupancy, a project aided by a loan made after May
  first, nineteen hundred fifty-nine,  shall  not  be  sold  except  to  a
  company  organized  pursuant  to  the provisions of this article.   Such
  successor  company  shall  acquire  such  project  subject  to  all  the
  provisions  of the loan and mortgage contract and the provisions of this
  article, and shall be entitled to all  the  benefits  provided  in  such
  contract  or  granted under this article, and a company so conveying all
  its projects may be dissolved with the consent of  the  commissioner  or
  the supervising agency, as the case may be.
    2.   In  the  event  of  any  sale  described  in  this  section,  the
  stockholders of the dissolving company shall in no  event  receive  more
  than the par value of their stock with accrued and unpaid dividends upon
  such stock.




   §  36-a. Additional powers of municipalities. In addition to any other
  powers granted  to  a  municipality  by  law,  and  notwithstanding  the
  provisions  of  any  other  law,  a  municipality  acting  by  its local
  legislative body shall have power:
    1. To undertake, plan, develop, construct or enter into contracts  for
  the  planning,  development  or  construction  of, or to own one or more
  projects or any part thereof, or to  engage  in  one  or  more  of  such
  activities  in  respect to one or more projects or any part thereof. For
  any of the purposes of this subdivision,  a  municipality  may  contract
  either  with a housing company incorporated under this article or with a
  housing development fund company incorporated pursuant to article eleven
  of this chapter.
    2. (a) Acquire by  purchase,  gift,  devise,  lease,  condemnation  or
  otherwise, in accordance with the provisions of the appropriate general,
  special  or  local law applicable to the acquisition of real or personal
  property by such municipality, real or personal property or any interest
  therein necessary for or incidental to  a  project,  including  but  not
  limited  to  air rights, and easements or other rights of user necessary
  for the use and development of such air rights, to be developed  as  air
  rights  sites  for a project; provided, however, that the acquisition of
  any air rights over railroad tracks, rights of  way  or  facilities  and
  easements  or other rights of user necessary for the use and development
  of such air rights are  to  be  subject  to  the  provision  of  section
  fifty-one-a  of  the  railroad  law.  The  acquisition  of real property
  pursuant to a plan shall in every case be deemed to be and constitute  a
  continuous rather than separate takings.
    (b)  Property  so  acquired  by  a  municipality  shall be exempt from
  taxation until sold, leased for a term not exceeding  ninety-nine  years
  or  otherwise  disposed  of  in  accordance  with the provisions of this
  section; provided however, that any such  municipality  shall  have  the
  power  and authority, with respect to such property, to pay or transfer,
  out of funds available to it for the effectuating  of  such  program  or
  project  annual  sums  in  lieu  of  taxes  to  any  taxing jurisdiction
  providing services to the project  area,  or  to  the  part  or  portion
  thereof  within  such  taxing jurisdiction, in order that no such taxing
  jurisdiction shall suffer an inequitable loss of revenue  by  virtue  of
  such  project; provided, further, that the amount so paid or transferred
  for any year with respect to any such  property  shall  not  exceed  the
  lesser  of  (1)  the  sum  last  levied  for  the benefit of such taxing
  jurisdiction as an annual tax on such property prior to the time of  its
  acquisition for project purposes or (2) such amount as shall be approved
  by the commissioner pursuant to such rules, regulations, limitations and
  conditions as he may prescribe, as an eligible and proper charge against
  such  project.   Upon the sale, lease or disposition of such property to
  any person, firm or corporation,  not  entitled  to  an  exemption  from
  taxation or entitled to only a partial tax exemption such property shall
  immediately  become subject to taxation in whole or in part, as the case
  may be, and shall be taxed pro rata for the  unexpired  portion  of  the
  taxable year.
    As  used  in  this paragraph, the term "taxing jurisdiction" means any
  municipal corporation or  district  corporation,  including  any  school
  district  or  any  special district, having the power to levy or collect
  taxes and benefit assessments upon real property,  or  in  whose  behalf
  such taxes or benefit assessments may be levied or collected.
    3.  To  sell  or  lease for a term not exceeding ninety-nine years any
  such project, or part thereof, at any stage before or at the date of  or
  after  the  physical completion of such project, to a company which will
  undertake, plan, construct, own,  manage  or  operate  such  project  in


 accordance  with  the  plan  and  the provisions of this article. In the
  event of a sale or lease of any  such  project  prior  to  the  physical
  completion  thereof,  the  municipality  may  agree  to complete and may
  complete  construction and development of such project or cause the same
  to be completed. Any such sale or  lease  may  be  made  without  public
  bidding,  public  sale  or  public  offering pursuant to such negotiated
  contract, agreement or lease, containing such  provisions,  limitations,
  requirements,  terms  and  conditions,  price or rental as the governing
  body of the municipality may deem necessary or desirable  to  effectuate
  the plan and the public policy and public purposes described in sections
  eleven and eleven-a of this article.
    4.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  section thirty-three of this
  article the real property in a project sold or  leased  as  provided  in
  this  section,  when the transfer thereunder becomes effective, shall be
  exempt from local and municipal taxes, other than assessments for  local
  improvements  to  such extent as may be granted by the local legislative
  body of the municipality. The tax exemption shall operate  and  continue
  so long as capital loans of the company to which such project shall have
  been  sold  or  leased  or any additional loan the proceeds of which are
  primarily used  for  the  residential  portion  of  the  project,  which
  additional  loan  is  approved  by  the  commissioner or the supervising
  agency are outstanding.
    Notes, bonds, mortgages and other obligations of such  a  company  are
  declared   to   be  issued  for  a  public  purpose  and  to  be  public
  instrumentalities and, together with interest thereon, shall  be  exempt
  from tax.
    5.  The  provisions  of section thirteen of this article requiring the
  approval by the commissioner of housing of the persons  incorporating  a
  limited-profit housing company and the provisions of section fourteen of
  this article requiring the consent of the commissioner of housing to the
  filing  of  the  certificate  of  incorporation of such a company in the
  office of the secretary of state and the  amendment  thereof  shall  not
  apply to a corporation created pursuant to this article on a cooperative
  basis  for  the purchase or lease of a project pursuant to this section;
  nor shall any of the provisions of  this  article  conferring  upon  the
  commissioner  of housing any powers in respect of limited-profit housing
  companies  apply  to  such  a  corporation.  The  application  of   this
  subdivision  shall be limited to corporations undertaking a project with
  the aid of a municipal loan under this article.
    6. A project or part of a project sold or leased to a housing  company
  pursuant  to  the provisions of this section thirty-six-a shall be owned
  or operated by such housing company in accordance with the provisions of
  this article and in accordance with an agreement of sale or lease to  be
  entered  into  by  the  municipality and such housing company. Each such
  agreement shall contain, in addition to such other terms and  conditions
  as may lawfully be agreed upon by the parties, the following provisions,
  which  shall  be  subject to any approvals which may be required by this
  article:
    (a) Establishing a schedule of maximum rents which may be  charged  by
  the housing company.
    (b) Prescribing the method by which tenants are to be selected for the
  project and criteria of tenant eligibility.
    (c)  Any such agreement of lease may provide for the transfer of title
  of the real property so leased to the housing company at the end of  the
  term or lease.
    7.  A  housing  company shall have the power, in addition to any other
  powers under this article to enter into and carry out the provisions  of
  any   agreement   authorized   under   this  section  or  under  section


 twenty-three-a or twenty-three-b of this article, and to enter into  and
  carry  out  agreements  in  order  to  obtain  insurance  by the federal
  government of a mortgage for the purpose of refinancing all or any  part
  of a mortgage loan pursuant to section twenty-three of this article.
    8.  Any  project that received a tax exemption under this section may,
  upon  the  expiration  of  the  tax  exemption  period,  be  granted  an
  additional tax exemption period of up to fifty years, or until such time
  as  the project is no longer operated under the restrictions and for the
  purposes set forth in this article, whichever is sooner.




   §  37. Separability clause. 1. Except as specifically provided in this
  article, nothing contained therein shall be deemed to limit or  restrict
  any  power  or  authority  granted to banking institutions, foundations,
  labor unions, veterans' organizations, or insurance companies or to  any
  other  corporation  or  to  any  fiduciary by any other provision of law
  heretofore or hereafter enacted.
    2. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article
  shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to  be  invalid
  such  judgment  shall  not  affect,  impair  or invalidate the remainder
  thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
  paragraph, section or part thereof directly involved in the  controversy
  in which such judgment shall have been rendered.




   §  40.  Short  title. This article may be cited as the "New York state
  housing finance agency act."




   §  41.  Statement  of  legislative  findings  and  purposes.  1. There
  continues to exist in the state a seriously inadequate  supply  of  safe
  and  sanitary  dwelling accommodations, non-housekeeping accommodations,
  aged care  accommodations  or  accommodations  for  handicapped  persons
  within  the  financial reach of families and persons (including aged and
  handicapped persons) of low income. This condition is  contrary  to  the
  public  interest  and threatens the health, safety, welfare, comfort and
  security of the people of the state.
    2. The ordinary operations of private  enterprise  cannot  provide  an
  adequate   supply   of   safe   and  sanitary  dwelling  accommodations,
  non-housekeeping   accommodations,   aged   care   accommodations    and
  accommodations  for  handicapped  persons  at rentals which families and
  persons of low income can afford. In order to encourage  the  investment
  of   private   capital   and   provide   such  dwelling  accommodations,
  non-housekeeping   accommodations,   aged   care   accommodations    and
  accommodations  for  handicapped  persons  provision  should be made for
  mortgage loans, at low  interest  rates,  to  housing  companies  which,
  subject  to  state  regulation  as  to  rents,  profits,  dividends  and
  disposition of their property, supply multiple dwelling  accommodations,
  non-housekeeping    accommodations,   aged   care   accommodations   and
  accommodations for handicapped persons, and other facilities  incidental
  or  appurtenant  thereto, to such families and persons. For that purpose
  there should be created a corporate governmental agency of the state, to
  be known as the "New York state housing finance agency," which,  through
  the  issuance  of  its  bonds, notes or other obligations to the private
  investing public, may attract a broad base of investment by the greatest
  number of the general public and obtain the funds necessary to  make  or
  finance the making of such mortgage loans. Thus, private capital will be
  encouraged  to  enter  this  field  of investment and will help meet the
  housing needs of families and persons of low  income.  Provision  should
  also be made for the New York state housing finance agency to lease such
  dwelling accommodations and to receive appropriations from the state, in
  aid  of providing housing in limited profit housing company projects for
  persons and families of low income who would otherwise be  eligible  for
  occupancy in low rent public housing.
    * 2-a.  Programs to attract capital to provide dwelling accommodations
  which families and persons of low and moderate income can afford may not
  be economically feasible without adequate subsidy where all of the units
  in the multiple dwelling accommodations to be financed are regulated  as
  to rents, profits, dividends and disposition of the owner's property. In
  such  cases  the  New  York  state housing finance agency should provide
  residential units for such families and  persons  by  making  loans,  or
  financing   the   making  of  such  loans,  to  the  owners  of  housing
  developments which will be required to supply, for a  reasonable  period
  of  time, a portion of residential units to such families and persons at
  rentals they can afford. Further it is the policy of the  state  through
  the  New  York  state  housing  finance  agency  to maximize as fully as
  possible consistent  with  the  economic  feasibility  of  each  housing
  development  the affordability, period of occupancy, and number of units
  in those portions of each housing development which are designed  to  be
  affordable to persons of low and moderate income.
    * NB Repealed July 23, 2025
    3.  There  is  also  threatened  in  the state an inadequate supply of
  academic  buildings  and  other   facilities   at   the   state-operated
  institutions  and statutory and contract colleges under the jurisdiction
  of the state university of New York when needed and when scheduled under
  the approved master plan of the state university. In order to  encourage
  the  investment  of private capital in such academic buildings and other


 facilities  and  to  assure  their  timely  construction,   acquisition,
  reconstruction,  rehabilitation  and  improvement,  the  New  York state
  housing finance agency should also be empowered, through the issuance of
  its  bonds,  notes or other obligations to the private investing public,
  to obtain a portion of the funds  necessary  to  finance  such  academic
  buildings  and  other  facilities at the state-operated institutions and
  statutory and contract colleges under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  state
  university of New York.
    4. Further, it is the policy of the state to promote the redevelopment
  and  reconstruction  of  municipal  urban renewal areas in a manner that
  will serve the civic, cultural and recreational needs of  the  community
  as a whole. The ordinary operations of private enterprise cannot provide
  adequate   financing   for  the  construction  of  civic,  cultural  and
  recreational structures and  facilities  and  other  non-profit  capital
  development  projects  invested with a public interest, which are needed
  in connection with urban renewal programs. In  order  to  encourage  the
  investment  of  private  capital  in  such  projects,  and to assure the
  expeditious undertaking, financing and completion of  the  redevelopment
  and  reconstruction  of urban renewal areas in the municipalities of the
  state, the  New  York  state  housing  finance  agency  should  also  be
  empowered, through the issuance of its bonds, notes or other obligations
  to  the  private investing public, to obtain the funds necessary to make
  mortgage  loans,  at  low  interest  rates,  to   non-profit   community
  development  corporations  for  the acquisition and construction of such
  projects, structures and facilities.
    5. Prompt provision of well-equipped, modern  hospitals,  schools  and
  other  facilities  related  to  the  care,  maintenance and treatment of
  mentally ill persons, mental defectives and epileptics is also needed in
  the state. In order to encourage the investment of  private  capital  in
  such  hospitals,  schools  and  other  mental  hygiene facilities and to
  assure   their   timely   construction,   acquisition,   reconstruction,
  rehabilitation  and  improvement,  the  New  York  state housing finance
  agency should be empowered, through the issuance of its bonds, notes  or
  other  obligations  to the private investing public, to obtain a portion
  of the funds necessary to finance the same and  to  meet  the  needs  of
  patients and staff at such facilities.
    6. A serious shortage of safe and sanitary nursing home accommodations
  providing  therein  nursing  care,  lodging  and  board  by or under the
  supervision of a duly  licensed  physician  to  sick,  invalid,  infirm,
  disabled   or   convalescent   persons   of   low  income  or  providing
  health-related service as defined in article twenty-eight of the  public
  health law to persons of low income or any combination of the foregoing,
  and  in  addition  thereto,  providing  nursing  care and health-related
  service, or either of them,  to  persons  of  low  income  who  are  not
  occupants  of  the  project, whose need for such facilities and services
  cannot readily be provided by the ordinary unaided operation of  private
  enterprise,  exists  in many communities throughout the state that it is
  the policy of the state to promote the provision of  such  nursing  home
  accommodations, including such other facilities as may be incidental and
  appurtenant  thereto; that there is need for non-profit corporations and
  limited-profit  corporations   to   construct,   acquire,   reconstruct,
  rehabilitate  and  improve such low cost nursing home accommodations. In
  order to encourage the investment of private  capital  in  such  nursing
  homes,  the  New  York  state  housing  finance  agency  should  also be
  empowered, through the issuance of its bonds, notes or other obligations
  to the private investing public, to obtain funds  necessary  to  finance
  nursing homes.


   7.  There  is  a  serious  shortage throughout the state of facilities
  suitable for use for the care of children especially those of pre-school
  age and primary school age whose parents are unable to provide such care
  for all or a substantial portion  of  the  day  or  post-school  day.  A
  similar  shortage  of  residential  child  care  facilities also exists.
  Existing day care and residential child care facilities are  overcrowded
  with  long  waiting lists. Many such facilities are so located that they
  are not accessible to families in need of such services. The absence  of
  adequate  day  care and residential child care facilities is contrary to
  the interest of the people of the state, is detrimental  to  the  health
  and  welfare of the child and his parents and often prevents the gainful
  employment of persons, who are otherwise qualified, because of the  need
  to provide such care in their home. In order to encourage the investment
  of  private  capital  in  such  facilities  and  to  assure their timely
  construction,   acquisition,    reconstruction,    rehabilitation    and
  improvement,  the  New  York  state  housing  finance  agency  should be
  empowered, through the issuance of its bonds, notes or other obligations
  to the private investing public,  to  obtain  a  portion  of  the  funds
  necessary  to  finance  such  facilities  and  to  meet the needs of the
  community.
    8. Prompt provision of new and improved community  mental  health  and
  developmental  disabilities  facilities  is  required  for  the care and
  treatment of the increasing number  of  persons  afflicted  with  mental
  illness,   mental  deficiencies,  epilepsy  and  behavior  or  emotional
  disorders; that such facilities should be located close  to  the  people
  they  serve  in  order  to  speed  rehabilitation and restoration and to
  provide for out-patient  and  in-patient  care,  including  after  care,
  diagnostic  and  rehabilitative  services and residential accommodations
  for operation as hostels; that it is the policy of the state to  promote
  the   provision  of  such  community  mental  health  and  developmental
  disabilities  facilities;  that  there  is   a   need   for   non-profit
  corporations   to   construct  low  cost  community  mental  health  and
  developmental  disabilities  facilities.  In  order  to  encourage   the
  investment  of  private  capital  in  such  community  mental health and
  developmental disabilities facilities, and  to  assure  the  expeditious
  completion   of   such   community   mental   health  and  developmental
  disabilities facilities, the  New  York  state  housing  finance  agency
  should  be  empowered, through the issuance of its bonds, notes or other
  obligations to the private investing public, to obtain  funds  necessary
  to   make   mortgage   loans,  at  low  interest  rates,  to  non-profit
  corporations  for   the   construction,   acquisition,   reconstruction,
  rehabilitation  or  improvement  of such mental health and developmental
  disabilities facilities.
    9. Many hospitals and other health facilities throughout the state are
  becoming obsolete and are no longer adequate to meet the needs of modern
  medicine. As a result of rapid technological  changes,  such  facilities
  require   substantial  structural  or  functional  changes.  Others  are
  unsuited for continued use by virtue of their location and the  physical
  characteristics  of  their  existing plants and should be replaced. Such
  inadequate and outmoded facilities deny to the people of the  state  the
  benefits  of health care of the highest quality efficiently and promptly
  provided and at a reasonable cost. Their replacement  and  modernization
  is  essential to protect and prolong the lives of the state's population
  and cannot be readily accomplished by the ordinary unaided operation  of
  private  enterprise.  It  is  the  policy  of the state to encourage the
  provision of modern, well-equipped  health  facilities,  including  such
  other  facilities  as  may  be  incidental  and  appurtenant thereto. In
  furtherance of this end and in order to obtain the investment of private


 capital in such hospitals and other  health  facilities,  the  New  York
  state  housing  finance  agency  should  also  be  empowered through the
  issuance of its  bonds,  notes  or  other  obligations  to  the  private
  investing public, to obtain the funds necessary to finance such hospital
  and health facilities.
    10.  Prompt  provision  of  new and improved community senior citizens
  facilities is required for the increasing number of persons who  are  in
  need  of  programs and services for the aging. Such facilities should be
  located close to  the  people  they  serve  and  should  supplement  the
  programs  and  services  provided for such persons by the office for the
  aging pursuant to title one of article two of the elder law; that it  is
  the  policy  of  the  state to promote the provision of such facilities;
  that there is need for non-profit corporations  to  construct  low  cost
  community   senior  citizens  facilities.  In  order  to  encourage  the
  investment  of  private  capital  in  such  community  senior   citizens
  facilities, and to assure the expeditious completion of such facilities,
  the  New  York state housing finance agency should be empowered, through
  the issuance of its bonds, notes or other  obligations  to  the  private
  investing  public,  to obtain funds necessary to make mortgage loans, at
  low interest rates, to non-profit  corporations  for  the  construction,
  acquisition,  reconstruction,  rehabilitation  or  improvement  of  such
  facilities.
    11. It  is  frequently  appropriate  to  combine  and  coordinate  the
  development,   rehabilitation   and   provision   of  housing  with  the
  development, rehabilitation and provision of health and  health  related
  facilities  such  as intermediate care, skilled nursing, aged treatment,
  and hospice facilities for which there is  also  a  need.  In  order  to
  encourage  the  investment  of private capital in non-profit housing and
  health facilities, and to assure  the  expeditious  completion  of  such
  facilities,  the  New  York  state  housing  finance  agency  should  be
  empowered, through the issuance of its bonds, notes or other obligations
  to the private investing public, to obtain funds  necessary  to  finance
  loans, for the construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation
  or improvement of such facilities.




   §  42.  Definitions.  As used or referred to in this article, unless a
  different meaning clearly appears from the context:
    1. "Agency" shall mean the corporate governmental  agency  created  by
  section forty-three of this article.
    1-a.   "Amortized  value"  shall  mean,  when  used  with  respect  to
  securities purchased at a premium above or a  discount  below  par,  the
  value  as of any given date obtained by dividing the total amount of the
  premium or discount at which  such  securities  were  purchased  by  the
  number  of  days remaining to maturity on such securities at the time of
  such purchase and by multiplying the amount so calculated by the  number
  of  days  having  passed since the date of such purchase; and (a) in the
  case of securities purchased at a premium, by deducting the product thus
  obtained from the purchase price, and (b)  in  the  case  of  securities
  purchased  at  a  discount,  by  adding the product thus obtained to the
  purchase price.
    2. "Bonds" and "notes" shall mean bonds and notes respectively, issued
  by the agency pursuant to this article.
    3. "Equity bonds" and  "equity  notes"  shall  mean  bonds  and  notes
  respectively,  issued  by  the  agency  pursuant  to subdivision four of
  section forty-six of this article.
    4. "Equity loan" shall mean a loan made by  the  agency  to  a  mutual
  company,  mutual  housing  company,  mutual  redevelopment  company,  or
  housing development fund company which  is  organized  pursuant  to  the
  business  corporation  law  and  article  eleven  of this chapter, in an
  amount not to exceed nine per centum of project cost and not  in  excess
  of  the  aggregate  face value of home owners purchase notes received by
  such  mutual  company,  mutual  housing  company,  mutual  redevelopment
  company,  or  housing  development fund company, as the case may be, for
  the issuance of shares.
    4-a. "Federally-aided mortgage loan" shall mean a loan  secured  by  a
  first mortgage lien on the real property of which a project consists and
  the  personal  property  attached  to  or  used  in  connection with the
  construction, acquisition, reconstruction,  rehabilitation,  improvement
  or operation of the project, made or financed by the agency to the owner
  of  such  property,  which  loan is insured or co-insured by the federal
  government or in connection  with  which  there  has  been  assigned  or
  pledged  to  the agency the right to receive housing assistance payments
  to be made by the federal  government  under  a  contract  entered  into
  pursuant  to  section eight of the United States housing act of nineteen
  hundred thirty-seven, as amended  or  supplemented,  provided,  however,
  that  such  term shall not include mortgage loans made by the agency and
  insured by the federal government pursuant to subsection (f) of  section
  two  hundred  twenty-three of such act, to refinance mortgage loans made
  by the agency or the state prior to the  first  day  of  June,  nineteen
  hundred seventy-nine or theretofore or thereafter, amended, modified, or
  increased or loans provided for pursuant to subdivision twenty-nine-a of
  section  forty-four  of  this  article. Where all or part of the cost of
  acquiring any real property included in the project is to be financed by
  a federally-aided mortgage loan the term "owner" shall  mean  the  owner
  upon  such acquisition. Nothing contained herein shall limit or prohibit
  the agency  from  consenting  to  the  modification  of  any  instrument
  executed  in  connection  with a federally-aided mortgage loan, provided
  that such modification will not  materially  reduce  the  value  of  the
  security for such mortgage loan.
    4-b. "Federally guaranteed security" means any security, investment or
  evidence  of  indebtedness  which  is  issued  pursuant  to the national
  housing act or any successor provision of  law,  as  amended,  which  is
  either,  directly or indirectly, insured or guaranteed in full as to the


 repayment of principal and interest by the United States of  America  or
  any instrumentality thereof.
    5. "Home owners purchase note" shall mean home owners purchase note as
  defined in article one of this chapter.
    5-a.  "Insured  mortgage  reserve fund" shall mean the fund created by
  section fifty-seven of this chapter.
    6. "Mortgage loan" shall mean a loan made by the agency to  a  company
  in an amount not to exceed ninety per centum of the project cost, except
  that  in the case of a mutual company, an urban rental company which has
  not been aided by any loan  made  prior  to  September  first,  nineteen
  hundred  sixty-eight,  or  a non-profit company incorporated pursuant to
  the provisions of the not-for-profit corporation law  and  this  chapter
  for  the  purpose  of  providing housing for staff members, employees or
  students of a college, university, hospital or  child  care  institution
  and  their  immediate families or in the case of a community development
  corporation the loan shall not exceed  ninety-five  per  centum  of  the
  project  cost  and  in  the  case  of  a non-profit company incorporated
  pursuant to the provisions of the  not-for-profit  corporation  law  and
  this   chapter  for  the  purpose  of  providing  housing  for  aged  or
  handicapped persons of low income  or  in  the  case  of  a  low  income
  non-profit  housing  company the loan shall not exceed the total project
  cost, and secured by a first mortgage lien on the real property of which
  the project consists and the personal property attached to  or  used  in
  connection   with   the   construction,   acquisition,   reconstruction,
  rehabilitation, improvement or  operation  of  the  project.  "Company,"
  "mutual  company,"  "urban rental company," "project cost" and "project"
  shall mean company, mutual company, urban rental company,  project  cost
  and project, respectively, as defined in article two of this chapter.
    6-a.  "Mortgage  loan"  shall also mean a loan made by the agency to a
  community senior citizens center and services company in an  amount  not
  to exceed the total project cost of a project undertaken by such company
  pursuant  to  article  seven-A  of  this chapter, and secured by a first
  mortgage lien on the real property of which the project consists and the
  personal  property  attached  to  or  used  in   connection   with   the
  construction,  acquisition,  reconstruction, rehabilitation, improvement
  or operation of the project.
    6-b. "Mortgage loan" shall also mean a loan made by the agency  to  an
  eligible  borrower  as  defined  in article twenty-eight-B of the public
  health law in an amount not to exceed the total  hospital  project  cost
  and  secured  by a first mortgage lien on the real property of which the
  hospital project consists and the personal property attached to or  used
  in   connection  with  the  construction,  acquisition,  reconstruction,
  rehabilitation, improvement or operation of the hospital  project.  Such
  loan  may  be  further  secured  by such a lien upon other real property
  owned by the eligible borrower. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions
  of this subdivision or any other  provisions  of  this  article  to  the
  contrary,  any  personal  property  may be excluded from the lien of the
  mortgage provided  (a)  the  commissioner  of  health  finds  that  such
  property  is  not  essential  for  the  rendition  of  required hospital
  services as such term is defined in article twenty-eight of  the  public
  health  law,  and  (b)  the agency consents to such exclusion. "Hospital
  project cost" and "hospital project" shall mean  hospital  project  cost
  and hospital project, respectively, as defined in article twenty-eight-B
  of the public health law.
    6-c.  "Mortgage  loan"  shall also mean a loan made by the agency to a
  limited-profit  nursing  home  company  incorporated  pursuant  to   the
  provisions  of  article  twenty-eight-A  of  the public health law in an
  amount not to exceed ninety-five per centum of the nursing home  project


 cost,  and in the case of a non-profit nursing home company incorporated
  pursuant to the provisions  of  article  twenty-eight-A  of  the  public
  health  law  and  the not-for-profit corporation law in an amount not to
  exceed  the  total  nursing  home  project  cost, and secured by a first
  mortgage lien on the real property of which  the  nursing  home  project
  consists  and  the  personal  property attached to or used in connection
  with  the  construction,  acquisition,  reconstruction,  rehabilitation,
  improvement  or  operation  of the nursing home project. Notwithstanding
  the foregoing provisions of this subdivision or any other  provision  of
  this article to the contrary, any personal property may be excluded from
  the  lien  of the mortgage provided (a) the commissioner of health finds
  that such property is not essential for the nursing home project as such
  term is defined in article twenty-eight-A of the public health law,  and
  (b)  the  agency  consents  to  such  exclusion. "Nursing home company",
  "limited-profit  nursing  home  company",   "non-profit   nursing   home
  company",  "nursing  home project cost" and "nursing home project" shall
  mean  nursing  home  company,  limited-profit  nursing   home   company,
  non-profit  nursing  home company, nursing home project cost and nursing
  home project, respectively, as defined in article twenty-eight-A of  the
  public health law.
    6-d.  "Mortgage  loan"  shall also mean a loan made by the agency to a
  company incorporated pursuant to the provisions  of  the  not-for-profit
  corporation  law  in  an amount not to exceed the total community mental
  health services project cost  or  community  developmental  disabilities
  services  project cost, and secured by a first mortgage lien on the real
  property of which  the  community  mental  health  services  project  or
  community  developmental  disabilities services project consists and the
  personal  property  attached  to  or  used  in   connection   with   the
  construction,  acquisition,  reconstruction, rehabilitation, improvement
  or  operation  of  the  community  mental  health  services  project  or
  community developmental disabilities services project. "Community mental
  health services company," "community developmental disabilities services
  company,"  "community  mental  health services project cost," "community
  developmental disabilities services  project  cost,"  "community  mental
  health  services  project"  and  "community  developmental  disabilities
  services project" shall mean community mental health  services  company,
  community  developmental disabilities services company, community mental
  health  services  project  cost,  community  developmental  disabilities
  services  project  cost,  community  mental  health services project and
  community developmental disabilities services project, respectively.
    6-e. "Mortgage loan" shall also mean a loan made by the  agency  to  a
  non-profit corporation which is an eligible borrower as defined in title
  five-A  of  article  six  of the social services law in an amount not to
  exceed the total youth facilities project cost, and secured by  a  first
  mortgage lien on the real property of which the youth facilities project
  consists  and  the  personal  property attached to or used in connection
  with  the  construction,  acquisition,  reconstruction,  rehabilitation,
  improvement  or  operation  of  the  youth  facilities  project.  "Youth
  facilities project cost" and "youth facilities project" shall mean youth
  facilities project cost and youth facilities project,  respectively,  as
  defined in title five-A of article six of the social services law.
    6-f. "Mortgage loan" shall also mean an instrument or instruments made
  by  a  company  to  evidence  residual indebtedness, which instrument or
  instruments are secured by a  mortgage  on  the  real  property  of  the
  project.
    * 6-g.  "Mortgage  loan"  shall  also  mean  a loan secured by a first
  mortgage lien on the real property of which a project consists  and  the
  personal   property   attached   to  or  used  in  connection  with  the


 construction or rehabilitation of the project, made or financed  by  the
  agency to the owner of such property, which property a municipal housing
  authority,  constituted,  created  or  established  pursuant  to article
  thirteen  of  the  public  housing  law, has agreed to purchase upon the
  completion of such construction or rehabilitation.
    * NB There are 2 sb 6-g's
    * 6-g. "Mortgage loan" shall also mean a loan made by the agency to  a
  mutual  housing  company  for  the  purpose  of refinancing the existing
  mortgage indebtedness of such company in an amount  not  to  exceed  the
  cost  of  refinancing the existing mortgage indebtedness of such company
  and necessary funds for the replacement, improvement and  rehabilitation
  of the project owned by such company, all costs incurred by such company
  relating  to  the  refinancing  of  the  existing  mortgage indebtedness
  including amounts required to establish escrow  accounts,  reserves  and
  working  capital  as determined by the agency, and such other amounts as
  are permitted by article four of this chapter, and secured  by  a  first
  mortgage lien on the real property of which the project consists and the
  personal   property   attached   to  or  used  in  connection  with  the
  construction, acquisition, reconstruction,  rehabilitation,  improvement
  or operation of the project.
    * NB (Operative pending ruling by Internal Revenue Service)
    * NB There are 2 sb 6-g's
    7.   "Mutual   company",   "mutual   housing   company"   and  "mutual
  redevelopment company" shall mean mutual company, mutual housing company
  and mutual redevelopment company as defined in articles  two,  four  and
  five, respectively, of this chapter.
    8.  "Non-profit company" shall mean a company incorporated pursuant to
  the provisions of the not-for-profit corporation law and article two  of
  this  chapter  for  the  purpose of providing housing for staff members,
  employees or students of a college, university, hospital or  child  care
  institution  and  their  immediate  families  or for handicapped or aged
  persons of low income or housing for persons of low  income  or  housing
  for families of low income as defined under article two of this chapter.
    9.  "Community  development  corporation"  shall  mean  a  corporation
  incorporated  pursuant  to  the   provisions   of   the   not-for-profit
  corporation law and article six-A of this chapter.
    10.  "Non-profit  project  bonds" and "non-profit project notes" shall
  mean bonds and notes respectively, issued by the agency for the purposes
  of making mortgage loans to mutual companies,  non-profit  companies  or
  community  development  corporations  paying  interest on such bonds and
  notes, establishing reserves to secure such bonds and notes, and  paying
  of  all  other  expenditures  of the agency incident to and necessary or
  convenient for the making of such mortgage loans.
    11. "Hospital and  nursing  home  project  bonds"  and  "hospital  and
  nursing  home  project  notes"  shall mean bonds and notes respectively,
  issued by the agency for  the  purposes  of  making  mortgage  loans  to
  hospital corporations which are eligible borrowers as defined in article
  twenty-eight-B  of  the  public  health  law  or nursing home companies,
  paying interest on such bonds and notes, establishing reserves to secure
  such bonds and notes, and paying of all other expenditures of the agency
  incident to and necessary or convenient for the making of such  mortgage
  loans.
    12.  "Urban  rental  project  bonds"  and "urban rental project notes"
  shall mean bonds and notes respectively,  issued  by  the  agency  after
  August  thirty-first,  nineteen hundred sixty-eight, for the purposes of
  making mortgage loans to urban rental companies, paying interest on such
  bonds and notes, establishing reserves to secure such bonds  and  notes,


 and  paying  of  all  other  expenditures  of the agency incident to and
  necessary or convenient for the making of such mortgage loans.
    13.  "Youth  facilities  project  bonds" and "youth facilities project
  notes" shall mean bonds and notes, respectively, issued  by  the  agency
  for  the  purposes  of  making mortgage loans to non-profit corporations
  which are eligible borrowers as defined in title five-A of  article  six
  of  the  social  services  law, paying interest on such bonds and notes,
  establishing reserves to secure such bonds and notes, and paying of  all
  other expenditures of the agency incident to and necessary or convenient
  for the making of such mortgage loans.
    14.  "Community  mental health services and developmental disabilities
  services project  bonds"  and  "community  mental  health  services  and
  developmental  disabilities services project notes" shall mean bonds and
  notes, respectively, issued by the agency for  the  purposes  of  making
  mortgage  loans to companies incorporated pursuant to the not-for-profit
  corporation law, paying interest on such bonds and  notes,  establishing
  reserves  to  secure  such  bonds  and  notes,  and  paying of all other
  expenditures of the agency incident to and necessary or  convenient  for
  the making of such mortgage loans.
    14-a. "Community mental health services and developmental disabilities
  services  project  revenue  bonds" and "community mental health services
  and developmental disabilities services  project  revenue  notes"  shall
  mean bonds and notes, respectively, issued by the agency for the purpose
  of  making  mortgage  loans  to  companies  incorporated pursuant to the
  not-for-profit corporation law and article seventy-five of  title  E  of
  the  mental  hygiene  law,  paying  interest  on  such  bonds and notes,
  establishing reserves to secure such bonds and notes, and paying of  all
  other expenditures of the agency incident to and necessary or convenient
  for the making of such mortgage loans.
    15.  "Community senior citizens services project bonds" and "community
  senior citizens services project notes"  shall  mean  bonds  and  notes,
  respectively,  issued  by the agency for the purposes of making mortgage
  loans  to  companies  incorporated  pursuant   to   the   not-for-profit
  corporation  law and article seven-A of this chapter, paying interest on
  such bonds and notes, establishing reserves to  secure  such  bonds  and
  notes,  and  paying  of all other expenditures of the agency incident to
  and necessary or convenient for the making of such mortgage loans.
    16. "State of New York municipal bond bank agency bonds" and "State of
  New York municipal bond  agency  notes"  shall  mean  bonds  and  notes,
  respectively, issued by the state of New York municipal bond bank agency
  for the purposes of purchasing municipal bonds from municipalities.
    17.  "New York state medical care facilities finance agency bonds" and
  "New York state medical care facilities finance agency notes" shall mean
  bonds and notes, respectively, issued by the New York state medical care
  facilities finance agency for the corporate purposes  of  the  New  York
  state medical care facilities finance agency.
    18.  "New York state project finance agency bonds" and "New York state
  project finance agency notes" shall mean bonds and notes,  respectively,
  issued  by  the  New York state project finance agency for the corporate
  purposes of the New York state project finance agency.
    19.  "Residual   indebtedness."   Residual   indebtedness   shall   be
  indebtedness  of  a  company  in an amount equal to the unpaid principal
  balance due on the original mortgage plus all interest  accrued  thereon
  at  such  time as the mortgage is refinanced less an amount equal to the
  principal amount, when made, of the  mortgage  insured  by  the  federal
  government  in  connection  with  the  refinancing  of  a  project. Such
  indebtedness shall be secured by a mortgage which may be subordinate  to
  the  lien of any mortgage loan insured by the federal government and may


 contain such terms and conditions not inconsistent with this article  as
  may  be  approved  by  the  commissioner,  and  as  the  agency may deem
  necessary  or  desirable  to  secure  the  repayment  of  such  residual
  indebtedness.
    *  20.  "Revenue  housing bonds" shall mean bonds issued by the agency
  after May thirty-first, nineteen hundred seventy-six for the purpose  of
  making  mortgage  loans  to  mutual  companies, non-profit companies, or
  urban rental companies,  funding  non-profit  project  notes  and  urban
  rental  project  notes  issued  for  the purpose of making such mortgage
  loans, paying interest on such bonds, establishing  reserves  to  secure
  such  bonds  and paying all other expenditures of the agency incident to
  and necessary or convenient for the making of such mortgage loans or the
  funding of such notes.
  * NB (Effective until ruling by Internal Revenue Service)
    * 20. "Revenue housing bonds" shall mean bonds issued  by  the  agency
  after  May thirty-first, nineteen hundred seventy-six for the purpose of
  making mortgage loans to mutual  companies,  mutual  housing  companies,
  non-profit  companies,  or  urban  rental  companies, funding non-profit
  project notes and urban rental project notes issued for the  purpose  of
  making  such mortgage loans, paying interest on such bonds, establishing
  reserves to secure such bonds and paying all other expenditures  of  the
  agency  incident  to  and necessary or convenient for the making of such
  mortgage loans or the funding of such notes.
  * NB (Effective pending ruling by Internal Revenue Service)
    21. "Special revenue housing coverage reserve funds"  shall  mean  the
  funds created by section fifty-eight of this article.
    22.  "Bond  reserve  insurance  fund"  shall  mean the fund created by
  section fifty-nine of this article.
    * 23. "Lending institution" shall mean any bank or  trust  company  or
  savings  bank,  or any corporation, association or other entity which is
  owned or controlled by any one or more such bank  or  trust  company  or
  savings bank, or any savings and loan association, credit union, federal
  national mortgage association approved mortgage banker, national banking
  association, federal savings and loan association, federal savings bank,
  public  pension  fund,  pension  fund  with  assets  over  fifty million
  dollars, insurance company, federal  credit  union  or  other  financial
  institution   or   governmental   agency  of  the  United  States  which
  customarily makes, purchases, holds,  insures  or  services  residential
  mortgages.
    * NB Effective until July 23, 2025
    * 23.  "Lending  institution"  shall mean any bank or trust company or
  savings bank, or any corporation, association or other entity  which  is
  owned  or  controlled  by  any one or more such bank or trust company or
  savings bank, or any savings  and  loan  association,  industrial  bank,
  credit  union,  federal  national mortgage association approved mortgage
  banker,  national  banking  association,  federal   savings   and   loan
  association,  pension  fund,  insurance company, federal credit union or
  other financial institution or governmental agency of the United  States
  which  customarily  makes,  purchases,  holds  or  services  residential
  mortgages.
    * NB Effective July 23, 2025
    * 24. "Housing development" shall mean a specific work or improvement,
  whether or not to effectuate all or any part of a plan,  and  consisting
  of  five  or  more residential units, and including the lands, buildings
  and improvements acquired, owned, constructed, managed  or  operated  to
  provide  such  units  and  such  incidental  and appurtenant commercial,
  recreation, cultural, communal, dining, medical and  nursing  treatment,
  day  care  or  residential child care and community facilities as may be


 approved by the agency. As used in  connection  with  the  term  housing
  development, the term residential unit shall refer to units suitable for
  residential  use  or  accommodations included within the term housing as
  defined in subdivision nine of section twelve of this chapter.
    * NB Repealed July 23, 2025
    25.  "Housing  and  non-profit  health facility" shall mean a specific
  work or improvement, whether or not to effectuate all or any part  of  a
  plan  consisting  of five or more residential units, and at the election
  of the agency such additional health and health  related  facilities  as
  the   agency  may  approve;  and  including  the  lands,  buildings  and
  improvements  acquired,  owned,  constructed,  managed  or  operated  to
  provide  such  units  and  health, or health related facilities and such
  incidental and appurtenant commercial, recreation,  cultural,  communal,
  dining,  parking, day care or residential child care, senior citizen and
  community facilities as may be approved by the agency  acquired,  owned,
  constructed,   rehabilitated,   improved,   managed  or  operated  by  a
  non-profit  company  except  that  any  portion  thereof   meeting   the
  definition of a housing development set forth in subdivision twenty-four
  hereof  may  be  separately  owned by a for profit owner approved by the
  agency. As used in connection  with  the  term  housing  and  non-profit
  health facility, the term residential unit shall refer to units suitable
  for  residential  use or accommodations included within the term housing
  as defined in subdivision nine of section twelve of  this  chapter,  and
  the  term  non-profit company shall mean a company incorporated pursuant
  to the provisions of the not-for-profit corporation law for the  purpose
  of  providing housing for staff members, employees, students or users of
  a hospital, health, health related facility and their immediate families
  or for the purpose of providing a hospital, health,  or  health  related
  facility.






	   §  43.  New  York  state  housing  finance  agency. 1. There is hereby
  created the "New York state housing finance agency". The agency shall be
  a  corporate  governmental  agency   constituting   a   public   benefit
  corporation.    Its  membership  shall  consist  of  the commissioner of
  housing  and  community  renewal,  the  director  of  the  budget,   the
  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance,  one  member  appointed by the
  temporary president of the senate,  and  one  member  appointed  by  the
  speaker  of the assembly. In addition, there shall be four members to be
  appointed by the governor with the advice and consent of the senate. The
  members first appointed by the governor shall  serve  for  terms  ending
  three,  four,  five  and  six years respectively from January first next
  succeeding the date of their appointment. Their successors  shall  serve
  for  terms  of  six years each.   Members shall continue in office until
  their  successors  have  been  appointed  and  qualified.  The   members
  appointed  by  the  temporary president of the senate and the speaker of
  the assembly shall serve at the pleasure of the temporary  president  of
  the senate and the speaker of the assembly respectively. In the event of
  a vacancy occurring in the office of any member by death, resignation or
  otherwise,  such  vacancy  shall  be  filled, for the unexpired term, if
  applicable,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  original  appointment.  The
  provisions of section thirty-nine of the public officers law shall apply
  to such members.
    2.  The  governor  shall designate from among the members appointed by
  him or her a chairman, who shall serve as such during his or her term as
  member. The members, including the chairman, shall serve without  salary
  or other compensation, but each member, including the chairman, shall be
  entitled  to reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in
  the performance of his or her official duties and in the event that  the
  chairman  shall  also  be a full time officer or employee of the agency,
  the chairman shall receive no salary as chairman but shall receive  only
  his  or  her  regular  salary  as officer or employee, not to exceed the
  average of the salaries paid to the appointed commissioners of the state
  departments or the regular salary such officer or employee was receiving
  at the time of his or her appointment as chairman, whichever is greater.
    3. Such members other than the commissioner of housing  and  community
  renewal,  the  director  of the budget, the commissioner of taxation and
  finance and the chairman if he be a full time officer or employee of the
  agency, may  engage  in  private  employment,  or  in  a  profession  or
  business, subject to the limitations contained in sections seventy-three
  and  seventy-four  of the public officers law. The agency shall, for the
  purposes of  sections  seventy-three  and  seventy-four  of  the  public
  officers  law, be a "state-agency," and such members shall be "officers"
  of the agency for the purposes of said sections.
    4.  Notwithstanding  any  inconsistent  provisions  of  law,  general,
  special  or  local, no officer or employee of the state, or of any civil
  division thereof, shall be deemed to have forfeited or shall forfeit his
  office or employment by reason of his acceptance of  membership  on  the
  agency  created  by  this section; provided, however, a member who holds
  such other public office  or  employment  shall  receive  no  additional
  compensation  or  allowance  for  services  rendered  pursuant  to  this
  article, but shall be entitled  to  reimbursement  for  his  actual  and
  necessary expenses incurred in the performance of such services.
    5.  The  governor  may  remove any member for inefficiency, neglect of
  duty or misconduct in office after giving him  a  copy  of  the  charges
  against him, and an opportunity to be heard, in person or by counsel, in
  his  defense,  upon  not  less than ten days' notice. If any such member
  shall be  removed,  the  governor  shall  file  in  the  office  of  the
  department  of  state  a complete statement of charges made against such


 member, and his findings thereon, together with a complete record of the
  proceeding. The holding of office by the commissioner of  housing  shall
  continue  to  be  governed  by  the  provisions of section eleven of the
  public housing law.
    6.  The  agency  and  its  corporate  existence  shall  continue until
  terminated by law, provided, however, that no such law shall take effect
  so long as the agency shall have  bonds,  notes  and  other  obligations
  outstanding.  Upon  termination  of the existence of the agency, all its
  rights and properties shall pass to and be vested in the state.
    7. The powers of the agency shall be vested in  and  exercised  by  no
  less  than  six  of  the  members thereof then in office. The agency may
  delegate to one or more of its members,  or  its  officers,  agents  and
  employees, such powers and duties as it may deem proper.
    8.  The commissioner of housing and community renewal, the director of
  the budget and the commissioner of taxation and finance each may appoint
  a person from their respective division or department to represent  such
  member,  respectively,  at  all  meetings  of the agency from which such
  member may be absent. Any such representative so designated  shall  have
  the  power to attend and to vote at any meeting of the agency from which
  the member so designating him as a representative  is  absent  with  the
  same  force and effect as if the member designating him were present and
  voting. Such designation shall be  by  written  notice  filed  with  the
  chairman  of  the agency by each of the said members. The designation of
  such persons shall continue until revoked at any time by written  notice
  to  the  chairman  by the respective member making the designation. Such
  designation shall not be deemed to limit the  power  of  the  appointing
  member to attend and vote at any meeting of the agency.




   §  44.  Powers  of  the  agency.  Except  as otherwise limited by this
  article, the agency shall have power:
    1. To sue and be sued;
    2. To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure;
    3. To make and execute contracts and all other  instruments  necessary
  or  convenient  for  the  exercise of its power and functions under this
  article;
    4. To make  and  alter  by-laws  for  its  organization  and  internal
  management  and,  subject to agreements with noteholders or bondholders,
  to make rules and regulations governing the  use  of  its  property  and
  facilities,  which  rules  and  regulations  shall  be  filed  with  the
  department of state in the manner provided by section one hundred two of
  the executive law;
    5. To acquire, hold and dispose of personal property for its corporate
  purposes;
    6. To appoint officers, agents and employees, prescribe  their  duties
  and  fix  their  compensation,  subject  to  the provisions of the civil
  service law and to the  rules  and  regulations  of  the  civil  service
  commission of this state;
    7.  To  borrow  money  and  issue  negotiable  notes,  bonds  or other
  obligations and to provide for the rights of the holders thereof;
    8. Subject to any  agreements  with  noteholders  or  bondholders,  to
  invest any funds held in reserve or sinking funds, including the insured
  mortgage  reserve  fund and any special revenue housing coverage reserve
  fund or any monies not required for immediate use  or  disbursement,  at
  the  discretion of the agency, in obligations of the state or the United
  States government or obligations the principal and interest of which are
  guaranteed by the state or the United States government, or in any other
  obligations in which the  comptroller  of  the  state  of  New  York  is
  authorized  to  invest  pursuant  to  section  ninety-eight of the state
  finance law;
    9. Subject to the approval of the commissioner in the case of mortgage
  loans to other than hospital corporations which are  eligible  borrowers
  as defined in article twenty-eight-B of the public health law or nursing
  home  companies, non-profit corporations which are eligible borrowers as
  defined in title five-A of article six of the social  services  law,  or
  companies  incorporated  pursuant  to the not-for-profit corporation law
  and article seventy-five of the mental hygiene law, who shall be  guided
  by the provisions governing state loans contained in article two of this
  chapter, to make mortgage loans, to participate with the state in making
  mortgage  loans  and  to undertake commitments to make any such mortgage
  loans;
    9-a. Subject to the approval of the commissioner of social services of
  the state  of  New  York,  to  make  mortgage  loans  and  to  undertake
  commitments  to make mortgage loans to community senior citizens centers
  and services companies under and pursuant to  article  seven-A  of  this
  chapter.
    10.  Subject  to  the  approval  of  the  commissioner  of housing and
  community  renewal,  the  state  commissioner  of  health,   the   state
  commissioner  of  mental  hygiene  or  the  state commissioner of social
  services, as the case may be, to sell, at public or  private  sale,  any
  mortgage  or  other  obligation  securing  a  mortgage  loan made by the
  agency;
    * 10-a. To acquire and  to  contract  to  acquire,  by  assignment  or
  otherwise,  any  mortgage securing a loan and any note or bond made by a
  mutual housing company and to modify or satisfy such mortgage,  bond  or
  note  and  accept  or  make a new mortgage and other instruments for the
  purpose of refinancing the existing indebtedness of such company.


   * NB (Effective pending ruling by Internal Revenue Service)
    11.  (a)  In  connection  with  the  making or financing the making of
  mortgage loans and  commitments  therefor,  except  mortgage  loans  and
  commitments made with hospital corporations which are eligible borrowers
  as  defined  in article twenty-eight-B of the public health law, nursing
  home companies, non-profit corporations which are eligible borrowers  as
  defined  in  title  five-A of article six of the social services law, or
  companies incorporated pursuant to the  not-for-profit  corporation  law
  and  article seventy-five of the mental hygiene law, to make and collect
  such fees and charges, including but not limited to reimbursement of all
  costs  of  financing  by  the  agency,  service  charges  and  insurance
  premiums, as the agency shall determine to be reasonable and as shall be
  approved by the commissioner of housing;
    (b)  In  connection  with the making of mortgage loans and commitments
  therefor to  hospital  corporations  which  are  eligible  borrowers  as
  defined  in  article  twenty-eight-B of the public health law or nursing
  home companies, to make and collect from such corporations and companies
  such fees and charges, including but not limited to reimbursement of all
  costs  of  financing  by  the  agency,  service  charges  and  insurance
  premiums, as the agency shall determine to be reasonable;
    (c)  In  connection  with the making of mortgage loans and commitments
  therefor to non-profit corporations  which  are  eligible  borrowers  as
  defined  in  title  five-A of article six of the social services law, to
  make and collect from such corporations such fees and charges, including
  but not limited to reimbursement  of  all  costs  of  financing  by  the
  agency,  service  charges  and  insurance  premiums  as the agency shall
  determine to be reasonable.
    (d) In connection with the making of mortgage  loans  and  commitments
  therefor  to  companies  incorporated  pursuant  to  the  not-for-profit
  corporation law and article seventy-five of the mental hygiene  law,  to
  make  and  collect  from such companies such fees and charges, including
  but not limited to reimbursement  of  all  costs  of  financing  by  the
  agency,  service  charges  and  insurance  premiums, as the agency shall
  determine to be reasonable.
    11-a. In connection with the making of mortgage loans and  commitments
  therefor  to  companies  incorporated  pursuant  to  the  not-for-profit
  corporation law and article seven-A of this chapter, to make and collect
  from such companies such fees and charges, including but not limited  to
  reimbursement  of  all costs of financing by the agency, service charges
  and insurance premiums, as the agency shall determine to be reasonable.
    11-b. To make or finance the making of federally-aided mortgage  loans
  pursuant to section forty-four-c of this article and, in connection with
  such  mortgage  loans,  to  exercise  such  powers  and  undertake  such
  responsibilities as may be required by  any  law,  regulation  or  other
  requirement of the federal government.
    11-c.  Subject  to the provisions of any contract with noteholders and
  bondholders (a) to make and contract for the making  of  mortgage  loans
  for  the  construction  or  rehabilitation of projects which a municipal
  housing authority,  constituted,  created  or  established  pursuant  to
  article  thirteen of the public housing law, has agreed to purchase on a
  turnkey basis in accordance with a federally assisted  program  for  the
  production  of public housing as authorized by the United States housing
  act of nineteen hundred thirty-seven as amended to the date of enactment
  of this subdivision  of  this  section,  upon  the  completion  of  such
  construction  or  rehabilitation and (b) to make and to contract for the
  making of loans to, or to purchase loans from banking or  other  lending
  institutions   for   the  purpose  of  financing  such  construction  or
  rehabilitation.


   12. In connection with any property on which it has made or financed a
  mortgage loan, to foreclose on any such property or commence any  action
  to  protect or enforce any right conferred upon it by any law, mortgage,
  contract or other agreement, and to bid for and purchase  such  property
  at  any  foreclosure or at any other sale, or acquire or take possession
  of any such property;  and  in  such  event  the  agency  may  complete,
  administer,  pay  the  principal  of  and  interest  on  any obligations
  incurred in connection with such property,  dispose  of,  and  otherwise
  deal  with,  such  property,  in  such  manner  as  may  be necessary or
  desirable to protect the interests of the agency therein;
    13. To enter into agreements to pay annual sums in lieu  of  taxes  to
  any political subdivision of the state with respect to any real property
  owned  by the agency; provided, however, that the amount so paid for any
  year upon any such property shall not exceed the sum last paid as  taxes
  on such property prior to the time of its acquisition by the agency;
    14.  To  procure  insurance  against  any  loss in connection with its
  property and other  assets  (including  mortgages,  mortgage  loans  and
  federally  guaranteed securities secured by such mortgage loans) in such
  amounts, and from such insurers, as it deems desirable;
    15. (a) Subject to  the  approval  of  the  commissioner  and  to  the
  provisions  of any contract with noteholders or bondholders, except with
  any holders of hospital and nursing home project bonds or notes or youth
  facilities project bonds or notes, or community mental  health  services
  and developmental disabilities services project bonds or notes, whenever
  it deems it necessary or desirable in the fulfillment of the purposes of
  this  article,  to  consent to the modification, with respect to rate of
  interest, time of payment of any installment of principal  or  interest,
  security,  or  any  other term, of any mortgage, mortgage loan, mortgage
  loan commitment, contract or agreement of any kind to which  the  agency
  is  a  party,  except  such  mortgages,  mortgage  loans,  mortgage loan
  commitments, contracts or agreements as may have been entered into  with
  hospital corporations which are eligible borrowers as defined in article
  twenty-eight-B  of  the  public  health  law,  nursing home companies or
  non-profit corporations which are eligible borrowers as defined in title
  five-A  of  article  six  of  the  social  services  law  or   companies
  incorporated  pursuant to the not-for-profit corporation law and article
  seventy-five of the mental hygiene law;
    (b) Subject to the provisions of any contract with holders of hospital
  and nursing home project bonds or notes, whenever it deems it  necessary
  or  desirable  in  the  fulfillment  of the purposes of this article, to
  consent to the modification, with respect to rate of interest,  time  of
  payment  of  any  installment of principal or interest, security, or any
  other term of any mortgage, mortgage  loan,  mortgage  loan  commitment,
  contract  or  agreement  of  any  kind between the agency and a hospital
  corporation  which  is  an  eligible  borrower  as  defined  in  article
  twenty-eight-B of the public health law or a nursing home company;
    (c)  Subject  to  the provisions of any contract with holders of youth
  facilities project bonds or notes, whenever it  deems  it  necessary  or
  desirable in the fulfillment of the purposes of this article, to consent
  to  the  modification, with respect to rate of interest, time of payment
  of any installment of principal or interest, security, or any other term
  of any mortgage, mortgage loan, mortgage loan  commitment,  contract  or
  agreement  of  any  kind between the agency and a non-profit corporation
  which is an eligible borrower pursuant to title five-A of article six of
  the social services law.
    (d) Subject  to  the  provisions  of  any  contract  with  holders  of
  community mental health services and developmental disabilities services
  project  bonds  or notes, whenever it deems it necessary or desirable in


 the fulfillment of the purposes of  this  article,  to  consent  to  the
  modification,  with  respect to rate of interest, time of payment of any
  installment of principal or interest, security, or any other term of any
  mortgage, mortgage loan, mortgage loan commitment, contract or agreement
  of  any  kind  between the agency and a company incorporated pursuant to
  the not-for-profit corporation  law  and  article  seventy-five  of  the
  mental hygiene law.
    15-a.  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  any  contract with holders of
  community senior citizens services project bonds or notes,  whenever  it
  deems  it  necessary  or desirable in the fulfillment of the purposes of
  this article, to consent to the modification, with respect  to  rate  of
  interest,  time  of payment of any installment of principal or interest,
  security, or any other term of any  mortgage,  mortgage  loan,  mortgage
  loan  commitment,  contract  or agreement of any kind between the agency
  and a company incorporated pursuant to  the  not-for-profit  corporation
  law and article seven-A of this chapter.
    16.  To  accept  any  gifts or grants or loans of funds or property or
  financial or other aid in any form from the federal  government  or  any
  agency  or  instrumentality  thereof or from the state or from any other
  source and to comply, subject to the provisions of  this  article,  with
  the terms and conditions thereof;
    17.  To engage the services of private consultants on a contract basis
  for rendering professional and technical assistance and advice;
    18. Subject to  the  approval  of  the  commissioner  of  housing  and
  community  renewal,  to  make  equity  loans to mutual companies, mutual
  housing  companies,  mutual   redevelopment   companies,   and   housing
  development  fund companies which are corporations organized pursuant to
  the business corporation law and article  eleven  of  this  chapter,  in
  amounts  not  to exceed the aggregate face value of home owners purchase
  notes accepted by  such  mutual  companies,  mutual  housing  companies,
  mutual  redevelopment  companies, or housing development fund companies,
  as the case may be, as consideration for the issuance of shares pursuant
  to the provisions of section nineteen of article two  of  this  chapter,
  section  seventy-eight  of  article  four  of  this chapter, section one
  hundred eight of article five of this chapter, or  subdivision  four  of
  section five hundred seventy-three of article eleven of this chapter, as
  the  case  may be; such loans shall be repaid over or within such period
  and shall be secured in such manner as the agency shall require and  the
  commissioner shall approve.
    19.  Subject to the approval of the commissioner of health pursuant to
  the provisions of article twenty-eight-A of the public  health  law,  to
  make  mortgage  loans  to non-profit nursing home companies incorporated
  pursuant to the provisions  of  article  twenty-eight-A  of  the  public
  health  law  and the not-for-profit corporation law and to make mortgage
  loans to limited-profit nursing home companies incorporated pursuant  to
  the provisions of article twenty-eight-A of the public health law and to
  undertake commitments to make any such mortgage loans.
    20.  Subject  to  the  approval of the commissioner, to purchase or to
  contract to purchase from a mutual  company,  or  from  any  shareholder
  thereof,  as  the  case may be, the shares appertaining to the dwellings
  leased by it for the purposes set forth in section forty-four-a of  this
  article,  to  hold  such  shares  or to sell or to contract to sell such
  shares to the sublessees  of  the  agency  who  are  residents  in  such
  dwellings,  or to the designees of the mutual company. Such shares shall
  be purchased or sold by the agency for the par value thereof. The  terms
  under  which  such shares may be sold, or be contracted to be sold shall
  be subject to the approval of the  commissioner.  Shares  owned  by  the
  agency may not be voted.


   21.  Subject  to  the  approval of the commissioner of social services
  pursuant to the provisions of title five-A of article six of the  social
  services  law,  to  make mortgage loans to non-profit corporations which
  are eligible borrowers pursuant to the provisions of the aforesaid title
  five-A and to undertake commitments to make any such mortgage loans.
    21-a.  Subject  to the approval of the commissioner of social services
  of the state of New York pursuant to the provisions of  article  seven-A
  of  this  chapter,  to  make  mortgage  loans  to companies incorporated
  pursuant to the  provisions  of  such  article  and  the  not-for-profit
  corporation  law  and to undertake commitments to make any such mortgage
  loans.
    22. Subject to the approval of  the  commissioner  of  mental  hygiene
  pursuant to the provisions of article seventy-five of the mental hygiene
  law,  to make loans to companies incorporated pursuant to the provisions
  of article seventy-five of the mental hygiene law and the not-for-profit
  corporation law and to undertake commitments to make any  such  mortgage
  loans.  No such loan or commitment made on or after June first, nineteen
  hundred eighty-two, shall be made primarily for a purpose other than the
  refinancing of existing indebtedness pursuant  to  subdivision  four  of
  section 75.05 of the mental hygiene law.
    23.  Subject to the approval of the commissioner of health pursuant to
  the provisions of article twenty-eight-B of the public  health  law,  to
  make   mortgage  loans  to  hospital  corporations  which  are  eligible
  borrowers as defined in article twenty-eight-B of the public health  law
  and to undertake commitments to make any such mortgage loans.
    24.  To contract with the state of New York municipal bond bank agency
  to render such services as the agency may  deem  appropriate,  including
  but  not  limited  to  the  use  of the premises, personnel and personal
  property of the agency and to charge the reasonable  costs  thereof  and
  provide for the reimbursement to the agency for any expenses necessarily
  incurred  by  the agency in carrying out the terms of such contract. Any
  such contract shall be subject to the separate approval of the  director
  of the budget.
    25.  To  contract  with  the  New  York  state medical care facilities
  finance agency to market and service any New  York  state  medical  care
  facilities  finance  agency  bonds  and  New  York  state  medical  care
  facilities finance agency notes approved by the New York  state  medical
  care  facilities  finance  agency,  and to contract to render such other
  services as the New York state medical care  facilities  finance  agency
  may  request,  including  but  not  limited  to the use of the premises,
  personnel and personal property  of  the  agency,  and  to  provide  for
  reimbursement  to  the  agency  from  the  New  York  state medical care
  facilities finance agency for any expenses necessarily incurred  by  the
  agency in carrying out the terms of any such contract. Any such contract
  shall be subject to the separate approval of the director of the budget.
    26.  To  contract  with  the  New York state project finance agency to
  market and service any New York state project finance agency  bonds  and
  New  York  state  project  finance agency notes approved by the New York
  state project finance agency, and  to  contract  to  render  such  other
  services  as  the  New  York  state  project finance agency may request,
  including but not limited to the use  of  the  premises,  personnel  and
  personal property of the agency, and to provide for reimbursement to the
  agency  from  the New York state project finance agency for any expenses
  necessarily incurred by the agency in carrying out the terms of any such
  contract. Any such contract shall be subject to the separate approval of
  the director of the budget.
    27. To contract with the New York state urban development  corporation
  to  market  and service any New York state urban development corporation


 bonds and New York state urban development corporation notes approved by
  the New York state urban development  corporation  and  to  contract  to
  render  such  other  services  as  the  New York state urban development
  corporation  may  request,  including  but not limited to the use of the
  premises, personnel and personal property of the agency, and to  provide
  for   reimbursement  to  the  agency  from  the  New  York  state  urban
  development corporation for any expenses  necessarily  incurred  by  the
  agency in carrying out the terms of any such contract. Any such contract
  shall be subject to the separate approval of the director of the budget.
    28.  To  participate in federal programs for the insurance of mortgage
  loans including programs which require the  agency  to  share  any  loss
  arising  out  of  any  mortgage  loan insured by the federal government,
  provided that the agency's share of any such loss shall not exceed fifty
  percent thereof.
    28-a. To acquire and enter into commitments to acquire  any  federally
  guaranteed  security to finance the making of mortgage loans pursuant to
  section forty-four-c of this article and to pledge or otherwise use  any
  such federally guaranteed security in such manner as the agency deems in
  its  best  interest to secure or otherwise provide a source of repayment
  on bonds issued to finance the making of such mortgage loans.
    29. To do any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out  its
  purposes  and  exercise  the  powers expressly given and granted in this
  article.
    * 29-a. (1) Subject to the provisions of any contract with noteholders
  and bondholders (a) to make and contract for the making of loans for the
  acquisition, construction or rehabilitation of housing developments  for
  the  purpose of providing residential units for occupancy by persons and
  families for whom the ordinary operations of private  enterprise  cannot
  provide  an  adequate  supply  of  safe, sanitary and affordable housing
  accommodations or for residential units located in an area designated as
  blighted pursuant to article fifteen or sixteen of the general municipal
  law, and (b) to make and to contract for the making of loans  to  or  to
  purchase  loans  from  lending institutions for the purpose of financing
  loans for such acquisition, construction or rehabilitation. No loans may
  be financed pursuant to this subdivision unless the  agency  finds  that
  portions  of  the  housing developments are to be occupied by persons or
  families of low or moderate income. In determining whether the  portions
  of housing developments will be so occupied, the agency may consider and
  rely  upon  the  fact  that the housing developments will be occupied by
  persons and families in accordance with requirements for the interest on
  obligations issued to finance them to be exempt from  taxation  pursuant
  to  section  103(b)(3)  or  103(b)(4)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of
  1954, as amended.
    (2) With regard to any loan made  pursuant  to  this  subdivision  and
  notwithstanding   the  provisions  of,  or  any  regulation  promulgated
  pursuant to, the emergency housing rent control law, the local emergency
  housing rent control act, or local law  enacted  pursuant  thereto,  the
  rent  stabilizaton  law of nineteen hundred sixty-nine, or the emergency
  tenant protection act of nineteen seventy-four, the owner of  a  housing
  development  otherwise subject to any such law or act, with the approval
  of the agency, may establish the initial rent  for  each  dwelling  unit
  within  the project. If the initial rents are to be established pursuant
  hereto, the agency shall notify occupants of the housing development, if
  any, of any such proposed rental establishment  and  offer  to  meet  at
  least once with the occupants prior to its approval.
    (3)  The  powers  granted by this subdivision may be exercised only if
  (a) obligations of the agency have been issued to fund the loan made  or
  purchased by the agency and such obligations have received an investment


 grade  rating  from  a  recognized  rating  agency; (b) the loan made or
  purchased by the agency is fully secured as to principal and interest by
  insurance or a commitment to insure issued by  the  state  of  New  York
  mortgage agency or by the general credit of a bank, national bank, trust
  company,  savings bank, savings and loan association, insurance company,
  governmental agency of the United States, or any combination thereof; or
  (c) obligations of the agency are purchased by a  bank,  national  bank,
  trust  company,  savings  bank,  savings and loan association, insurance
  company, governmental agency of the United States, which for purposes of
  this subdivision, include the federal home  loan  mortgage  corporation,
  the  federal  national  mortgage  association, the governmental national
  mortgage association,  and  any  successor  of  the  foregoing,  or  any
  wholly-owned subsidiary or combination thereof.
    * NB Repealed July 23, 2025
    29-b.  To  carry  out  its powers and responsibilities with respect to
  permanent housing projects for homeless  families  as  provided  for  in
  article three-A of this chapter.
    30. (1) Subject to the provisions of any contract with noteholders and
  bondholders  (a)  to  make  and contract for the making of loans for the
  acquisition, refinancing, construction or rehabilitation of housing  and
  non-profit  health  facilities  and  (b) to make and to contract for the
  making of loans to or to purchase loans from  lending  institutions  for
  the  purposes  of  financing loans for such acquisition, construction or
  rehabilitation.
    (2) The powers granted by this subdivision may be exercised  only  if:
  (a)  the  commissioner  of  health  has  approved  any health and health
  related facilities which are in addition to  the  residential  unit  and
  housing  portion  of  the  facility,  pursuant  to  section twenty-eight
  hundred two of the public health law in any case where the  facility  is
  subject  to  the provisions of such section or has approved the facility
  according to the guidelines prescribed  in  any  other  case;  (b)  with
  respect  to  any portion thereof owned by a for profit owner, the agency
  makes  the  finding  required  to  finance  housing  developments  under
  paragraph  one  of  subdivision  twenty-nine-a  of this section; (c) (i)
  obligations of the agency have been issued to  fund  the  loan  made  or
  purchased by the agency and such obligations have received an investment
  grade  rating  from a recognized rating agency, or (ii) the loan made or
  purchased by the agency is fully secured as to principal and interest by
  insurance or a commitment to insure issued by  the  state  of  New  York
  mortgage agency or by the general credit of a bank, national bank, trust
  company,  savings bank, savings and loan association, insurance company,
  the college construction loan insurance association,  the  student  loan
  marketing  association,  or  a governmental agency of the United States;
  and (d) approval from the applicable state agencies as to the  need  for
  the project has been obtained prior to joint financing.
    31.  To  and  shall  develop, promote and ensure that, where possible,
  minority groups which traditionally have been disadvantaged,  and  women
  are   afforded  equal  opportunity  for  contracts  in  connection  with
  development and construction contracts for developments, facilities  and
  projects  financed by the issuance of bonds, notes and other obligations
  of the agency.
    32. To transfer funds in an amount to be agreed upon, at  the  request
  of the director of the division of the budget, to the state treasury for
  deposit  to  the general fund as an expense of the agency. Such transfer
  shall be made in such amounts and at  such  times  as  specified  in  an
  agreement  or agreements executed between the agency and the director of
  the budget with copies to be provided to the chairman  of  the  assembly


 ways  and  means  committee  and  the  chairman  of  the  senate finance
  committee.




   §  44-a.  Low rent dwelling accommodations. 1. Subject to the approval
  of  the  commissioner  and  to  the  provisions  of  any  contract  with
  noteholders  and  bondholders,  the agency shall have the power to lease
  dwellings in a project, not to exceed twenty per centum of the dwellings
  in such project, from a company, except that in the case  of  a  project
  located  in  an  area  in  which  the  commissioner finds that unusually
  difficult housing conditions exist, the number of dwellings which may be
  leased by the agency shall not exceed fifty per centum, and except  that
  the agency may lease all or any portion of the dwellings in a non-profit
  company  project  designed or intended for occupancy by aged persons, at
  such rentals as may be fixed therefor by such company  and  approved  by
  the commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case may be, pursuant
  to  the  provisions  of  subdivision  one  of section thirty-one of this
  chapter less an appropriate adjustment for the increased tax  exemption,
  if  any,  attributable  to such dwellings pursuant to subdivision two of
  section thirty-three of this chapter; and to sublet such  dwellings,  in
  accordance  with subdivision two of this section, to persons or families
  eligible therefor in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (a)  of
  subdivision  two  of  section  thirty-one  of  this chapter, except that
  dwellings in a non-profit  company  project  designed  or  intended  for
  occupancy  by  the aged shall be sublet only to aged persons, and except
  that in the case of mutual companies, dwellings may be leased only  when
  the agency shall purchase the shares appertaining to such dwellings.
    2.  The  rental  of any dwelling sublet in accordance with subdivision
  one of this section shall be fixed at an  amount  equal  to  twenty  per
  centum of the probable aggregate annual income of the occupants thereof,
  determined in accordance with section thirty-one of this chapter, at the
  time  of  the  execution  of  such  sublease  and  at  a time thereafter
  proximate to each anniversary date of the execution of such sublease and
  at the time of any renewal or extension of such sublease, provided  that
  no  such  dwelling shall be sublet (a) at an average rental of less than
  fifteen dollars per room per month or at a  rental  less  than  that  of
  comparable  dwellings  in new state-aided public housing projects in the
  community, whichever is greater, or (b) to  a  person  or  family  whose
  probable  aggregate  annual  income  exceeds five times the rental fixed
  therefor  by  the  company  pursuant  to  subdivision  one  of   section
  thirty-one  of this chapter, provided however, such person or family may
  continue to occupy such dwelling  and  pay  to  the  agency  such  fixed
  rental,  including any surcharges which would otherwise be authorized if
  such person or family were a tenant of the company,  until  the  company
  shall have entered into a lease with such person or family or until such
  person or family has vacated or has been caused to vacate such dwelling.
    3.  Subject  to the approval of the commissioner and to the provisions
  of any contract with noteholders and bondholders, the agency shall  have
  the  power  to  lease  dwellings,  within  areas  designated  to receive
  benefits  under  the  federal  demonstration  cities  and   metropolitan
  development  act  of  nineteen hundred sixty-six, in a multiple dwelling
  receiving benefits and subject to control of  its  rents  under  article
  eight  of  this chapter from the owner thereof at such rentals as may be
  approved by the governmental agency having jurisdiction pursuant to  the
  provisions  of  section four hundred five of this chapter; and to sublet
  such dwellings to persons or families eligible  therefor  in  accordance
  with  the provisions of subdivision three of section four hundred one of
  this chapter. The  rental  of  any  dwelling  sublet  pursuant  to  this
  subdivision  shall  be  fixed at an amount equal to twenty per centum of
  the  probable  aggregate  annual  income  of  the   occupants   thereof,
  determined  in accordance with subdivision three of section four hundred
  one of this chapter, at the time of the execution of such  sublease  and


 at the time of each anniversary of the execution of such sublease and at
  the  time of any renewal or extension of such sublease, provided that no
  such dwelling shall be sublet (a) at an  average  rental  of  less  than
  fifteen  dollars  per  room  per  month or at a rental less than that of
  comparable dwellings in new state-aided public housing projects  in  the
  community,  whichever  is  greater,  or  (b) to a person or family whose
  probable aggregate annual income exceeds five  times  the  rental  fixed
  therefor pursuant to section four hundred five of this chapter.
    4.  The  agency  shall  create  and establish a special account, to be
  known as the low rent housing assistance account,  and  shall  pay  into
  such account all monies appropriated and made available by the state for
  the  purposes  of  such  account  and any other monies which may be made
  available to the agency for the purposes of such account from any  other
  source  or  sources.  All monies held in the low rent housing assistance
  accounts shall be used by the agency (a) to meet, together with  rentals
  received  therefor  from  the occupants, the agency's rent obligation to
  the company or owner of a multiple dwelling with  respect  to  dwellings
  leased pursuant to this section; (b) to make housing assistance payments
  pursuant  to  subdivision  five  of this section; (c) for the payment of
  administrative and  other  expenses  of  the  agency  allocable  to  its
  activities  pursuant  to this section, and (d) to reimburse the division
  of housing and  community  renewal  the  reasonable  costs  of  services
  performed  by  the commissioner of housing and community renewal and the
  division of housing and community renewal in carrying out the provisions
  of this section pursuant to section  fifty-five  of  this  article.  Any
  monies  held in the low rent housing assistance account not required for
  immediate disbursement may  be  invested  in  the  manner  permitted  by
  subdivision  eight  of section forty-four of this article. Any income or
  interest earned by, or increment to such account shall be added  to  the
  monies held in such account for the purposes herein provided.
    5.  (a)  In  lieu  of  leasing  and  subleasing housing accommodations
  pursuant to subdivisions one through three of this section,  the  agency
  may  provide  housing  for  persons and families of low income by making
  housing assistance payments to the company owning a project.
    (b) A housing assistance payment pursuant to this subdivision  may  be
  made only with respect to occupants of a dwelling in a project who would
  be eligible for a sublease under the provisions of this section.
    (c)  Tenants receiving housing assistance payments shall pay a rent to
  the company equal to the rent they would pay under a  sublease  pursuant
  to  this  section.  Housing  assistance payments equal to the difference
  between such rent and the rental fixed  for  the  dwelling  pursuant  to
  section  thirty-one of this chapter shall be made by or on behalf of the
  agency to the company.
    (d) The agency and the division of housing and community  renewal  may
  make  such  regulations,  not  inconsistent  with the provisions of this
  section, and enter into such agreements with the owners of  projects  as
  may  be  necessary  or  proper  to  carry  out  the  provisions  of this
  subdivision. Such agreements may, in the case of a project the  mortgage
  on  which  is  held  by  the  agency,  provide for the making of housing
  assistance payments in the  form  of  a  credit  against  the  company's
  payments thereon.






	   § 44-b. Mortgage modifications, evidence of pre-existing indebtedness.
  1.    Notwithstanding  the provision of any law, general or special, the
  agency shall have the power to:
    (i) consent to and contract for the modification of any of  the  terms
  of  a  mortgage, and note or bond secured thereby, made pursuant to this
  article for the purpose of obtaining insurance of such mortgage loan  by
  the  federal  government  in  order  to refinance all or any part of the
  indebtedness evidenced by such mortgage and note or bonds, or
    (ii) satisfy such mortgage loan in order  to  enable  the  company  to
  obtain  insurance  by the federal government of a mortgage loan made for
  the purpose of refinancing all or any part of the indebtedness evidenced
  by such mortgage and note or bond.
    Notwithstanding the provisions hereof, the agency  on  or  after  June
  fifteen,  nineteen  hundred  seventy-six,  shall not modify or satisfy a
  mortgage loan, pursuant to this subdivision  one,  where  the  principal
  amount  of  the  mortgage loan insured by the federal government is less
  than eighty-five per centum of the principal amount outstanding  on  the
  original  mortgage  loan  at  the  time  such  original mortgage loan is
  refinanced, unless such modification or satisfaction is  first  approved
  by  the New York state public authorities control board created pursuant
  to article one-A of the public authorities law.
    2. In the event that the existing mortgage loan is satisfied  pursuant
  to this section, the agency may in consideration of the issuance of such
  satisfaction  accept  a  new  mortgage  and  note or bond insured by the
  federal government in an amount equal to the maximum principal amount of
  a mortgage loan  the  federal  government  will  insure  or  accept  the
  proceeds   available   to  the  housing  company  as  a  result  of  the
  refinancing.
    3. In the event that  there  is  residual  indebtedness,  the  housing
  company  shall make and the agency shall accept an instrument evidencing
  such indebtedness in such form and upon such terms  as  the  agency  may
  approve,  provided that such terms are not inconsistent with subdivision
  two of section twenty of this chapter.
    4. Notwithstanding any other provisions  of  this  article  where  the
  commissioner  has  made  the  findings  required  in  subdivision one of
  section twenty-six and where a project has  been  approved  pursuant  to
  subdivision  five  of section twenty-six of this chapter, the agency may
  make or contract to make a mortgage loan pursuant to subdivision two  or
  three  of  this  section without further findings by the commissioner or
  further approval by the local legislative body.
    5. No company shall accept a  mortgage  loan  to  be  insured  by  the
  federal  government  made  for  the  purpose of refinancing the existing
  mortgage loan of a company which shall exceed the amount  which  can  be
  supported by the income derived from the operation of the project at the
  rental  rate  determined  by the commissioner that would be necessary to
  meet all necessary payments to be made by the company, of  all  expenses
  including  fixed  charges,  sinking  funds,  reserves  and  dividends on
  outstanding stock as authorized by the commissioner,  if  the  principal
  amount  of  the  original  mortgage loan of the company were to be fully
  repaid over the term  of  such  mortgage  loan  by  constant  and  equal
  payments  of  principal  and  interest  and  if the interest rate on the
  company's original mortgage loan was  eight  and  one-half  percent  per
  annum.




   §  44-c.  Federally-aided mortgage loans. 1. In addition to the powers
  of the agency to make mortgage loans to companies organized pursuant  to
  article   two  of  this  chapter  and  notwithstanding  any  limitations
  contained in such article or in this article in connection with mortgage
  loans made to such companies, the agency may make or finance the  making
  of  a  federally-aided mortgage loan to the owner of a project upon such
  terms and conditions  not  inconsistent  with  the  provisions  of  this
  section  as it shall require, the proceeds of which are substantially to
  be used to finance the construction, reconstruction,  rehabilitation  or
  improvement  of  a  project  intended  to  be  occupied by three or more
  families. A federally-aided mortgage loan made or financed by the agency
  shall not exceed an amount equal  to  the  lesser  of  (i)  the  maximum
  mortgage  loan  authorized or approved by the federal government or (ii)
  one hundred percent of the development cost of the project  approved  by
  the agency.
    2.  No  federally-aided  mortgage  loan shall be made or financed to a
  company organized pursuant to article two of  this  chapter  unless  the
  commissioner  has  made  the  findings  required  by  such  article.  No
  federally-aided mortgage loan shall be made or  financed  to  any  other
  person,  firm,  corporation,  partnership  or association unless (a) the
  commissioner finds that (i) the project is consistent with the needs  of
  the  state and the county, city, town or village in which it is located,
  or  with  a  plan  or  undertaking  for   the   clearance,   replanning,
  reconstruction or rehabilitation of a substandard and insanitary area or
  areas,  and (ii) the plans and specifications for the project conform to
  all  applicable  federal,  state  and  local  laws,  ordinances,  rules,
  regulations  or  requirements,  (in making such finding the commissioner
  may rely upon approvals, consents  and  certifications  of  governmental
  authorities  exercising  jurisdiction  over  the  project, including the
  federal and state government, and any subdivision, agency, bureau, board
  or commission thereof), and (b) the agency finds that (i) the  estimated
  revenues  of  the project will be sufficient to cover all probable costs
  of  operations  and  maintenance,  all  installments  of  principal  and
  interest  on  the  indebtedness relating to the project, taxes, and such
  other expenses,  including  the  maintenance  of  reserves,  as  may  be
  projected  or required by the agency or the federal government, and (ii)
  the project is to be substantially occupied by persons  or  families  of
  low-income.  In  determining  whether  a  project  will be substantially
  occupied by persons or families of low-income the  agency  may  consider
  and  rely upon the purpose of the federal program of mortgage insurance,
  co-insurance, or housing assistance payments in  connection  with  which
  the mortgage loan is made.
    3.  A  company organized pursuant to article two of this chapter which
  subsequent to the first day of June, nineteen hundred  seventy-nine  has
  obtained a commitment from the agency to make or finance the making of a
  federally-aided  mortgage loan and the project of such company shall not
  be subject to any restrictions, limitation or procedure  imposed  by  or
  pursuant  to such article relating to any matter which is the subject of
  any restriction, limitation or procedure imposed by or pursuant  to  any
  applicable  law,  regulation or requirement of the federal government or
  agreement entered into pursuant thereto.
    4. As used in this section or in  connection  with  a  federally-aided
  mortgage   loan   the  term  project  shall  mean  a  specific  work  or
  improvement, whether or not to effectuate all or any part of a plan, and
  shall include the lands, buildings  and  improvements  acquired,  owned,
  constructed,  managed or operated to provide dwelling accommodations and
  such incidental and appurtenant commercial, recreational  and  community
  facilities as may be approved by the agency.




   §  45.  Transfer  of officers and employees. Officers and employees of
  state departments and agencies may be  transferred  to  the  agency  and
  officers  and  employees  of  the  agency  may  be  transferred to state
  departments and agencies without examination and  without  loss  of  any
  civil  service  status or rights. No such transfer may, however, be made
  except with the approval of the head of the state department or division
  involved and the director of the budget and the chairman of the  agency,
  and  in  compliance  with the rules and regulations of the civil service
  commission of the state.




   §  46. Notes and bonds of the agency. 1. (a) Subject to the provisions
  of section forty-seven of this article, the agency shall have power  and
  is hereby authorized from time to time to issue its negotiable bonds and
  notes in conformity with applicable provisions of the uniform commercial
  code in such principal amount as, in the opinion of the agency, shall be
  necessary  to  provide  sufficient  funds  for  achieving  its corporate
  purposes, including the making  or  financing  the  making  of  mortgage
  loans,  the  payment  of  interest  on  bonds  and  notes of the agency,
  establishment of reserves to secure such bonds and notes, and all  other
  expenditures  of  the  agency incident to and necessary or convenient to
  carry out its corporate purposes and powers;
    (b) The agency shall have power, from time to time, to  issue  renewal
  notes,  to  issue  bonds  to  pay  notes  and whenever it deem refunding
  expedient, to refund any bonds by the issuance of new bonds, whether the
  bonds to be refunded have or have not matured, and to issue bonds partly
  to refund bonds then outstanding and partly for any other  purpose.  The
  refunding  bonds shall be sold and the proceeds applied to the purchase,
  redemption or payment of the bonds to be refunded;
    (c) Except as may otherwise be expressly provided by the agency, every
  issue of its notes or bonds shall be general obligations of  the  agency
  payable out of any revenues or monies of the agency, subject only to any
  agreements  with  the  holders of particular notes or bonds pledging any
  particular receipts or revenues;
    2. a. The notes and bonds, except as  provided  in  paragraph  (c)  of
  subdivision  four  of this section, shall be authorized by resolution of
  the members, shall bear such date or dates, and  shall  mature  at  such
  time  or  times,  in the case of any such note, or any renewals thereof,
  issued for achieving its corporate purposes other  than  the  making  or
  financing  the  making  of mortgage loans, not exceeding the term of any
  applicable lease or sublease, and in the case of any such note,  or  any
  renewals  thereof,  issued  for  the  purpose of making or financing the
  making of mortgage loans, not exceeding the term for  the  repayment  of
  the  mortgage  loan  or  the federally guaranteed securities acquired to
  finance such mortgage loan, and  in  the  case  of  any  such  bond  not
  exceeding  fifty  years  from  the  date of issue, as such resolution or
  resolutions may provide.
    b. In no event, however, shall any such note mature, in the case of  a
  note  or  any  renewals thereof, issued for the purpose of achieving its
  corporate purposes other than the making  or  financing  the  making  of
  mortgage  loans,  later  than eight years from the date of issue of such
  original note, and, in the case of  a  note  or  any  renewals  thereof,
  issued  for  the  purpose  of making or financing the making of mortgage
  loans, later than ten years from the date  of  issue  of  such  original
  note,  unless in each year at least that amount of principal is required
  to be paid as would be required if (i) the principal of and interest  on
  any  such note were payable in such manner that the total annual charges
  required for the payment of principal and  interest  were  approximately
  equal  and  constant for the period of such lease, sublease or mortgage,
  as the case may be, and (ii) at the  expiration  of  the  term  of  such
  lease,  sublease  or  mortgage, the total of such required payments were
  sufficient to pay the full  principal  amount  of  such  note;  provided
  however, that such manner of payment of principal shall be required only
  from  the  date of the issuance of such note or from the commencement of
  the lease or sublease term in the case of a lease or sublease  and  from
  the  occupancy  date  in  the case of a mortgage whichever later occurs.
  Such payment of principal may be made either to the holder of such  note
  or  into  a  sinking  fund.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no such note
  shall be issued pursuant to this paragraph b unless the  state  director


 of  the  budget  has  approved  the issuance of any such note in writing
  prior to such issuance.
    c.  The  notes and bonds shall bear interest at such rate or rates, be
  in such denominations, be in such form,  either  coupon  or  registered,
  carry  such  registration  privileges,  be  executed  in such manner, be
  payable in such medium of payment,  at  such  place  or  places  and  be
  subject  to  such  terms of redemption as such resolution or resolutions
  may provide. The notes and bonds of  the  agency  may  be  sold  by  the
  agency, at public or private sale, at such price or prices as the agency
  shall  determine.  No  notes  or  bonds of the agency may be sold by the
  agency at private sale, however, unless such sale and the terms  thereof
  have been approved in writing by (a) the comptroller, where such sale is
  not  to  the  comptroller, or (b) the director of the budget, where such
  sale is to the comptroller.
    3. Except as provided in paragraph (d) of  subdivision  four  of  this
  section, any resolution or resolutions authorizing any notes or bonds or
  any  issue  thereof may contain provisions, which shall be a part of the
  contract with the holders thereof, as to:
    (a) pledging all or any part of the fees and charges made or  received
  by  the agency, and all or any part of the monies received in payment of
  mortgage loans  or  the  federally  guaranteed  securities  acquired  to
  finance  such  mortgage  loans  and  interest  thereon, and other monies
  received or to be received, to secure the payment of the notes or  bonds
  or  of any issue thereof, subject to such agreements with bondholders or
  noteholders as may then exist;
    (b) pledging all or any part of the assets of  the  agency,  including
  mortgages  or  the  federally  guaranteed securities acquired to finance
  such mortgage loans and obligations securing the  same,  to  secure  the
  payment of the notes or bonds or of any issue of notes or bonds, subject
  to such agreements with noteholders or bondholders as may then exist;
    (c)  the  use and disposition of the gross income from mortgages owned
  or financed by the agency and payment of principal of mortgages owned by
  the agency;
    (d) the setting aside of reserves or sinking funds and the  regulation
  and disposition thereof;
    (e)  limitations on the purpose to which the proceeds of sale of notes
  or bonds may be applied and pledging such proceeds to secure the payment
  of the notes or bonds or of any issue thereof;
    (f) limitations on the issuance of  additional  notes  or  bonds;  the
  terms  upon  which  additional notes or bonds may be issued and secured;
  the refunding of outstanding or other notes or bonds;
    (g) the procedure, if any, by which the terms  of  any  contract  with
  noteholders  or  bondholders  may be amended or abrogated, the amount of
  notes or bonds the holders of which must consent thereto, and the manner
  in which such consent may be given;
    (h) limitations on the amount of monies to be expended by  the  agency
  for operating, administrative or other expenses of the agency;
    (i) vesting in a trustee or trustees such property, rights, powers and
  duties  in  trust  as the agency may determine, which may include any or
  all of the rights, powers and duties of the  trustee  appointed  by  the
  bondholders  pursuant  to  this  article, and limiting or abrogating the
  right of the bondholders to appoint a  trustee  under  this  article  or
  limiting the rights, powers and duties of such trustee;
    (j)  any  other  matters, of like or different character, which in any
  way affect the security or protection of the notes or bonds.
    4. (a) Subject to the provisions of subdivisions  three  and  four  of
  section  forty-seven of this article and notwithstanding anything to the
  contrary hereinabove provided in this section,  the  agency  shall  have


 power  and  is  hereby  authorized from time to time to issue negotiable
  bonds and notes in such principal amount, as,  in  the  opinion  of  the
  agency, shall be necessary to provide sufficient funds for the making of
  equity  loans,  the  payment  of  interest  on bonds and notes issued to
  provide funds for the making of such equity loans, the establishment  of
  reserves  to  secure such bonds and notes, and all other expenditures of
  the agency incident to and necessary or convenient  for  the  making  of
  such equity loans;
    (b)  The  provisions of paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) of subdivision one
  of this section shall apply to equity notes  and  bonds  issued  by  the
  agency for the making of equity loans.
    (c)  The  provisions of subdivision two of this section shall apply to
  equity notes and bonds issued by the agency for  the  making  of  equity
  loans  except  that  any such equity notes, or any renewals thereof, and
  any such equity  bond  shall  mature  at  such  time  or  times  as  the
  resolution  of  the  members  shall  provide,  but in no event at a time
  subsequent to six months after the latest  maturity  date  of  the  last
  maturing  equity  loan  made  from  the proceeds of such equity notes or
  bonds.
    (d) Any resolution or resolutions  authorizing  any  equity  notes  or
  equity  bonds  or  any  issue thereof for the making of equity loans may
  contain any of the provisions set forth in  subdivision  three  of  this
  section, which shall be a part of the contract with the holders thereof,
  except  that  no such resolution or resolutions shall pledge any fees or
  charges collected by  the  agency  pursuant  to  subdivision  eleven  of
  section  forty-four,  income  from mortgages owned by the agency, or any
  payments of principal of mortgages owned by the agency.
    5. It is the intention hereof that any pledge made by the agency shall
  be valid and binding from the time when the pledge  is  made;  that  the
  monies  or  property  so  pledged  and thereafter received by the agency
  shall immediately be subject to the lien  of  such  pledge  without  any
  physical  delivery thereof or further act; and that the lien of any such
  pledge shall be valid and binding as against all parties  having  claims
  of  any  kind  in  tort,  contract  or  otherwise  against  the  agency,
  irrespective of whether such parties have notice  thereof.  Neither  the
  resolution nor any other instrument by which a pledge is created need be
  recorded.
    6.  Neither  the  members  of  the agency nor any person executing the
  notes or bonds shall be liable personally on the notes or  bonds  or  be
  subject  to  any  personal  liability or accountability by reason of the
  issuance thereof.
    7.  The  agency,  subject  to  such  agreements  with  noteholders  or
  bondholders  as  may  then  exist,  shall  have  power  out of any funds
  available therefor to purchase notes or bonds of the agency, which shall
  thereupon be cancelled, at a price not exceeding (a)  if  the  notes  or
  bonds  are  then  redeemable,  the redemption price then applicable plus
  accrued interest to the next interest payment date thereon,  or  (b)  if
  the  notes  or  bonds  are  not  then  redeemable,  the redemption price
  applicable on the first date after such purchase upon which the notes or
  bonds become subject to redemption plus accrued interest to such date.
    8. The state shall not be liable on notes or bonds of the  agency  and
  such  notes  and  bonds shall not be a debt of the state, and such notes
  and bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement to such effect.




   § 47. Reserve funds and appropriations. 1. (a) The agency shall create
  and  establish  a  special  fund  (herein referred to as capital reserve
  fund), and shall pay into such  capital  reserve  fund  (1)  any  monies
  appropriated  and  made  available by the state for the purposes of such
  fund, (2) any proceeds of sale  of  notes  or  bonds  other  than  state
  university  construction  notes  or state university construction bonds,
  equity notes or equity bonds, non-profit  project  notes  or  non-profit
  project  bonds,  hospital and nursing home project notes or hospital and
  nursing home project bonds, urban rental project notes or  urban  rental
  project bonds, health facilities notes or health facilities bonds, youth
  facilities  project  notes  or youth facilities project bonds, community
  mental health services and developmental disabilities  services  project
  notes or community mental health services and developmental disabilities
  services project bonds, community senior citizens services project notes
  or  community  senior  citizens  services  project bonds, mental hygiene
  improvement notes  or  mental  hygiene  improvement  bonds  and  revenue
  housing bonds, and bonds and notes for the housing program to the extent
  provided  in  the  resolution  of  the  agency  authorizing the issuance
  thereof, and (3) any other moneys which may be  made  available  to  the
  agency  for  the  purpose of such fund from any other source or sources.
  All moneys held in the  capital  reserve  fund,  except  as  hereinafter
  provided, shall be used solely for the payment of the principal of bonds
  of  the  agency  other  than state university construction bonds, equity
  bonds, non-profit project  bonds,  hospital  and  nursing  home  project
  bonds,  urban  rental  project  bonds,  health  facilities  bonds, youth
  facilities  project  bonds,  community  mental   health   services   and
  developmental  disabilities  services  project  bonds,  community senior
  citizens services project bonds, mental hygiene  improvement  bonds  and
  revenue  housing  bonds,  and bonds and notes for the housing program as
  the same mature, required payments to any sinking fund established in  a
  resolution of the agency for the amortization of term bonds (hereinafter
  referred  to  as "sinking fund payments"), the purchase or redemption of
  bonds of the agency other  than  state  university  construction  bonds,
  equity  bonds,  non-profit  project  bonds,  hospital  and  nursing home
  project bonds, urban rental  project  bonds,  health  facilities  bonds,
  youth  facilities  project  bonds,  community mental health services and
  developmental disabilities  services  project  bonds,  community  senior
  citizens  services  project  bonds, mental hygiene improvement bonds and
  revenue housing bonds, and bonds and notes for the housing  program  the
  payment  of  interest  on such bonds of the agency or the payment of any
  redemption premium required to be paid  when  such  bonds  are  redeemed
  prior to maturity; provided, however, that monies in such fund shall not
  be  withdrawn  therefrom  at any time in such amount as would reduce the
  amount of such fund to less than the maximum  amount  of  principal  and
  interest maturing and becoming due and sinking fund payments required to
  be  made in any succeeding calendar year on all bonds of the agency then
  outstanding other  than  state  university  construction  bonds,  equity
  bonds,  non-profit  project  bonds,  hospital  and  nursing home project
  bonds, urban  rental  project  bonds,  health  facilities  bonds,  youth
  facilities   project   bonds,   community  mental  health  services  and
  developmental disabilities  services  project  bonds,  community  senior
  citizens  services  project  bonds, mental hygiene improvement bonds and
  revenue housing bonds and bonds  and  notes  for  the  housing  program,
  except for the purpose of paying principal of, interest and sinking fund
  payments  becoming due on such bonds of the agency maturing and becoming
  due and for the payment of which other moneys  of  the  agency  are  not
  available.  For  the  purposes  of  this  subdivision,  in computing the
  maximum amount of principal maturing at a  single  future  date  (herein


 called  "term  bonds")  in  any  succeeding calendar year, the principal
  amount of any such term bonds which are subject to mandatory  redemption
  prior to such future date by sinking fund payments shall not be included
  in  the computation determining the maximum amount of principal maturing
  in said future year. Any income or interest earned by, or increment  to,
  the   capital  reserve  fund  due  to  the  investment  thereof  may  be
  transferred by the agency to the general reserve fund or other  fund  of
  the  agency  to  the extent it does not reduce the amount of the capital
  reserve fund below the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing
  and becoming due and sinking fund payments required to be  made  in  any
  succeeding   calendar  year  on  all  such  bonds  of  the  agency  then
  outstanding other  than  state  university  construction  bonds,  equity
  bonds,  non-profit  project  bonds,  hospital  and  nursing home project
  bonds, urban  rental  project  bonds,  health  facilities  bonds,  youth
  facilities   project   bonds,   community  mental  health  services  and
  developmental disabilities  services  project  bonds,  community  senior
  citizens  services  project  bonds, mental hygiene improvement bonds and
  revenue housing bonds and bonds and notes for the housing program.
    (b) The agency shall not  issue  bonds  other  than  state  university
  construction bonds, equity bonds, non-profit project bonds, hospital and
  nursing   home   project  bonds,  urban  rental  project  bonds,  health
  facilities bonds,  youth  facilities  project  bonds,  community  mental
  health  services  and developmental disabilities services project bonds,
  community  senior  citizens  services  project  bonds,  mental   hygiene
  improvement  bonds and revenue housing bonds and bonds and notes for the
  housing program at any time secured by the capital reserve fund  if  the
  maximum  amount  of principal and interest maturing and becoming due and
  sinking fund payments required to be made in a succeeding calendar  year
  on  such  bonds  then  to be issued and on all other bonds of the agency
  then outstanding other than state university construction bonds,  equity
  bonds,  non-profit  project  bonds,  hospital  and  nursing home project
  bonds, urban  rental  project  bonds,  health  facilities  bonds,  youth
  facilities   project   bonds,   community  mental  health  services  and
  developmental disabilities  services  project  bonds,  community  senior
  citizens  services  project  bonds, mental hygiene improvement bonds and
  revenue housing bonds and bonds and notes for the housing  program  will
  exceed  the  amount  of the capital reserve fund at the time of issuance
  unless the agency, at the time of issuance of such bonds, shall  deposit
  in  such  fund  from  the  proceeds  of  the  bonds  so to be issued, or
  otherwise, an amount which, together with the amount then in such  fund,
  will  be  not  less  than  the  maximum amount of principal and interest
  maturing and becoming due and sinking fund payments required to be  made
  in  any  succeeding calendar year on such bonds then to be issued and on
  all other  bonds  of  the  agency  then  outstanding  other  than  state
  university  construction  bonds, equity bonds, non-profit project bonds,
  hospital and nursing home project bonds,  urban  rental  project  bonds,
  health  facilities  bonds,  youth  facilities  project  bonds, community
  mental health services and developmental disabilities  services  project
  bonds,  community senior citizens services project bonds, mental hygiene
  improvement bonds and revenue housing bonds and bonds and notes for  the
  housing program.
    (c)  The  agency  shall  not  issue  bonds  and notes other than state
  university construction bonds and state university  construction  notes,
  hospital  and  nursing  home project bonds and hospital and nursing home
  project notes, health facilities  bonds  and  health  facilities  notes,
  youth  facilities  project  bonds  and  youth  facilities project notes,
  community mental health services and developmental disabilities services
  project bonds and community mental  health  services  and  developmental


 disabilities  services project notes, community senior citizens services
  project notes or community senior citizens services  project  bonds  and
  mental  hygiene  improvement  bonds and mental hygiene improvement notes
  and  bonds  and  notes  for the housing program for any of its corporate
  purposes in an aggregate principal amount exceeding  thirty-one  billion
  two  hundred eighty million dollars, excluding bonds and notes issued to
  refund outstanding bonds and notes.
    (d) To assure the continued operation and solvency of the  agency  for
  the  carrying  out  of the public purposes of this article, provision is
  made in paragraph (a) of this subdivision for the  accumulation  in  the
  capital  reserve  fund  of  an  amount  equal  to  the maximum amount of
  principal and interest  maturing  and  becoming  due  and  sinking  fund
  payments  required  to  be  made  in any succeeding calendar year on all
  bonds of  the  agency  then  outstanding  other  than  state  university
  construction bonds, equity bonds, non-profit project bonds, hospital and
  nursing   home   project  bonds,  urban  rental  project  bonds,  health
  facilities bonds,  youth  facilities  project  bonds,  community  mental
  health  services  and developmental disabilities services project bonds,
  community  senior  citizens  services  project  bonds,  mental   hygiene
  improvement  bonds and revenue housing bonds and bonds and notes for the
  housing program. In order further to  assure  such  maintenance  of  the
  capital  reserve  fund,  there shall be annually apportioned and paid to
  the agency for deposit in the capital reserve fund such sum, if any,  as
  shall  be  certified  by  the chairman of the agency to the governor and
  director of the budget as necessary to restore the capital reserve  fund
  to  an  amount  equal  to  the  maximum amount of principal and interest
  maturing and becoming due and sinking fund payments required to be  made
  in  any  succeeding  calendar  year  on  the  bonds  of  the agency then
  outstanding other  than  state  university  construction  bonds,  equity
  bonds,  non-profit  project  bonds,  hospital  and  nursing home project
  bonds, urban  rental  project  bonds,  health  facilities  bonds,  youth
  facilities   project   bonds,   community  mental  health  services  and
  developmental disabilities  services  project  bonds,  community  senior
  citizens  services  project  bonds, mental hygiene improvement bonds and
  revenue housing bonds and bonds and notes for the housing  program.  The
  chairman of the agency shall annually, on or before December first, make
  and  deliver  to the governor and director of the budget his certificate
  stating the amount, if any, required to restore the capital reserve fund
  to the amount aforesaid and the amount  so  stated,  if  any,  shall  be
  apportioned  and paid to the agency during the then current state fiscal
  year. The principal amount of bonds secured by the capital reserve  fund
  to  which state funds are apportionable pursuant to this paragraph shall
  be limited to the total amount of bonds and  notes  outstanding  on  the
  effective  date  of  this  act, plus the total amount of bonds and notes
  contracted after the effective date of this act to finance  projects  in
  progress on the effective date of this act as determined by the New York
  state public authorities control board created pursuant to section fifty
  of  the  public authorities law whose affirmative determination shall be
  conclusive as to all matters of law and fact solely for the purposes  of
  the  limitations  contained in this paragraph, but in no event shall the
  total amount of bonds so secured by such a capital reserve fund or funds
  exceed three  hundred  thirty-eight  million  dollars,  excluding  bonds
  issued  to refund such outstanding bonds until the date of redemption of
  such outstanding bonds. As outstanding bonds so secured  are  paid,  the
  amount  so  secured  shall  be reduced accordingly but the redemption of
  such outstanding bonds from the proceeds of refunding  bonds  shall  not
  reduce the amount so secured.


   (e)  In  computing  the  amount  of  the  capital reserve fund for the
  purposes of this section, securities in which all or a portion  of  such
  fund  shall  be  invested shall be valued at par or if purchased at less
  than par, at their cost to the agency.
    2.  The  agency  shall  create  and  establish  a special fund (herein
  referred to as general reserve fund) and shall pay into  such  fund  all
  fees  and  charges  collected by the agency pursuant to paragraph (a) of
  subdivision eleven of section forty-four of this article, or  otherwise,
  other  than  fees and charges collected in connection with the making of
  mortgage loans (or commitments therefor) to mutual companies, non-profit
  companies, urban rental companies or community development corporations,
  and any monies which the agency shall transfer from the capital  reserve
  fund  pursuant  to the provisions of paragraph (a) of subdivision one of
  this section. Such monies and any other monies  paid  into  the  general
  reserve  fund  may,  in  the  discretion  of  the  agency but subject to
  agreements with bondholders and noteholders, be used by the  agency  (a)
  for  the  repayment  of  advances  from the state in accordance with the
  provisions of repayment agreements between the agency and  the  director
  of  the  budget,  (b) to reimburse the division of housing and community
  renewal  the  reasonable  costs  of  the  services  performed   by   the
  commissioner  of  housing  and community renewal and division of housing
  and community renewal pursuant to section fifty-five  of  this  article,
  (c)  to pay all costs, expenses and charges of financing, including fees
  and expenses of trustees and paying agents, (d)  for  transfers  to  the
  capital  reserve  fund,  (e)  for  the  payment  of the principal of and
  interest on bonds or notes  other  than  state  university  construction
  bonds  or  state  university  construction notes, equity bonds or equity
  notes, non-profit project bonds or non-profit  project  notes,  hospital
  and  nursing  home  project  bonds  or hospital and nursing home project
  notes, urban rental project bonds or urban rental project notes,  health
  facilities  bonds  or  health facilities notes, youth facilities project
  bonds  or  youth  facilities  project  notes,  community  mental  health
  services  and  developmental  disabilities  services  project  bonds  or
  community mental health services and developmental disabilities services
  project notes, community  senior  citizens  services  project  notes  or
  community   senior  citizens  services  project  bonds,  mental  hygiene
  improvement bonds  or  mental  hygiene  improvement  notes  and  revenue
  housing  bonds and bonds and notes for the housing program issued by the
  agency when the same shall become due whether at maturity or on call for
  redemption and for the payment of any redemption premium required to  be
  paid  where  such  bonds  or  notes  are  redeemed prior to their stated
  maturities, and to purchase bonds or notes other than  state  university
  construction  bonds or state university construction notes, equity bonds
  or equity notes, non-profit project bonds or non-profit  project  notes,
  hospital  and  nursing  home  project bonds or hospital and nursing home
  project notes, urban rental project bonds or urban rental project notes,
  health facilities bonds or health  facilities  notes,  youth  facilities
  project bonds or youth facilities project notes, community mental health
  services  and  developmental  disabilities  services  project  bonds  or
  community mental health services and developmental disabilities services
  project notes, community  senior  citizens  services  project  notes  or
  community   senior  citizens  services  project  bonds,  mental  hygiene
  improvement bonds  or  mental  hygiene  improvement  notes  and  revenue
  housing  bonds and bonds and notes for the housing program issued by the
  agency, or (f) for such other corporate purposes of the  agency  as  the
  agency in its discretion shall determine and provide.
    3.  (a)  The  agency shall create and establish a special fund (herein
  referred to as equity reserve fund), and  shall  pay  into  such  equity


 reserve fund (1) any monies appropriated and made available by the state
  for  the purposes of such fund, (2) any proceeds of sale of equity notes
  or equity bonds, to the extent provided in the resolution of the  agency
  authorizing  the issuance thereof, and (3) any other monies which may be
  made available to the agency for the purpose of such fund from any other
  source or sources. All moneys held in the equity reserve fund, except as
  hereinafter provided, shall be  used  solely  for  the  payment  of  the
  principal  of  equity  bonds  of  the  agency,  as  the same mature, the
  purchase of equity bonds of the  agency,  the  payment  of  interest  on
  equity  bonds  of  the  agency  or the payment of any redemption premium
  required to be paid when such bonds  are  redeemed  prior  to  maturity;
  provided,  however,  that  moneys  in  such  fund shall not be withdrawn
  therefrom at any time in such amount as would reduce the amount of  such
  fund  to less than the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing
  and becoming due in any succeeding calendar year on all equity bonds  of
  the  agency then outstanding, except for the purpose of paying principal
  and interest on equity bonds of the agency maturing and becoming due and
  for the payment of which other monies of the agency are  not  available.
  Any  income  or  interest earned by, or increment to, the equity reserve
  fund due to the investment thereof may be transferred to the equity loan
  fund or other fund of the agency to the extent it does  not  reduce  the
  amount  of the equity reserve fund below the maximum amount of principal
  and interest maturing and becoming due in any succeeding  calendar  year
  on all equity bonds of the agency then outstanding.
    (b) The agency shall not issue equity bonds at any time secured by the
  equity  reserve  fund  if  the  maximum amount of principal and interest
  maturing and becoming due in a succeeding calendar year  on  the  equity
  bonds then to be issued and on all other equity bonds of the agency then
  outstanding  will  exceed  the  amount of the equity reserve fund at the
  time of issuance, unless the agency, at the time  of  issuance  of  such
  bonds,  shall  deposit in such fund from the proceeds of the bonds so to
  be issued, or otherwise, an amount which together with the  amount  then
  in  such fund, will be not less than the maximum amount of principal and
  interest maturing and becoming due in any succeeding  calendar  year  on
  the  equity bonds then to be issued and on all other equity bonds of the
  agency then outstanding.
    (c) The agency shall not issue equity bonds and  equity  notes  in  an
  aggregate  principal  amount  exceeding fifty million dollars, excluding
  equity bonds and notes issued to refund  outstanding  equity  bonds  and
  notes.
    (d)  To  assure the continued operation and solvency of the agency for
  the carrying out of the public purposes of this  article,  provision  is
  made  in  paragraph  (a) of this subdivision for the accumulation in the
  equity reserve fund  of  an  amount  equal  to  the  maximum  amount  of
  principal  and  interest  maturing  and  becoming  due in any succeeding
  calendar year on all equity bonds of the  agency  then  outstanding.  In
  order  further  to  assure  such maintenance of the equity reserve fund,
  there shall be annually apportioned and paid to the agency  for  deposit
  in  the  equity  reserve fund such sum, if any, as shall be certified by
  the chairman of the agency to the governor and director of the budget as
  necessary to restore the equity reserve fund to an amount equal  to  the
  maximum  amount  of  principal and interest maturing and becoming due in
  any succeeding calendar year on the equity  bonds  of  the  agency  then
  outstanding.  The  chairman  of  the agency shall annually, on or before
  December first, make and deliver to the governor  and  director  of  the
  budget  his  certificate stating the amount, if any, required to restore
  the equity reserve fund to  the  amount  aforesaid  and  the  amount  so
  stated,  if  any, shall be apportioned and paid to the agency during the


 then current state fiscal year. The principal amount of bonds secured by
  the equity reserve fund to which state funds are apportionable  pursuant
  to  this  paragraph  shall  be  limited to the total amount of bonds and
  notes  outstanding  on  the  effective  date of this act, plus the total
  amount of bonds and notes contracted after the effective  date  of  this
  act  to  finance projects in progress on the effective date of this act,
  as determined by the New York state  public  authorities  control  board
  created  pursuant  to  section fifty of the public authorities law whose
  affirmative determination shall be conclusive as to all matters  of  law
  and  fact  solely  for the purposes of the limitations contained in this
  paragraph, but in no event shall the total amount of bonds so secured by
  such a equity  reserve  fund  or  funds  exceed  three  hundred  fifteen
  thousand  dollars,  excluding  bonds  issued  to refund such outstanding
  bonds until the  date  of  redemption  of  such  outstanding  bonds.  As
  outstanding  bonds  so  secured are paid, the amount so secured shall be
  reduced accordingly but the redemption of such  outstanding  bonds  from
  the proceeds of refunding bonds shall not reduce the amount so secured.
    (e)  In  computing  the  amount  of  the  equity  reserve fund for the
  purposes of this section, securities in which all or a portion  of  such
  fund shall be invested shall be valued at par if purchased at par, or if
  purchased at other than par, at amortized value.
    4.  The  agency  shall  create  and  establish  a special fund (herein
  referred to as equity loan fund) and shall pay into such fund any monies
  which the agency shall transfer from the equity reserve fund pursuant to
  the provisions of paragraph (a) of subdivision three of this section and
  any monies received in payment of principal of  or  interest  on  equity
  loans.   Such monies and any other monies paid into the equity loan fund
  may, in the discretion of the agency, but subject to agreements with the
  holders of equity bonds and equity notes be used by the agency  (a)  for
  the  repayment  of  advances  from  the  state  in  accordance  with the
  provisions of repayment agreements between the agency and  the  director
  of  the  budget, (b) to reimburse the division of housing the reasonable
  costs of the services performed  by  the  commissioner  of  housing  and
  division  of housing pursuant to section fifty-five of this article, (c)
  to pay all costs,  expenses  and  charges  of  financing  equity  loans,
  including  fees  and  expenses  of  trustees  and paying agents, (d) for
  transfers to the equity  reserve  fund,  (e)  for  the  payment  of  the
  principal  of and interest on equity bonds or equity notes issued by the
  agency when the same shall become due whether at maturity or on call for
  redemption and for the payment of any redemption premium required to  be
  paid  where  such  bonds  or  notes  are  redeemed prior to their stated
  maturities, and to purchase equity bonds or equity notes issued  by  the
  agency,  or  (f)  for such other corporate purposes of the agency as the
  agency in its discretion shall determine and provide.
    5. (a) The agency may create and  establish  one  or  more  additional
  reserve funds to be known as debt service reserve funds and may pay into
  such reserve funds (1) any moneys appropriated and made available by the
  state  for  the  purposes  of  such  funds,  (2) any proceeds of sale of
  non-profit project notes or non-profit  project  bonds,  to  the  extent
  provided  in  the  resolution  of  the  agency  authorizing the issuance
  thereof, and (3) any other moneys which may be  made  available  to  the
  agency  for the purposes of such funds from any other source or sources.
  The moneys held  in  or  credited  to  any  debt  service  reserve  fund
  established under this subdivision except as hereinafter provided, shall
  be  used  solely  for the payment of the principal of non-profit project
  bonds of the agency secured by such reserve fund, as  the  same  mature,
  required payments to any sinking fund established in a resolution of the
  agency  for  the  amortization of term bonds (hereinafter referred to as


 "sinking fund payments"), the purchase or redemption of such  non-profit
  project  bonds of the agency, the payment of interest on such non-profit
  project bonds of the agency or the payment  of  any  redemption  premium
  required  to  be  paid  when  such bonds are redeemed prior to maturity;
  provided, however, that moneys in any such fund shall not  be  withdrawn
  therefrom  at any time in such amount as would reduce the amount of such
  fund to less than the maximum amount of principal, interest maturing and
  becoming due and sinking fund  payments  required  to  be  made  in  any
  succeeding  calendar  year on the non-profit project bonds of the agency
  then outstanding and secured  by  such  reserve  fund,  except  for  the
  purpose  of  paying  principal  and  interest  and sinking fund payments
  becoming due on the non-profit project bonds of the  agency  secured  by
  such reserve fund maturing and becoming due and for the payment of which
  other  moneys  of the agency are not available. For the purposes of this
  subdivision five, in computing the maximum amount of principal  maturing
  at  a  single future date (herein called "term bonds") in any succeeding
  calendar year, the principal amount of any such  term  bonds  which  are
  subject  to  mandatory  redemption  prior to such future date by sinking
  fund payments shall not be included in the computation  determining  the
  maximum  amount of principal maturing in said future year. Any income or
  interest earned by, or increment to, any such debt service reserve  fund
  due  to  the  investment thereof may be transferred to any other fund or
  account of the agency to the extent it does not  reduce  the  amount  of
  such debt service reserve fund below the maximum amount of principal and
  interest maturing and becoming due and sinking fund payments required to
  be  made in any succeeding calendar year on all non-profit project bonds
  of the agency then outstanding and secured by such reserve fund.
    (b) The agency shall not issue non-profit project bonds at any time if
  the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing and  becoming  due
  and  sinking  fund payments required to be made in a succeeding calendar
  year on the non-profit project bonds outstanding and then to  be  issued
  and  secured  by  a  debt service reserve fund will exceed the amount of
  such reserve account at the time of issuance, unless the agency, at  the
  time  of issuance of such bonds, shall deposit in such reserve fund from
  the proceeds of the bonds so to be issued, or otherwise, an amount which
  together with the amount then in such reserve fund,  will  be  not  less
  than  the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing and becoming
  due and sinking fund payments required to  be  made  in  any  succeeding
  calendar  year  on the non-profit project bonds then to be issued and on
  all other non-profit project bonds of the agency  then  outstanding  and
  secured by such reserve fund.
    (c)  To  assure the continued operation and solvency of the agency for
  the carrying out of the public purposes of  this  article  provision  is
  made  in  paragraph (a) of this subdivision for the accumulation in each
  debt service reserve fund of an amount equal to the  maximum  amount  of
  principal  and  interest  maturing  and  becoming  due  and sinking fund
  payments required to be made in any  succeeding  calendar  year  on  all
  non-profit  project  bonds of the agency then outstanding and secured by
  such reserve fund. In order further to assure the  maintenance  of  such
  debt service reserve funds, there shall be annually apportioned and paid
  to the agency for deposit in each debt service reserve fund such sum, if
  any, as shall be certified by the chairman of the agency to the governor
  and  director of the budget as necessary to restore such reserve fund to
  an amount equal to the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing
  and becoming due and sinking fund payments required to be  made  in  any
  succeeding  calendar  year on the non-profit project bonds of the agency
  then outstanding and secured by such reserve fund. The chairman  of  the
  agency  shall annually, on or before December first, make and deliver to


 the governor and director of the budget his certificate stating the sum,
  if any, required to restore each such debt service reserve fund  to  the
  amount  aforesaid,  and  the  sum or sums so certified, if any, shall be
  apportioned  and paid to the agency during the then current state fiscal
  year. The principal amount of bonds secured by a  debt  service  reserve
  fund  or  funds  to which state funds are apportionable pursuant to this
  paragraph shall be limited to  the  total  amount  of  bonds  and  notes
  outstanding  on the effective date of this act, plus the total amount of
  bonds and notes contracted after the  effective  date  of  this  act  to
  finance  projects  in  progress  on  the  effective  date of this act as
  determined by the  New  York  state  public  authorities  control  board
  created  pursuant  to  section fifty of the public authorities law whose
  affirmative determination shall be conclusive as to all matters  of  law
  and  fact  solely  for  the purpose of the limitations contained in this
  paragraph, but in no event shall the total amount of bonds so secured by
  such  a  debt  service  reserve  fund  or  funds  exceed  seven  hundred
  ninety-three  million  dollars,  excluding  bonds  issued to refund such
  outstanding bonds until the  date  of  redemption  of  such  outstanding
  bonds.  As  outstanding bonds so secured are paid, the amount so secured
  shall be reduced accordingly but  the  redemption  of  such  outstanding
  bonds  from  the proceeds of refunding bonds shall not reduce the amount
  so secured.
    (d) In computing any debt service reserve fund  for  the  purposes  of
  this  section, securities in which all or a portion of such reserve fund
  shall be invested shall be valued at par, or if purchased at  less  than
  par, at their cost to the agency.
    6.  (a) The agency may create and establish a special fund to be known
  as hospital and nursing home capital reserve fund and may pay into  such
  reserve  funds  (1)  any  monies  appropriated and made available by the
  state for the purposes of such  funds,  (2)  any  proceeds  of  sale  of
  hospital  and  nursing  home  project notes or hospital and nursing home
  project bonds, to the extent provided in the resolution  of  the  agency
  authorizing  the issuance thereof, and (3) any other monies which may be
  made available to the agency for the purposes of such accounts from  any
  other  source  or sources. The monies held in or credited to the capital
  reserve fund established under this subdivision  except  as  hereinafter
  provided,  shall  be  used  solely  for  the payment of the principal of
  hospital and nursing home project bonds of the agency  secured  by  such
  reserve  fund, as the same mature, required payments to any sinking fund
  established in a resolution of the agency for the amortization  of  term
  bonds  (hereinafter referred to as "sinking fund payments") the purchase
  or redemption of such hospital and nursing home  project  bonds  of  the
  agency,  the  payment  of  interest  on  such  hospital and nursing home
  project bonds of the agency, or the payment of  any  redemption  premium
  required  to  be  paid  when  such bonds are redeemed prior to maturity;
  provided, however, that monies in any such fund shall not  be  withdrawn
  therefrom  at any time in such amount as would reduce the amount of such
  fund to less than the maximum amount of principal and interest  maturing
  and  becoming  due  and sinking fund payments required to be made in any
  succeeding calendar year on the hospital and nursing home project  bonds
  of  the agency then outstanding and secured by such reserve fund, except
  for the purpose of paying principal, interest on  hospital  and  nursing
  home  project  bonds of the agency secured by such reserve fund maturing
  and becoming due and sinking fund payments  becoming  due  and  for  the
  payment  of  which other monies of the agency are not available. For the
  purposes of this subdivision six, in computing  the  maximum  amount  of
  principal  maturing at a single future date (herein called "term bonds")
  in any succeeding calendar year, the principal amount of any  such  term


 bonds  which  are  subject  to mandatory redemption prior to such future
  date by sinking fund payments shall not be included in  the  computation
  determining  the  maximum  amount  of  principal maturing in said future
  year.  Any  income  or  interest  earned  by,  or increment to, any such
  hospital and nursing home capital reserve fund  due  to  the  investment
  thereof  may  be  transferred  to  the hospital and nursing home general
  reserve fund or other fund of the agency, to  the  extent  it  does  not
  reduce the amount of such hospital and nursing home capital reserve fund
  below the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing and becoming
  due  and  sinking  fund  payments  required to be made in any succeeding
  calendar year on all hospital and nursing  home  project  bonds  of  the
  agency then outstanding and secured by such reserve fund.
    (b) The agency shall not issue hospital and nursing home project bonds
  and  notes  in  an aggregate principal amount exceeding one billion nine
  hundred fifty  million  dollars  excluding  hospital  and  nursing  home
  project  bonds  and  hospital  and  nursing home project notes issued to
  refund outstanding hospital and nursing home project bonds and  hospital
  and  nursing home project notes, nor shall it issue hospital and nursing
  home project bonds at any time secured by the hospital and nursing  home
  capital  reserve  fund  if  the maximum amount of principal and interest
  maturing and becoming due and sinking fund payments required to be  made
  in  a  succeeding calendar year on the hospital and nursing home project
  bonds outstanding and then to be issued and secured by the hospital  and
  nursing home capital reserve fund will exceed the amount of such reserve
  fund at the time of issuance, unless the agency, at the time of issuance
  of  such  bonds, shall deposit in such reserve fund from the proceeds of
  the bonds so to be issued, or otherwise, an amount which  together  with
  the  amount then in such reserve fund, will be not less than the maximum
  amount of principal and interest maturing and becoming due  and  sinking
  fund payments required to be made in any succeeding calendar year on the
  hospital  and  nursing  home  project bonds then to be issued and on all
  other hospital and  nursing  home  project  bonds  of  the  agency  then
  outstanding and secured by such reserve fund.
    (c)  To  assure the continued operation and solvency of the agency for
  the carrying out of the public purposes of  this  article  provision  is
  made  in  paragraph  (a) of this subdivision for the accumulation in the
  hospital and nursing home capital reserve fund of an amount equal to the
  maximum amount of principal and interest maturing and becoming  due  and
  sinking  fund payments to be made in any succeeding calendar year on all
  hospital and nursing home project bonds of the agency  then  outstanding
  and  secured  by  such  reserve  fund.  In  order  further to assure the
  maintenance of such hospital and  nursing  home  capital  reserve  fund,
  there  shall  be annually apportioned and paid to the agency for deposit
  in such hospital and nursing home capital reserve fund such sum, if any,
  as shall be certified by the chairman of the agency to the governor  and
  director  of  the budget as necessary to restore such reserve fund to an
  amount equal to the maximum amount of principal  and  interest  maturing
  and  becoming  due  and sinking fund payments required to be made in any
  succeeding calendar year on the hospital and nursing home project  bonds
  of  the  agency  then  outstanding and secured by such reserve fund. The
  chairman of the agency shall annually, on or before December first, make
  and deliver to the governor and director of the budget  his  certificate
  stating  the sums, if any, required to restore such hospital and nursing
  home capital reserve fund to the  amount  aforesaid,  and  the  sums  so
  certified,  if  any,  shall be apportioned and paid to the agency during
  the then current state  fiscal  year.  The  principal  amount  of  bonds
  secured  by  the hospital and nursing home capital reserve fund to which
  state funds are  apportionable  pursuant  to  this  paragraph  shall  be


 limited  to  the  total  amount  of  bonds  and notes outstanding on the
  effective date of this act, plus the total amount  of  bonds  and  notes
  contracted  after  the effective date of this act to finance projects on
  progress on the effective date of this act as determined by the New York
  state public authorities control board created pursuant to section fifty
  of  the  public authorities law whose affirmative determination shall be
  conclusive as to all matters of law and fact solely for the purposes  of
  the  limitations  contained in this paragraph, but in no event shall the
  total amount of bonds so secured by such a capital reserve fund or funds
  exceed nine hundred sixteen million dollars, excluding bonds  issued  to
  refund  such  outstanding  bonds  until  the  date of redemption of such
  outstanding bonds. As outstanding bonds so secured are paid, the  amount
  so  secured  shall  be  reduced  accordingly  but the redemption of such
  outstanding bonds from the proceeds of refunding bonds shall not  reduce
  the amount so secured.
    (d)  In  computing  any hospital and nursing home capital reserve fund
  for the purposes of this section, securities in which all or  a  portion
  of  such  reserve  fund  shall be invested shall be valued at par, or if
  purchased at less than par, at their cost to the agency.
    7. The agency shall  create  and  establish  one  or  more  additional
  special  funds  (herein referred to as hospital and nursing home general
  reserve funds) and shall, to the extent provided in the applicable  bond
  resolution  of  the  agency  authorizing  the  issuance  of hospital and
  nursing home project bonds, pay into any such fund the fees and  charges
  collected  by the agency pursuant to paragraph (b) of subdivision eleven
  of section forty-four of this article and any monies  which  the  agency
  shall  transfer  from the hospital and nursing home capital reserve fund
  pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (a) of subdivision six  of  this
  section.  Such  monies  and  any  other  monies paid into a hospital and
  nursing home general reserve fund may, in the discretion of the  agency,
  but  subject  to agreements with bondholders and noteholders, be used by
  the agency  (a)  for  the  repayment  of  advances  from  the  state  in
  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  repayment  agreements between the
  agency and the director of the budget, (b) to reimburse  the  department
  of  health  the  reasonable  costs  of  the  services  performed  by the
  commissioner  of  health  and  the  department  of  health  pursuant  to
  subdivision  three of section fifty-five of this article, (c) to pay all
  costs, expenses and charges of financing, including fees and expenses of
  trustees and paying agents,  (d)  for  transfers  to  the  hospital  and
  nursing  home capital reserve fund, (e) for the payment of principal and
  interest on hospital and nursing home project bonds and notes issued  by
  the agency when the same shall become due whether at maturity or on call
  for redemption and for the payment of any redemption premium required to
  be paid where such hospital and nursing home project bonds and notes are
  redeemed  prior  to their stated maturities and to purchase hospital and
  nursing home project bonds or notes issued by the  agency,  or  (f)  for
  such  other  corporate  purposes  of  the  agency  as  the agency in its
  discretion shall determine and provide.
    8. (a) The agency may create and  establish  one  or  more  additional
  reserve funds to be known as health facilities reserve funds and may pay
  into  such  reserve funds (1) any monies appropriated and made available
  by the state for the purposes of such funds, (2) any proceeds of sale of
  health facilities notes  or  health  facilities  bonds,  to  the  extent
  provided  in  the  resolution  of  the  agency  authorizing the issuance
  thereof, and (3) any other monies which may be  made  available  to  the
  agency  for the purposes of such funds from any other source or sources.
  The monies held in or credited to any  health  facilities  reserve  fund
  established  under  this  subdivision,  except  as hereinafter provided,


 shall be used  solely  for  the  payment  of  the  principal  of  health
  facilities bonds of the agency secured by such reserve fund, as the same
  mature,   required  payments  to  any  sinking  fund  established  in  a
  resolution of the agency for the amortization of term bonds (hereinafter
  referred  to  as  "sinking fund payments") the purchase or redemption of
  such health facilities bonds of the agency, the payment of  interest  on
  such  health  facilities  bonds  of  the  agency,  or the payment of any
  redemption premium required to be paid  when  such  bonds  are  redeemed
  prior to maturity; provided, however, that monies in any such fund shall
  not  be  withdrawn  therefrom at any time in such amount as would reduce
  the amount of such fund to less than the maximum amount of principal and
  interest maturing and becoming due and sinking fund payments required to
  be made in any succeeding calendar year on the health  facilities  bonds
  of  the agency then outstanding and secured by such reserve fund, except
  for the purpose of paying principal, interest and sinking fund  payments
  becoming  due  on  the  health facilities bonds of the agency secured by
  such reserve fund maturing and becoming due and for the payment of which
  other monies of the agency are not available. For the purposes  of  this
  subdivision eight, in computing the maximum amount of principal maturing
  at  a  single future date (herein called "term bonds") in any succeeding
  calendar year, the principal amount of any such  term  bonds  which  are
  subject  to  mandatory  redemption  prior to such future date by sinking
  fund payments shall not be included in the computation  determining  the
  maximum  amount of principal maturing in said future year. Any income or
  interest earned by, or increment to, any such health facilities  reserve
  fund  due to the investment thereof may be transferred to any other fund
  or account of the agency to the extent it does not reduce the amount  of
  such  health  facilities  reserve  fund  below  the  maximum  amount  of
  principal and interest  maturing  and  becoming  due  and  sinking  fund
  payments  required  to  be  made  in any succeeding calendar year on all
  health facilities bonds of the agency then outstanding  and  secured  by
  such reserve fund.
    (b)  The agency shall not issue health facilities bonds at any time if
  the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing and  becoming  due
  and  sinking  fund payments required to be made in a succeeding calendar
  year on the health facilities bonds outstanding and then  to  be  issued
  and secured by any health facilities reserve fund will exceed the amount
  of  such  reserve account at the time of issuance, unless the agency, at
  the time of issuance of such bonds, shall deposit in such  reserve  fund
  from  the proceeds of the bonds so to be issued, or otherwise, an amount
  which together with the amount then in such reserve  fund  will  be  not
  less  than  the  maximum  amount  of principal and interest maturing and
  becoming due and sinking fund  payments  required  to  be  made  in  any
  succeeding  calendar  year  on  the  health  facilities bonds then to be
  issued and on all other health  facilities  bonds  of  the  agency  then
  outstanding and secured by such reserve fund.
    (c)  To  assure the continued operation and solvency of the agency for
  the carrying out of the public purposes of this  article,  provision  is
  made  in  paragraph (a) of this subdivision for the accumulation in each
  health facilities reserve fund of an amount equal to the maximum  amount
  of  principal  and  interest  maturing and becoming due and sinking fund
  payments required to be made in any  succeeding  calendar  year  on  all
  health  facilities  bonds  of the agency then outstanding and secured by
  such reserve fund. In order further to assure the  maintenance  of  such
  health facilities reserve funds, there shall be annually apportioned and
  paid  to  the  agency for deposit in each health facilities reserve fund
  such sum, if any, as shall be certified by the chairman of the agency to
  the governor and director of the budget as  necessary  to  restore  such


 reserve  fund  to an amount equal to the maximum amount of principal and
  interest maturing and becoming due and sinking fund payments required to
  be made in any succeeding calendar year on the health  facilities  bonds
  of  the  agency  then  outstanding and secured by such reserve fund. The
  chairman of the agency shall annually, on or before December first, make
  and deliver to the governor and director of the budget  his  certificate
  stating  the  sums,  if  any,  required  to  restore  each  such  health
  facilities reserve fund  to  the  amount  aforesaid,  and  the  sums  so
  certified,  if  any,  shall be apportioned and paid to the agency during
  the then current state  fiscal  year.  The  principal  amount  of  bonds
  secured  by  a  health  facilities  reserve fund or funds to which state
  funds are apportionable pursuant to this paragraph shall be  limited  to
  the total amount of bonds and notes outstanding on the effective date of
  this  act, plus the total amount of bonds and notes contracted after the
  effective date of this act  to  finance  projects  in  progress  on  the
  effective  date  of  this act as determined by the New York state public
  authorities control board created  pursuant  to  section  fifty  of  the
  public   authorities   law  whose  affirmative  determination  shall  be
  conclusive as to all matters of law and fact solely for the purposes  of
  the  limitations  contained in this paragraph, but in no event shall the
  total amount of bonds so secured by such a reserve fund or funds  exceed
  six  hundred  seventy-five  million  dollars,  excluding bonds issued to
  refund such outstanding bonds until  the  date  of  redemption  of  such
  outstanding  bonds. As outstanding bonds so secured are paid, the amount
  so secured shall be reduced  accordingly  but  the  redemption  of  such
  outstanding  bonds from the proceeds of refunding bonds shall not reduce
  the amounts so secured.
    (d) In computing any health facilities reserve fund for  the  purposes
  of  this  section,  securities in which all or a portion of such reserve
  fund shall be invested shall be valued at par, or if purchased  at  less
  than par, at their cost to the agency.
    9.  (a)  The  agency  may  create and establish one or more additional
  reserve funds to be known as urban rental debt service reserve funds and
  may pay into such reserve funds (1) any  monies  appropriated  and  made
  available  by the state for the purposes of such funds, (2) any proceeds
  of sale of urban rental project notes or urban rental project bonds,  to
  the  extent  provided  in  the  resolution of the agency authorizing the
  issuance thereof, and (3) any other monies which may be  made  available
  to  the  agency  for the purposes of such funds from any other source or
  sources. The monies held in or credited to any urban rental debt service
  reserve fund established under this subdivision  except  as  hereinafter
  provided, shall be used solely for the payment of the principal of urban
  rental  project bonds of the agency secured by such reserve fund, as the
  same mature, required payments to any  sinking  fund  established  in  a
  resolution of the agency for the amortization of term bonds (hereinafter
  referred  to  as "sinking fund payments"), the purchase or redemption of
  such urban rental project bonds of the agency, the payment  of  interest
  on  such urban rental project bonds of the agency, or the payment of any
  redemption premium required to be paid  when  such  bonds  are  redeemed
  prior to maturity; provided, however, that monies in any such fund shall
  not  be  withdrawn  therefrom at any time in such amount as would reduce
  the amount of such fund to less than the maximum amount of principal and
  interest maturing and becoming due and sinking fund payments required to
  be made in any succeeding calendar year  on  the  urban  rental  project
  bonds  of  the agency then outstanding and secured by such reserve fund,
  except for the purpose of paying principal, interest  and  sinking  fund
  payments  becoming  due  on the urban rental project bonds of the agency
  secured by such reserve fund maturing  and  becoming  due  and  for  the


 payment  of  which other monies of the agency are not available. For the
  purposes of this subdivision nine, in computing the  maximum  amount  of
  principal  maturing at a single future date (herein called "term bonds")
  in  any  succeeding calendar year, the principal amount of any such term
  bonds which are subject to mandatory redemption  prior  to  such  future
  date  by  sinking fund payments shall not be included in the computation
  determining the maximum amount of  principal  maturing  in  said  future
  year.  Any income or interest earned by, or increment to, any such urban
  rental debt service reserve fund due to the investment  thereof  may  be
  transferred  to any other fund or account of the agency to the extent it
  does not reduce the amount of such urban  rental  debt  service  reserve
  fund  below  the  maximum  amount of principal and interest maturing and
  becoming due and sinking fund  payments  required  to  be  made  in  any
  succeeding calendar year on all urban rental project bonds of the agency
  then outstanding and secured by such reserve fund.
    (b)  The agency shall not issue urban rental project bonds at any time
  if the maximum amount of principal and interest  maturing  and  becoming
  due  and  sinking  fund  payments  required to be made in any succeeding
  calendar year on the urban rental project bonds outstanding and then  to
  be  issued and secured by an urban rental debt service reserve fund will
  exceed the amount of such reserve  account  at  the  time  of  issuance,
  unless  the agency, at the time of issuance of such bonds, shall deposit
  in such reserve fund from the proceeds of the bonds so to be issued,  or
  otherwise, an amount which together with the amount then in such reserve
  fund, will be not less than the maximum amount of principal and interest
  maturing  and becoming due and sinking fund payments required to be made
  in any succeeding calendar year on the urban rental project  bonds  then
  to  be  issued and on all other urban rental project bonds of the agency
  then outstanding and secured by such reserve fund.
    (c) To assure the continued operation and solvency of the  agency  for
  the  carrying  out  of  the public purposes of this article provision is
  made in paragraph (a) of this subdivision for the accumulation  in  each
  urban rental debt service reserve fund of an amount equal to the maximum
  amount  of  principal and interest maturing and becoming due and sinking
  fund payments required to be made in any succeeding calendar year on all
  urban rental project bonds of the agency then outstanding and secured by
  such reserve fund. In order further to assure the  maintenance  of  such
  urban  rental  debt  service  reserve  funds,  there  shall  be annually
  apportioned and paid to the agency for deposit in each urban rental debt
  service reserve fund such sum, if any, as  shall  be  certified  by  the
  chairman  of  the  agency  to the governor and director of the budget as
  necessary to restore such reserve fund to an amount equal to the maximum
  amount of principal and interest maturing and becoming due  and  sinking
  fund payments required to be made in any succeeding calendar year on the
  urban rental project bonds of the agency then outstanding and secured by
  such  reserve  fund.  The  chairman  of the agency shall annually, on or
  before December first, make and deliver to the governor and director  of
  the budget his certificate stating the sums, if any, required to restore
  each  such  urban  rental  debt  service  reserve  fund  to  the  amount
  aforesaid, and the sums so certified, if any, shall be  apportioned  and
  paid  to  the  agency  during  the  then  current state fiscal year. The
  principal amount of bonds  secured  by  an  urban  rental  debt  service
  reserve fund or funds to which state funds are apportionable pursuant to
  this  paragraph  shall be limited to the total amount of bonds and notes
  outstanding on the effective date of this act, plus the total amount  of
  bonds  and  notes  contracted  after  the  effective date of this act to
  finance projects in progress on  the  effective  date  of  this  act  as
  determined  by  the  New  York  state  public  authorities control board


 created pursuant to section fifty of the public  authorities  law  whose
  affirmative  determination  shall be conclusive as to all matters of law
  and fact solely for the purposes of the limitations  contained  in  this
  paragraph, but in no event shall the total amount of bonds so secured by
  such  a debt service reserve fund or funds exceed six hundred forty-five
  million dollars, excluding bonds issued to refund such outstanding bonds
  until the date of redemption of such outstanding bonds.  As  outstanding
  bonds  so  secured  are  paid,  the  amount  so secured shall be reduced
  accordingly but the  redemption  of  such  outstanding  bonds  from  the
  proceeds of refunding bonds shall not reduce the amount so secured.
    (d)  In  computing  any urban rental debt service reserve fund for the
  purposes of this section, securities in which all or a portion  of  such
  reserve  fund  shall  be invested shall be valued at par if purchased at
  par, or if purchased at other than par, at amortized value.
    10. (a) The agency may create and establish a special fund to be known
  as youth facilities capital reserve fund and may pay into  such  reserve
  funds  (1)  any  monies appropriated and made available by the state for
  the purposes of such funds, (2) any proceeds of sale of youth facilities
  project notes or youth facilities project bonds, to the extent  provided
  in  the  resolution  of the agency authorizing the issuance thereof, and
  (3) any other monies which may be made available to the agency  for  the
  purposes  of  such accounts from any other source or sources. The monies
  held in or credited to the capital reserve fund established  under  this
  subdivision except as hereinafter provided, shall be used solely for the
  payment  of  principal  of  youth facilities project bonds of the agency
  secured by such reserve fund, as the same mature, the purchase  of  such
  youth facilities project bonds of the agency, the payment of interest on
  youth  facilities  project  bonds  of  the agency, or the payment of any
  redemption premium required to be paid  when  such  bonds  are  redeemed
  prior to maturity; provided, however, that monies in any such fund shall
  not  be  withdrawn  therefrom at any time in such amount as would reduce
  the amount of such fund to less than the maximum amount of principal and
  interest maturing and becoming due in any succeeding  calendar  year  on
  the  youth  facilities  project bonds of the agency then outstanding and
  secured by such reserve fund, except for the purpose of paying principal
  and interest on youth facilities project bonds of the agency secured  by
  such reserve fund maturing and becoming due and for the payment of which
  other  monies  of  the  agency are not available. Any income or interest
  earned by, or increment to, any such youth  facilities  capital  reserve
  fund  due  to  the  investment  thereof  may be transferred to the youth
  facilities general reserve fund or other fund  of  the  agency,  to  the
  extent  it  does  not reduce the amount of such youth facilities capital
  reserve fund below the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing
  and becoming due in any succeeding calendar year on all youth facilities
  project bonds of the agency then outstanding and secured by such reserve
  fund.
    (b) The agency shall not issue  youth  facilities  project  bonds  and
  notes  in  an  aggregate  principal amount exceeding one hundred million
  dollars excluding youth facilities project bonds  and  youth  facilities
  project  notes  issued  to  refund  outstanding youth facilities project
  bonds and youth facilities project  notes,  nor  shall  it  issue  youth
  facilities  project  bonds  at  any time secured by the youth facilities
  capital reserve fund if the maximum amount  of  principal  and  interest
  maturing  and  becoming  due  in a succeeding calendar year on the youth
  facilities project bonds outstanding and then to be issued  and  secured
  by  the  youth facilities capital reserve fund will exceed the amount of
  such reserve fund at the time of issuance, unless  the  agency,  at  the
  time  of issuance of such bonds, shall deposit in such reserve fund from


 the proceeds of the bonds so to be issued, or otherwise, an amount which
  together with the amount then in such reserve fund,  will  be  not  less
  than  the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing and becoming
  due  in  any  succeeding  calendar  year on the youth facilities project
  bonds then to be issued and on all other youth facilities project  bonds
  of the agency then outstanding and secured by such reserve fund.
    (c)  To  assure the continued operation and solvency of the agency for
  the carrying out of the public purposes of  this  article  provision  is
  made  in  paragraph  (a) of this subdivision for the accumulation in the
  youth facilities capital reserve fund of an amount equal to the  maximum
  amount  of  principal  and  interest  maturing  and  becoming due in any
  succeeding calendar year on all youth facilities project  bonds  of  the
  agency  then  outstanding  and  secured  by  such reserve fund. In order
  further to assure the  maintenance  of  such  youth  facilities  capital
  reserve fund, there shall be annually apportioned and paid to the agency
  for  deposit  in such youth facilities capital reserve fund such sum, if
  any, as shall be certified by the chairman of the agency to the governor
  and director of the budget as necessary to restore such reserve fund  to
  an amount equal to the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing
  and becoming due in any succeeding calendar year on the youth facilities
  project bonds of the agency then outstanding and secured by such reserve
  fund.   The chairman of the agency shall annually, on or before December
  first, make and deliver to the governor and director of the  budget  his
  certificate  stating  the  sums,  if any, required to restore such youth
  facilities capital reserve fund to the amount aforesaid, and the sums so
  certified, if any, shall be apportioned and paid to  the  agency  during
  the  then  current  state  fiscal  year.  The  principal amount of bonds
  secured by the youth facilities capital  reserve  fund  to  which  state
  funds  are  apportionable pursuant to this paragraph shall be limited to
  the total amount of bonds and notes outstanding on the effective date of
  this act, plus the total amount of bonds and notes contracted after  the
  effective  date  of  this  act  to  finance  projects in progress on the
  effective date of this act as determined by the New  York  state  public
  authorities  control  board  created  pursuant  to  section fifty of the
  public  authorities  law  whose  affirmative  determination   shall   be
  conclusive  as to all matters of law and fact solely for the purposes of
  the limitations contained in this paragraph, but in no event  shall  the
  total  amount  of bonds so secured by such a capital reserve fund exceed
  twenty-four million dollars,  excluding  bonds  issued  to  refund  such
  outstanding  bonds  until  the  date  of  redemption of such outstanding
  bonds. As outstanding bonds so secured are paid, the amount  so  secured
  shall  be  reduced  accordingly  but  the redemption of such outstanding
  bonds from the proceeds of refunding bonds shall not reduce  the  amount
  so secured.
    (d)  In  computing  any  youth facilities capital reserve fund for the
  purpose of this section, securities in which all or a  portion  of  such
  reserve  fund  shall  be invested shall be valued at par if purchased at
  par, or if purchased at other than par, at amortized value.
    11. The agency shall create  and  establish  a  special  fund  (herein
  referred  to as the youth facilities general reserve fund) and shall pay
  into such fund all fees and charges collected by the agency pursuant  to
  paragraph  (c)  of  subdivision  eleven  of  section  forty-four of this
  article and any monies which the agency shall transfer  from  the  youth
  facilities  capital reserve fund pursuant to the provisions of paragraph
  (a) of subdivision ten of this section. Such monies and any other monies
  paid into  the  youth  facilities  general  reserve  fund  may,  in  the
  discretion of the agency, but subject to agreements with bondholders and
  noteholders,  be  used  by  the agency (a) for the repayment of advances


 from the state in accordance with the provisions of repayment agreements
  between the agency and the director of the budget, (b) to reimburse  the
  department  of  social  services  the  reasonable  costs of the services
  performed  by  the commissioner of social services and the department of
  social services pursuant to subdivision four of  section  fifty-five  of
  this  article,  (c) to pay all costs, expenses and charges of financing,
  including fees and expenses of  trustees  and  paying  agents,  (d)  for
  transfers  to  the  youth  facilities  capital reserve fund, (e) for the
  payment of principal of and interest on youth facilities  project  bonds
  and notes issued by the agency when the same shall become due whether at
  maturity or on call for redemption and for the payment of any redemption
  premium  required  to  be paid where such youth facilities project bonds
  and notes are redeemed prior to their stated maturities and to  purchase
  youth facilities project bonds or notes issued by the agency, or (f) for
  such  other  corporate  purposes  of  the  agency  as  the agency in its
  discretion shall determine and provide.
    12. (a) The agency may create and establish a special fund to be known
  as community  mental  health  services  and  developmental  disabilities
  services  capital  reserve  fund and may pay into such reserve funds (1)
  any monies appropriated and made available by the state for the purposes
  of such funds, (2) any proceeds  of  sale  of  community  mental  health
  services  and  developmental  disabilities  services  project  notes  or
  community mental health services and developmental disabilities services
  project bonds, to the extent provided in the resolution  of  the  agency
  authorizing  the issuance thereof, and (3) any other monies which may be
  made available to the agency for the purposes of such accounts from  any
  other  source  or sources. The monies held in or credited to the capital
  reserve fund established under this subdivision  except  as  hereinafter
  provided, shall be used solely for the payment of principal of community
  mental  health  services and developmental disabilities services project
  bonds of the agency secured by such reserve fund, as  the  same  mature,
  the  purchase of such community mental health services and developmental
  disabilities services project  bonds  of  the  agency,  the  payment  of
  interest  on  such  community  mental  health services and developmental
  disabilities services project bonds of the agency, or the payment of any
  redemption premium required to be paid  when  such  bonds  are  redeemed
  prior to maturity; provided, however, that monies in any such fund shall
  not  be  withdrawn  therefrom at any time in such amount as would reduce
  the amount of such fund to less than the maximum amount of principal and
  interest maturing and becoming due in any succeeding  calendar  year  on
  the  community  mental  health  services  and developmental disabilities
  services project bonds of the agency then  outstanding  and  secured  by
  such  reserve  fund,  except  for  the  purpose  of paying principal and
  interest  on  community  mental  health   services   and   developmental
  disabilities  services  project  bonds  of  the  agency  secured by such
  reserve fund maturing and becoming due and  for  the  payment  of  which
  other  monies  of  the  agency are not available. Any income or interest
  earned by, or increment to, any such community  mental  health  services
  and  developmental disabilities services capital reserve fund due to the
  investment thereof may be transferred to  the  community  mental  health
  services and developmental disabilities services general reserve fund or
  other fund of the agency, to the extent it does not reduce the amount of
  such  community  mental  health  services and developmental disabilities
  services capital reserve fund below the maximum amount of principal  and
  interest  maturing  and  becoming due in any succeeding calendar year on
  all community mental  health  services  and  developmental  disabilities
  services  project  bonds  of  the agency then outstanding and secured by
  such reserve fund.


   (b) The agency shall not issue community mental  health  services  and
  developmental  disabilities  services  project  bonds  and  notes  in an
  aggregate  principal  amount  exceeding  one  hundred  million   dollars
  excluding   community   mental   health   services   and   developmental
  disabilities services project bonds and community mental health services
  and  developmental  disabilities services project notes issued to refund
  outstanding  community  mental   health   services   and   developmental
  disabilities services project bonds and community mental health services
  and  developmental  disabilities  services  project  notes, nor shall it
  issue community mental health services  and  developmental  disabilities
  services  project  bonds  at  any  time  secured by the community mental
  health services and developmental disabilities services capital  reserve
  fund  if  the  maximum  amount  of  principal  and interest maturing and
  becoming due in a succeeding  calendar  year  on  the  community  mental
  health  services  and  developmental disabilities services project bonds
  outstanding and then to be issued and secured by  the  community  mental
  health  services and developmental disabilities services capital reserve
  fund will exceed the  amount  of  such  reserve  fund  at  the  time  of
  issuance,  unless  the  agency,  at  the time of issuance of such bonds,
  shall deposit in such reserve fund from the proceeds of the bonds so  to
  be  issued,  or otherwise, an amount which together with the amount then
  in such reserve fund, will be  not  less  than  the  maximum  amount  of
  principal  and  interest  maturing  and  becoming  due in any succeeding
  calendar year on the community mental health services and  developmental
  disabilities  services  project bonds then to be issued and on all other
  community mental health services and developmental disabilities services
  project bonds of the agency then outstanding and secured by such reserve
  fund.
    (c) To assure the continued operation and solvency of the  agency  for
  the  carrying  out  of  the public purposes of this article provision is
  made in paragraph (a) of this subdivision for the  accumulation  in  the
  community mental health services and developmental disabilities services
  capital  reserve  fund  of  an  amount  equal  to  the maximum amount of
  principal and interest maturing  and  becoming  due  in  any  succeeding
  calendar  year on all community mental health services and developmental
  disabilities services project bonds of the agency then  outstanding  and
  secured by such reserve fund. In order further to assure the maintenance
  of  such community mental health services and developmental disabilities
  services capital reserve fund, there shall be annually  apportioned  and
  paid  to the agency for deposit in such community mental health services
  and developmental disabilities services capital reserve fund  such  sum,
  if  any,  as  shall  be  certified  by the chairman of the agency to the
  governor and director of the budget as necessary to restore such reserve
  fund to an amount equal to the maximum amount of principal and  interest
  maturing  and  becoming  due  in  any  succeeding  calendar  year on the
  community mental health services and developmental disabilities services
  project bonds of the agency then outstanding and secured by such reserve
  fund. The chairman of the agency shall annually, on or  before  December
  first,  make  and deliver to the governor and director of the budget his
  or her certificate stating the sums, if any, required  to  restore  such
  community mental health services and developmental disabilities services
  capital reserve fund to the amount aforesaid, and the sums so certified,
  if  any,  shall  be  apportioned  and paid to the agency during the then
  current state fiscal year. The principal amount of bonds secured by  the
  community mental health services and developmental disabilities services
  capital  reserve fund to which state funds are apportionable pursuant to
  this paragraph shall be limited to the total amount of bonds  and  notes
  outstanding  on the effective date of this act, plus the total amount of


 bonds and notes contracted after the  effective  date  of  this  act  to
  finance  projects  in  progress  on  the  effective  date of this act as
  determined by the  New  York  state  public  authorities  control  board
  created  pursuant  to  section fifty of the public authorities law whose
  affirmative determination shall be conclusive as to all matters  of  law
  and  fact  solely  for the purposes of the limitations contained in this
  paragraph, but in no event shall the total amount of bonds so secured by
  such a capital reserve fund or funds exceed  thirteen  million  dollars,
  excluding  bonds  issued to refund such outstanding bonds until the date
  of redemption of such outstanding bonds. As outstanding bonds so secured
  are paid, the amount so secured shall be  reduced  accordingly  but  the
  redemption  of  such  outstanding  bonds  from the proceeds of refunding
  bonds shall not reduce the amount so secured.
    (d)  In  computing  any   community   mental   health   services   and
  developmental   disabilities  services  capital  reserve  fund  for  the
  purposes of this section, securities in which all or a portion  of  such
  reserve  fund  shall  be invested shall be valued at par if purchased at
  par, or if purchased at other than par, at amortized value.
    13. The agency shall create  and  establish  a  special  fund  (herein
  referred  to  as  community  mental  health  services  and developmental
  disabilities services general reserve fund) and shall pay into such fund
  all fees and charges collected by the agency pursuant to  paragraph  (c)
  of  subdivision  eleven  of  section  forty-four of this article and any
  monies which the agency shall transfer from the community mental  health
  services  and  developmental  disabilities services capital reserve fund
  pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (a) of subdivision ten  of  this
  section. Such monies and any other monies paid into the community mental
  health  services and developmental disabilities services general reserve
  fund may, in the discretion of the agency,  but  subject  to  agreements
  with  bondholders  and  noteholders,  be  used by the agency (a) for the
  repayment of advances from the state in accordance with  the  provisions
  of  repayment  agreements  between  the  agency  and the director of the
  budget, (b) to reimburse the department of mental hygiene the reasonable
  costs of the services performed by the commissioner  of  mental  hygiene
  and  the  department  of  mental hygiene pursuant to subdivision four of
  section fifty-five of this article, including the  reasonable  costs  of
  such  services  performed  by  the  health and mental hygiene facilities
  improvement corporation upon  request  by  the  commissioner  of  mental
  hygiene  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  section  75.25 of the mental
  hygiene law, (c) to pay all costs, expenses and  charges  of  financing,
  including  fees  and  expenses  of  trustees  and paying agents, (d) for
  transfers to the community  mental  health  services  and  developmental
  disabilities  services  capital  reserve  fund,  (e)  for the payment of
  principal of and  interest  on  community  mental  health  services  and
  developmental  disabilities  services  project bonds and notes issued by
  the agency when the same shall become due whether at maturity or on call
  for redemption and for the payment of any redemption premium required to
  be paid where such community mental health  services  and  developmental
  disabilities  services  project  bonds  and  notes are redeemed prior to
  their stated maturities and to purchase community mental health services
  and developmental disabilities services project bonds or notes issued by
  the agency, or (f) for such other corporate purposes of  the  agency  as
  the agency in its discretion shall determine and provide.
    14. (a) The agency may create and establish a special fund to be known
  as  community  senior citizens services capital reserve fund and may pay
  into such reserve fund (1) any moneys appropriated and made available by
  the state for the purposes of such fund, (2) any  proceeds  of  sale  of
  community  senior  citizens  services  project notes or community senior


 citizens  services  project  bonds,  to  the  extent  provided  in   the
  resolution  of  the agency authorizing the issuance thereof, and (3) any
  other moneys which may be made available to the agency for the  purposes
  of such accounts from any other source or sources. The moneys held in or
  credited  to the capital reserve fund established under this subdivision
  except as hereinafter provided, shall be used solely for the payment  of
  principal  of  community  senior  citizens services project bonds of the
  agency secured by such reserve fund, as the same mature, the purchase of
  such community senior citizens services project bonds of the agency, the
  payment of interest on such community senior citizens  services  project
  bonds  of  the agency, or the payment of any redemption premium required
  to be paid when such bonds are redeemed  prior  to  maturity;  provided,
  however,  that  moneys in any such fund shall not be withdrawn thereform
  at any time in such amount as would reduce the amount of  such  fund  to
  less  than  the  maximum  amount  of principal and interest maturing and
  becoming due in any succeeding calendar year  on  the  community  senior
  citizens  services  project  bonds  of  the  agency then outstanding and
  secured by such reserve fund, except for the purpose of paying principal
  and interest on community senior citizens services project bonds of  the
  agency  secured  by  such reserve fund maturing and becoming due and for
  the payment of which other moneys of the agency are not  available.  Any
  income or interest earned by, or increment to, any such community senior
  citizens services capital reserve fund due to the investment thereof may
  be transferred to the community senior citizens services general reserve
  fund  or  other fund of the agency, to the extent it does not reduce the
  amount of such community senior citizens services capital  reserve  fund
  below the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing and becoming
  due  in  any  succeeding  calendar year on all community senior citizens
  services project bonds of the agency then  outstanding  and  secured  by
  such reserve fund.
    (b)  The  agency  shall  not  issue community senior citizens services
  project bonds and notes in an aggregate principal amount exceeding fifty
  million dollars excluding community  senior  citizens  services  project
  bonds  and  community  senior  citizens services project notes issued to
  refund outstanding community senior citizens services project bonds  and
  community  senior  citizens  services  project notes, nor shall it issue
  community senior citizens services project bonds at any time secured  by
  the community senior citizens capital reserve fund if the maximum amount
  of  principal  and  interest  maturing  and becoming due in a succeeding
  calendar year on the community senior citizens  services  project  bonds
  outstanding  and  then  to be issued and secured by the community senior
  citizens services capital reserve fund will exceed the  amount  of  such
  reserve  fund at the time of issuance, unless the agency, at the time of
  issuance of such bonds, shall deposit in  such  reserve  fund  from  the
  proceeds  of  the  bonds  so to be issued, or otherwise, an amount which
  together with the amount then in such reserve fund,  will  be  not  less
  than  the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing and becoming
  due in any succeeding calendar year on  the  community  senior  citizens
  services  project  bonds  then  to  be issued and on all other community
  senior citizens services project bonds of the  agency  then  outstanding
  and secured by such reserve fund.
    (c)  To  assure the continued operation and solvency of the agency for
  the carrying out of the public purposes of  this  article  provision  is
  made  in  paragraph  (a) of this subdivision for the accumulation in the
  community senior citizens services capital reserve  fund  of  an  amount
  equal  to  the  maximum  amount  of  principal and interest maturing and
  becoming due in any succeeding calendar year  on  all  community  senior
  citizens  services  project  bonds  of  the  agency then outstanding and


 secured by such reserve fund. In order further to assure the maintenance
  of such community senior citizens services capital reserve  fund,  there
  shall be annually apportioned and paid to the agency for deposit in such
  community  senior  citizens  services  capital reserve fund such sum, if
  any, as shall be certified by the chairman of the agency to the governor
  and director of the budget as necessary to restore such reserve fund  to
  an amount equal to the maximum amount of principal and interest maturing
  and becoming due in any succeeding calendar year on the community senior
  citizens  services  project  bonds  of  the  agency then outstanding and
  secured by such reserve fund. The chairman of the agency shall annually,
  on or before December first,  make  and  deliver  to  the  governor  and
  director  of  the  budget  his  certificate  stating  the  sums, if any,
  required to restore such  community  senior  citizens  services  capital
  reserve fund to the amount aforesaid, and the sums so certified, if any,
  shall  be  apportioned  and  paid  to the agency during the then current
  state fiscal  year.  The  principal  amount  of  bonds  secured  by  the
  community  senior  citizens services capital reserve fund to which state
  funds are apportionable pursuant to this paragraph shall be  limited  to
  the total amount of bonds and notes outstanding on the effective date of
  this  act, plus the total amount of bonds and notes contracted after the
  effective date of this act  to  finance  projects  in  progress  on  the
  effective  date  of  this act as determined by the New York state public
  authorities control board created  pursuant  to  section  fifty  of  the
  public   authorities   law  whose  affirmative  determination  shall  be
  conclusive as to all matters of law and fact solely for the purposes  of
  the  limitations  contained in this paragraph, but in no event shall the
  total amount of bonds so secured by such a capital reserve fund or funds
  exceed two million  eight  hundred  thousand  dollars,  excluding  bonds
  issued  to refund such outstanding bonds until the date of redemption of
  such outstanding bonds. As outstanding bonds so secured  are  paid,  the
  amount  so  secured  shall  be reduced accordingly but the redemption of
  such outstanding bonds from the proceeds of refunding  bonds  shall  not
  reduce the amount so secured.
    (d)  In  computing  any  community  senior  citizens  services capital
  reserve fund for the purposes of this section, securities in  which  all
  or  a  portion of such reserve fund shall be invested shall be valued at
  par if purchased at par, or if purchased at other than par, at amortized
  value.
    15. The agency shall create  and  establish  a  special  fund  (herein
  referred  to as community senior citizens services general reserve fund)
  and shall pay into such fund all  fees  and  charges  collected  by  the
  agency  pursuant  to  subdivision eleven-a of section forty-four of this
  article and  any  moneys  which  the  agency  shall  transfer  from  the
  community  senior citizens services capital reserve fund pursuant to the
  provisions of paragraph (a) of subdivision  fourteen  of  this  section.
  Such moneys and any other moneys paid into the community senior citizens
  services  general reserve fund may, in the discretion of the agency, but
  subject to agreements with bondholders and noteholders, be used  by  the
  agency  (a)  for  the repayment of advances from the state in accordance
  with the provisions of repayment agreements between the agency  and  the
  director  of  the  budget,  (b)  to  reimburse  the department of social
  services of the state of New  York  for  the  reasonable  costs  of  the
  services  performed  by  such  department pursuant to subdivision six of
  section fifty-five of this article, (c) to pay all costs,  expenses  and
  charges of financing, including fees and expenses of trustees and paying
  agents,  (d)  for  transfers  to  the community senior citizens services
  capital reserve fund, (e) for the payment of principal of  and  interest
  on  community senior citizens services project bonds and notes issued by


 the agency when the same shall become due whether at maturity or on call
  for redemption and for the payment of any redemption premium required to
  be paid where such community senior citizens services project bonds  and
  notes  are  redeemed  prior  to  their stated maturities and to purchase
  community senior citizens services project bonds or notes issued by  the
  agency, or (f) for such other corporate purposes of the agency as it, in
  its discretion, shall determine and provide.
    16.  (a) The agency may create and establish one or more special funds
  to be known  as  community  mental  health  services  and  developmental
  disabilities  services  capital  reserve  funds  and  may  pay into such
  reserve funds (1) any monies appropriated  and  made  available  by  the
  state  for  the  purposes of such funds, (2) any proceeds of the sale of
  community mental health services and developmental disabilities services
  project revenue bonds or notes, to the extent provided in the resolution
  of the agency authorizing the issuance thereof, and (3) any other monies
  which may be made available to the agency for the purposes of such  fund
  or  funds  from  any  other  source  or  sources.  The monies held in or
  credited to a capital reserve fund established under  this  subdivision,
  except  as  hereinafter  provided  and  as  provided  in agreements with
  bondholders and noteholders, shall be used solely  for  the  payment  of
  principal   of   community  mental  health  services  and  developmental
  disabilities services project revenue bonds of  the  agency  secured  by
  such  reserve fund, as the same mature, required payments to any sinking
  fund established in a resolution of the agency for the  amortization  of
  term  bonds  (hereinafter  referred  to as "sinking fund payments"), the
  purchase of such revenue bonds of the agency, the payment of interest on
  such revenue bonds of the agency,  or  the  payment  of  any  redemption
  premium  required  to  be  paid  when  such  bonds are redeemed prior to
  maturity. Any income or interest earned by, or increment  to,  any  such
  community mental health services and developmental disabilities services
  capital reserve fund due to the investment thereof may be transferred to
  the agency, subject to agreements with bondholders and noteholders.
    (b)   In   computing   any   community   mental  health  services  and
  developmental  disabilities  services  capital  reserve  fund  for   the
  purposes  of  this section, securities in which all or a portion of such
  reserve fund shall be invested shall be valued at par  if  purchased  at
  par, or if purchased at other than par, at the amortized value.
    (c)  The  agency  shall create and establish one or more special funds
  (herein  referred  to  as   community   mental   health   services   and
  developmental  disabilities services general reserve funds) and shall to
  the extent provided in the applicable  bond  resolution  of  the  agency
  authorizing  the  issuance  of  community  mental  health  services  and
  developmental disabilities services project revenue bonds, pay into  any
  such  fund  the  fees  and  charges  collected by the agency pursuant to
  paragraph (d) of  subdivision  eleven  of  section  forty-four  of  this
  article  and any monies which the agency shall transfer from a community
  mental health services and developmental disabilities  services  capital
  reserve  fund  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  paragraph  (a) of this
  subdivision. Such monies and any other  monies  paid  into  a  community
  mental  health  services  and developmental disabilities service general
  reserve fund may, in the  discretion  of  the  agency,  but  subject  to
  agreements  with  bondholders and noteholders, be used by the agency (i)
  for the repayment of advances from the  state  in  accordance  with  the
  provisions  of  repayment agreements between the agency and the director
  of the budget, (ii) to reimburse the department of  mental  hygiene  the
  reasonable costs of the services performed by the commissioner of mental
  hygiene  and  the  department  of mental hygiene pursuant to subdivision
  five of section fifty-five of this  article,  including  the  reasonable


 costs   of   such  services  performed  by  the  facilities  development
  corporation upon request by the commissioner of mental hygiene  pursuant
  to  the  provisions of section 75.25 of the mental hygiene law, (iii) to
  pay  all  costs,  expenses  and charges of financing, including fees and
  expenses of  trustees  and  paying  agents,  (iv)  for  transfers  to  a
  community mental health services and developmental disabilities services
  capital  reserve  fund, (v) for the payment of principal of and interest
  on community  mental  health  services  and  developmental  disabilities
  services  project  revenue bonds and notes issued by the agency when the
  same shall become due whether at maturity or on call for redemption  and
  for the payment of any redemption premium required to be paid where such
  community mental health services and developmental disabilities services
  project  revenue  bonds  and  notes  are  redeemed prior to their stated
  maturities  and  to  purchase  community  mental  health  services   and
  developmental disabilities services revenue bonds or notes issued by the
  agency,  or  (vi) for such other corporate purposes of the agency as the
  agency in its discretion shall determine and provide.




   §   47-a.   State   university   construction   bonds  and  notes.  1.
  Definitions.   For the purposes  of  section  forty-seven  and  of  this
  section:
    a.  "State  university facility" shall mean a classroom, lecture hall,
  library, laboratory or other academic building, or any structure  on  or
  improvement  to  real  property  of  any  kind or description, including
  fixtures and equipment which are an integral part of any such  building,
  structure  or  improvement,  a  walkway or roadway, and improvements and
  connections for water, sewer, gas, electrical, telephone,  heating,  air
  conditioning  and other utility services at a state-operated institution
  or statutory or contract college under the  jurisdiction  of  the  state
  university  of  New  York,  and  shall  include  a  housing  unit or any
  emergency temporary housing, with  necessary  and  usual  attendant  and
  related  facilities  and equipment, for the use of students, faculty and
  staff, and their families,  at  such  an  institution  or  statutory  or
  contract college.
    b.   "State  university  construction  bonds"  and  "state  university
  construction notes" shall mean bonds and notes respectively,  issued  by
  the agency pursuant to subdivision two of this section.
    2. Additional powers of the agency.
    a. The agency shall have power to cause state university facilities to
  be  constructed,  acquired,  reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved on
  any real property leased or made available by the  state  university  of
  New  York,  or  any  state-operated institution or statutory or contract
  college under the jurisdiction of the  state  university  of  New  York,
  under  an  agreement with the state university construction fund created
  by section three  hundred  seventy-one  of  the  education  law  and  in
  connection  therewith  may  authorize  the state university construction
  fund to act as its agent for the  purpose  of  constructing,  acquiring,
  reconstructing,   rehabilitating  or  improving  such  state  university
  facilities.
    b. The agency shall have power and is hereby authorized from  time  to
  time  to  issue negotiable bonds and notes in conformity with applicable
  provisions of the uniform commercial code in such principal  amount  as,
  in  the  opinion  of  the  agency, shall be necessary, after taking into
  account other monies which may be available for the purpose, to  provide
  sufficient  funds  for  the  construction,  acquisition, reconstruction,
  rehabilitation or improvement of state university facilities pursuant to
  the preceding paragraph of this subdivision, the payment of interest  on
  state  university  construction  bonds and state university construction
  notes issued for such purposes, the establishment of reserves to  secure
  such  bonds and notes, and all other expenditures of the agency incident
  to and necessary or convenient for any such  construction,  acquisition,
  reconstruction,  rehabilitation  or improvement; provided, however, that
  the agency shall not issue state university construction bonds and state
  university construction notes in an aggregate principal amount exceeding
  three billion dollars, excluding state university construction bonds and
  state university construction notes issued to refund  outstanding  state
  university construction bonds or state university construction notes. In
  no  event, however, shall the agency issue state university construction
  bonds  or  state  university  construction  notes  after  August  first,
  nineteen  hundred  eighty-eight,  except  state  university construction
  bonds  or  state  university  construction  notes   issued   to   refund
  outstanding  state  university  construction  bonds  or state university
  construction  notes;  provided,  however,  that  only  state  university
  construction  bonds to be issued to refund state university construction
  bonds may be issued after August first, nineteen  hundred  eighty-eight.
  Such  bonds  shall  be excluded from such limitation as to the aggregate


 principal amount  of  state  university  construction  bonds  and  state
  university construction notes if the present value of the aggregate debt
  service  on the refunding bonds does not exceed the present value of the
  aggregate  debt  service  on  the  bonds  refunded thereby. For purposes
  hereof, the present value of the aggregate debt service of the refunding
  bonds and the aggregate debt service of the  bonds  refunded,  shall  be
  calculated  by  utilizing the true interest cost of the refunding bonds,
  which shall be that rate arrived at by doubling the semi-annual interest
  rate (compounded semi-annually) necessary to discount the  debt  service
  payments  on  the  refunding bonds from the payment dates thereof to the
  date of issue of the refunding  bonds  to  the  purchase  price  of  the
  refunding  bonds,  including interest accrued thereon prior the issuance
  thereof.
    3. Application of other provisions of article.  Except  as  stated  in
  section forty-seven, the other provisions of this article shall apply to
  state  university  construction  bonds and state university construction
  notes issued by the agency pursuant to this section, provided,  however,
  that such bonds and notes, subject to any agreements with the holders of
  particular bonds or notes pledging any specified portions thereof, shall
  be secured by a pledge to the payment thereof of (i) rentals paid to the
  agency  with  respect  to  state university facilities financed with the
  proceeds of such bonds and notes, and (ii) any other assets,  monies  or
  accounts  pledged  or assigned to the agency as security for the payment
  of such rentals, and provided further that no resolution or  resolutions
  authorizing  state  university  construction  bonds and state university
  construction notes shall (i) pledge all or any  part  of  the  fees  and
  charges made or received by the agency pursuant to subdivision eleven of
  section  forty-four  in  connection with the making of mortgage loans or
  commitments therefor, or all or any  part  of  the  monies  received  in
  payment  of such mortgage loans and interest thereon, or (ii) pledge all
  or any part of the mortgages of the agency or obligations  securing  the
  same, or (iii) provide as to the use and disposition of the gross income
  from  mortgages owned by the agency or as to the payment of principal of
  mortgages owned by the agency, or (iv) pledge all or  any  part  of  the
  rentals  paid  to the agency under leases, subleases or other agreements
  for health facilities or mental hygiene facilities entered into  by  the
  agency  in  accordance with this article, or (v) pledge or assign all or
  any part of any other assets, monies or accounts pledged or assigned  to
  the  agency  as  security  for  the  payment  of rentals for such health
  facilities or mental hygiene facilities.
    4. Repayment fund. The agency shall create  and  establish  a  special
  fund  (herein  referred to as state university repayment fund) and shall
  pay into such fund any monies which the agency shall receive in  payment
  of  rentals  due  under  one  or  more  lease  agreements referred to in
  subdivision three of this section. Such monies and any other monies paid
  into the state university repayment fund may, in the discretion  of  the
  agency  but  subject  to agreements with the holders of state university
  construction bonds and state university construction notes, be  used  by
  the  agency (a) for the repayment of advances, if any, from the state to
  the agency in connection with state university facilities in  accordance
  with  the  provisions of repayment agreements between the agency and the
  director of the budget, (b) to pay all costs, expenses  and  charges  of
  financing  the construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation
  or improvement of state  university  facilities  on  any  real  property
  leased  or  made  available to the agency by the state university of New
  York, including fees and expenses of trustees and paying agents and  the
  reasonable  costs  of  services performed by the commissioner of housing
  and division of housing in respect thereof, and (c) for the  payment  of


 the  principal of and interest on state university construction bonds or
  state university construction notes issued by the agency when  the  same
  shall  become  due whether at maturity or on call for redemption and for
  the  payment  of  any  redemption premium required to be paid where such
  bonds or notes are redeemed prior to their  stated  maturities,  and  to
  purchase   state  university  construction  bonds  or  state  university
  construction notes issued by the agency.




   §  47-b.  Mental  hygiene improvement bonds and notes. 1. Definitions.
  For the purposes of section forty-seven and of this section:
    a. "Community mental health and developmental  disabilities  facility"
  shall  mean  a  building,  a  unit  within  a  building, a laboratory, a
  classroom, a housing unit,  a  dining  hall,  an  activities  center,  a
  library, or any structure on or improvement to real property of any kind
  or  description,  including fixtures and equipment which are an integral
  part of such building, unit or structure or improvement,  a  walkway,  a
  roadway  or  a  parking  lot and improvements and connections for water,
  sewer, gas, electrical, telephone, heating, air conditioning  and  other
  utility  services, or a combination of any of the foregoing, whether for
  patient care and treatment  or  staff,  staff  family  or  service  use,
  located  in  a  city,  or in a county not wholly included within a city,
  authorized to provide community mental  health  services  in  accordance
  with  the  provisions  of  article  forty-one  of  title E of the mental
  hygiene law, which is utilized or to be utilized for the  administration
  and  conduct of programs for people living with either mental illness or
  developmental disabilities, or both, and for the provision  of  services
  therefor.  A  community  mental  health  and  developmental disabilities
  facility shall also mean  and  include  a  residential  facility  to  be
  operated  as  a  community  residence  for  the mentally disabled, and a
  treatment facility for use in the conduct  of  an  alcoholism  treatment
  program  or  of  a  substance  abuse treatment program as defined in the
  mental hygiene law.
    b. "Mental hygiene facility" shall mean a building, a  unit  within  a
  building,  a  laboratory, a classroom, a housing unit, a dining hall, an
  activities center, a library, or any structure on or improvement to real
  property of any kind or description, including  fixtures  and  equipment
  which  are  an  integral  part  of any such building, unit, structure or
  improvement, a walkway, a roadway or a parking lot, and improvements and
  connections for water, sewer, gas, electrical, telephone,  heating,  air
  conditioning  and other utility services, or a combination of any of the
  foregoing, whether for patient care and treatment or staff, staff family
  or service use, located at or related to any state hospital,  any  state
  school,  or any state psychiatric or research institute now or hereafter
  established under the professional jurisdiction, supervision and control
  of the state department of mental hygiene.  A  mental  hygiene  facility
  shall  mean  and  include  a  "community mental health and developmental
  disabilities facility", unless such facility is  expressly  excepted  or
  the  context clearly requires otherwise, and shall also mean and include
  a treatment facility  for  use  in  the  conduct  of  an  alcoholism  or
  substance  abuse treatment program as defined in the mental hygiene law,
  unless such facility  is  expressly  excepted  or  the  context  clearly
  requires  otherwise.  The definition contained in this subdivision shall
  not be construed to exclude therefrom a facility to  be  made  available
  under  license  or  permit from the health and mental hygiene facilities
  improvement corporation to a voluntary agency  at  the  request  of  the
  commissioners  of the offices of the department of mental hygiene having
  jurisdiction thereof for use in providing community  mental  health  and
  developmental  disabilities  services,  or  for use in the conduct of an
  alcoholism or substance abuse treatment program.
    c. "Mental hygiene improvement bonds" and "mental hygiene  improvement
  notes"  shall  mean  bonds and notes, respectively, issued by the agency
  pursuant to subdivision two of this section.
    d. "Mental  hygiene  facilities  improvement  program"  shall  mean  a
  program  undertaken  by  the  agency  and  the health and mental hygiene
  facilities improvement corporation  for  the  purpose  of  constructing,
  acquiring,  reconstructing,  rehabilitating  or improving mental hygiene


 facilities or causing  such  facilities  to  be  constructed,  acquired,
  reconstructed,  rehabilitated  or  improved  pursuant  to the health and
  mental hygiene facilities improvement act and this article.
    2. Additional powers of the agency.
    a.  The  agency  shall have power to lease one or more existing mental
  hygiene facilities from the trustees of the health  and  mental  hygiene
  facilities   improvement   corporation   and   to   construct,  acquire,
  reconstruct, rehabilitate and improve new mental hygiene  facilities  at
  such   facilities,  or  on  any  real  property  leased  from  the  said
  corporation, and  to  cause  such  new  facilities  to  be  constructed,
  acquired,  reconstructed,  rehabilitated  or improved by the trustees of
  the said corporation as its agent,  all  in  accordance  with  a  lease,
  sublease  or  other  agreement  entered  into between the agency and the
  trustees of the said corporation pursuant to subdivision four of section
  nine of the health and mental hygiene facilities improvement act.
    b. The agency shall have power and is hereby authorized from  time  to
  time  to  issue negotiable bonds and notes in conformity with applicable
  provisions of the uniform commercial code in such principal  amount  as,
  in  the  opinion  of  the  agency, shall be necessary, after taking into
  account other monies which may be available for the purpose, to  provide
  sufficient  funds  for  the  construction,  acquisition, reconstruction,
  rehabilitation or improvement of mental hygiene facilities  pursuant  to
  the  preceding paragraph of this subdivision, the payment of interest on
  mental hygiene improvement bonds and mental  hygiene  improvement  notes
  issued  for  such purposes, the establishment of reserves to secure such
  bonds and notes, and all other expenditures of the  agency  incident  to
  and  necessary  or  convenient  for  any such construction, acquisition,
  reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement; provided,  however,  that
  the  agency  shall not issue mental hygiene improvement bonds and mental
  hygiene improvement notes in an  aggregate  principal  amount  exceeding
  seven hundred five million dollars, excluding mental hygiene improvement
  bonds  and mental hygiene improvement notes issued to refund outstanding
  mental hygiene improvement bonds or mental hygiene improvement notes.
    3. Application of other provisions of article.  Except  as  stated  in
  section forty-seven, the other provisions of this article shall apply to
  mental  hygiene  improvement  bonds and mental hygiene improvement notes
  issued by the agency pursuant to this section, provided,  however,  that
  such  bonds  and  notes,  subject  to any agreements with the holders of
  particular bonds or notes pledging any specified portions thereof, shall
  be secured by a pledge to the payment thereof of (i) rentals paid to the
  agency with respect to  mental  hygiene  facilities  financed  with  the
  proceeds  of  such bonds and notes, and (ii) any other assets, monies or
  accounts pledged or assigned to the agency as security for  the  payment
  of  such rentals, and provided further that no resolution or resolutions
  authorizing  mental  hygiene  improvement  bonds  and   mental   hygiene
  improvement  notes  shall  (i)  pledge  all  or any part of the fees and
  charges made or received by the agency pursuant to subdivision eleven of
  section forty-four in connection with the making of  mortgage  loans  or
  commitments  therefor,  or  all  or  any  part of the monies received in
  payment of such mortgage loans and interest thereon, or (ii) pledge  all
  or  any  part of the mortgages of the agency or obligations securing the
  same, or (iii) provide as to the use and disposition of the gross income
  from mortgages owned by the agency or as to the payment of principal  of
  mortgages  owned  by  the  agency, or (iv) pledge all or any part of the
  rentals paid to the agency under leases, subleases or  other  agreements
  for state university facilities or health facilities entered into by the
  agency  in  accordance with this article, or (v) pledge or assign all or
  any part of any other assets, monies or accounts pledged or assigned  to


 the  agency  as  security  for  the  payment  of  rentals for such state
  university facilities or health facilities.
    4.  Mental  hygiene  facilities  fund.  The  agency  shall  create and
  establish  a  special  fund  (herein  referred  to  as  mental   hygiene
  facilities  fund)  and  shall  pay  into  such fund any monies which the
  agency shall receive in payment of rentals due under one or more leases,
  subleases or other agreements entered into pursuant to subdivision  four
  of  section nine of the health and mental hygiene facilities improvement
  act and any other monies which the agency shall receive from the  health
  and mental hygiene facilities improvement corporation as security for or
  in  payment  of such rentals. Such monies and any other monies paid into
  the mental hygiene facilities fund may, in the discretion of the agency,
  but subject to agreements with the holders of mental hygiene improvement
  bonds and mental hygiene improvement notes, be used by  the  agency  (a)
  for  the  repayment of advances, if any, from the state to the agency in
  connection  with  mental  hygiene  facilities,  and  any  real  property
  required  therefor,  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of repayment
  agreements related  thereto  which  have  been  entered  into  with  the
  director  of  the  budget, (b) to pay all costs, expenses and charges of
  financing mental hygiene  facilities  including  fees  and  expenses  of
  trustees  and  paying  agents,  (c)  to pay the administrative and other
  expenses of the agency allocable to the services performed by the agency
  in the  financing  of  the  construction,  acquisition,  reconstruction,
  rehabilitation  or  improvement of mental hygiene facilities and matters
  relating thereto, (d) for the payment of the principal of  and  interest
  on  mental hygiene improvement bonds or mental hygiene improvement notes
  issued by the agency when the same shall become due whether at  maturity
  or  by call for redemption and for the payment of any redemption premium
  required to be paid where such bonds or  notes  are  redeemed  prior  to
  their  stated  maturities,  and  to  purchase mental hygiene improvement
  bonds or mental hygiene improvement notes issued by the agency,  or  (e)
  for such other corporate purposes of the agency relating to the carrying
  out of its functions, powers and duties with respect to the financing of
  the   construction,   acquisition,   reconstruction,  rehabilitation  or
  improvement of mental hygiene facilities as the agency in its discretion
  shall determine and provide.




   §  47-c.  Special  provisions  related  to  certain  bonds  and notes.
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, general or special:
    1. Any public corporation or officer responsible for  the  acquisition
  of  real  property  or  the  planning,  supervision or administration of
  facilities thereon which may be  constructed,  acquired,  reconstructed,
  rehabilitated  or  improved  by  the  agency pursuant to this article is
  hereby authorized for and on behalf and in the name of the people of the
  state of New York, to execute  and  deliver  to  the  agency,  for  such
  consideration,  if  any, as may be determined by such public corporation
  or officer and the agency, but not to exceed  the  cost  of  acquisition
  thereof  and  the  cost  of improvements thereon, a lease for a term not
  exceeding fifty years or a quitclaim deed conveying to  the  agency  all
  the  right, title and interest of the people of the state of New York in
  and to any of the lands acquired by such public corporation  or  officer
  for  such facilities, and in and to any of the improvements thereon, for
  the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, rehabilitating or improving
  thereon one or more facilities pursuant to this  article  for  lease  or
  sublease  to  any such public corporation or officer, in accordance with
  the terms of an agreement entered into among  them  in  accordance  with
  law.  The  agency  is  hereby  authorized  to  accept  any such lease or
  conveyance, to lease or sublease such lands, improvements and facilities
  to such public corporation or officer, and to hold the same  subject  to
  the  terms  of  any such lease, conveyance, sublease or other agreement,
  and such public corporation or officer is hereby  authorized,  with  the
  approval  of  the  governor,  or where so designated by the governor for
  such purpose, the director of the budget, to lease or sublease any  such
  lands  or  improvements  or  the  facilities constructed, reconstructed,
  rehabilitated or improved thereon pursuant  to  this  article  or  other
  provisions  of  law, and to hold such lands, improvements and facilities
  subject to the terms of any such lease, sublease or other agreement.
    2. a. In the event that the agency shall fail, within five years  from
  the date of a lease or conveyance authorized pursuant to subdivision one
  of  this section, to construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate or improve the
  facility or facilities thereon for which the  conveyance  was  made,  as
  provided  for  in a lease, sublease or other agreement entered into with
  such public corporation or officer, or in the event that  such  facility
  or facilities shall cease to be used for the purposes intended, then and
  in either event but subject to the terms of any lease, sublease or other
  agreement undertaken by the agency, such lands, and the improvements and
  facilities  thereon, shall revert to the people of the state of New York
  with right of re-entry thereupon, and such lease or deed shall  be  made
  subject  to  such  conditions;  provided,  however,  that as a condition
  precedent to the exercise of such right of re-entry  the  state  of  New
  York,  or such public corporation or officer, shall pay to the agency an
  amount equal to the purchase price of such lands and  improvements,  the
  depreciated   cost   of   any   facility   or   facilities  constructed,
  reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved thereon, and all other costs of
  the agency incident to the acquisition of such lands and  the  financing
  of  construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement relating
  to such facility or facilities, all as provided in the aforesaid  lease,
  sublease or other agreement entered into with such public corporation or
  officer.
    b.  In  the event that the agency shall determine that any portions of
  the lands leased or conveyed pursuant to subdivision one hereof  are  in
  excess  of  the  lands needed to construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate or
  improve the facility or facilities thereon for which the conveyance  was
  made,  as  provided in a lease, sublease or other agreement entered into
  with such public corporation or officer, the agency  may  terminate  its


 lease  with  respect  to  such excess portions of such lands or reconvey
  such excess portions to the people of the state of New  York;  provided,
  however,  that  the  state  of  New  York  or such public corporation or
  officer shall pay to the agency an amount equal to the consideration, if
  any,  paid by the agency to such public corporation or officer allocable
  to such excess lands and such other costs of the agency as are  incident
  to  the acquisition of such excess lands, all as may be approved by such
  public corporation or officer and the agency. Any monies so paid to  the
  agency  shall  be  used  and  applied,  subject to the provisions of any
  contract with noteholders and  bondholders,  for  the  sole  purpose  of
  paying costs and expenses of the agency incident to the financing of the
  facility  or  facilities to be constructed, reconstructed, rehabilitated
  or improved on such other portions of the land as shall have been leased
  or conveyed to the agency pursuant to subdivision one hereof.
    3. The attorney general shall pass upon the form and  sufficiency  and
  manner  of  execution  of  any  deed  of  conveyance and of any lease or
  sublease of lands authorized to be given under subdivision one  of  this
  section and the same shall not be effective unless so approved by him.
    4.    The   cost   of   construction,   acquisition,   reconstruction,
  rehabilitation or improvement of facilities  undertaken  by  the  agency
  pursuant to this article may include the cost of acquisition of any land
  and  improvements  leased  or  conveyed to the agency in accordance with
  subdivision  one  of  this  section  and  the  cost  of   the   original
  furnishings,  equipment,  machinery  and  apparatus  determined  by  the
  responsible public corporation or officer to be needed  to  furnish  and
  equip such facilities upon the completion of work. The agency shall have
  power to acquire or lease and to hold land and improvements required for
  the   construction,   acquisition,   reconstruction,  rehabilitation  or
  improvement of facilities undertaken by  the  agency  pursuant  to  this
  article  and  to  provide the original furnishings, equipment, machinery
  and apparatus  determined  by  the  responsible  public  corporation  or
  officer  to  be  needed  to  furnish  and equip such facilities upon the
  completion of  work  and  to  issue  its  bonds  and  notes  to  provide
  sufficient funds to pay the cost thereof.
    5. Any public corporation or officer referred to in subdivision one of
  this  section is hereby authorized and empowered, in connection with any
  lease, sublease or other agreement with the agency to which such  public
  corporation  or  officer is a party, and subject to such agreements with
  third parties as may then exist, to:
    (a) pledge or assign to the agency all or any portion of the  revenues
  and  monies  received  or  to  be received by such public corporation or
  officer, which may be available for the purpose of  paying  rentals  for
  the   use   of  the  facilities  constructed,  acquired,  reconstructed,
  rehabilitated or improved or to be constructed, acquired, reconstructed,
  rehabilitated or improved under such agreement, so that the  payment  of
  such rentals may be fully secured and protected; provided, however, that
  such pledge or assignment shall not extend to appropriations or advances
  from  the  state except appropriations or advances made specifically for
  the purpose of paying all or any part of such rentals;
    (b) use and dispose of such  revenues  and  monies,  or  any  portions
  thereof, for the purpose of defraying, in whole or in part, (1) the cost
  of  acquiring  any  real  property  for  the  purpose  of  constructing,
  acquiring,  reconstructing,  rehabilitating  or   improving   facilities
  thereon which may be constructed, acquired, reconstructed, rehabilitated
  or  improved  by  the  agency  pursuant to this article, (2) the cost of
  financing the construction, acquisition, reconstruction,  rehabilitation
  or  improvement  of  such  facilities, and (3) the cost of acquiring the


 original furnishings,  equipment,  machinery  and  apparatus  needed  to
  furnish and equip such facilities upon the completion of work;
    (c)  set  aside  rental  reserves  and  to  agree  to the maintenance,
  regulation and disposition thereof;
    (d) agree to limitations on the purposes to which the proceeds of sale
  of agency notes or bonds may be applied and  to  the  pledging  of  such
  proceeds  to secure the payment of agency notes or bonds or of any issue
  thereof;
    (e) agree to limitations on the making of additional leases, subleases
  or agreements with the agency or with others, and the terms  upon  which
  such additional leases, subleases or agreements may be made;
    (f)  recognize and give effect to such assignment, upon receipt of any
  notice of assignment by the agency of any such lease, sublease or  other
  agreement  with  the  agency,  or of any of its rights under such lease,
  sublease or other agreement, and to pay the assignee thereof rentals  or
  other  payments  then  due or which may become due under any such lease,
  sublease or other agreement which has been so assigned  by  the  agency;
  and
    (g)  agree to any other matters, of like or different character, which
  in any way affect the security or  protection  of  the  rental  payments
  required  to  be  made  under the terms of such lease, sublease or other
  agreement with the agency.
    6.  (a)  Any  state  university  facility,  as  defined   in   section
  forty-seven-a  of  this  article,  which has been constructed, acquired,
  reconstructed, rehabilitated or improved, in whole or in  part,  out  of
  monies  advanced  to  the  state  university  of  New  York,  the  state
  university construction fund, the state office of  general  services  or
  the  dormitory  authority since August first, nineteen hundred sixty-two
  pursuant to appropriations or  reappropriations  as  advances  from  the
  capital  construction  fund, and the lands upon which such a facility is
  located, may be leased or conveyed to the agency by the state university
  of New York, the state university construction  fund  or  the  dormitory
  authority  in accordance with the provisions of subdivisions one through
  five  of  this   section,   notwithstanding   that   the   construction,
  acquisition,  reconstruction,  rehabilitation  or  improvement  of  such
  facility may have been completed by the state university  of  New  York,
  the  state  university construction fund, the dormitory authority or the
  state office of general services, or may have  been  undertaken  or  may
  hereafter  be undertaken by the dormitory authority under agreement with
  the state university of New York or the  state  university  construction
  fund.
    (b)  Subject  to such agreements with third parties as may then exist,
  the state university of New York and the state  university  construction
  fund are hereby authorized and empowered to enter into leases, subleases
  and  other  agreements  with  the  agency  with  respect  to  any  state
  university facility described in paragraph (a), and the lands upon which
  such a facility is or may be located, in accordance with the  provisions
  of  section  three  hundred  seventy-eight  of the education law and the
  provisions of subdivisions one through five of  this  section;  and  the
  agency  is  hereby  authorized  and  empowered  to  accept  any lease or
  conveyance of any such state university facility,  and  the  lands  upon
  which  such  a  facility  is  or  may be located, to acquire, construct,
  reconstruct, rehabilitate or improve any  such  facility  and  to  issue
  bonds  and notes to provide sufficient funds therefor in accordance with
  the  provisions  of  section  forty-seven-a  of  this  article  and  the
  provisions of subdivisions one through five of this section.
    (c)  Any  mental hygiene facility, as defined in section forty-seven-b
  of this article, which has been  constructed,  acquired,  reconstructed,


 rehabilitated  or  improved, in whole or in part, out of monies advanced
  or deemed to have  been  advanced  to  the  health  and  mental  hygiene
  facilities  improvement  corporation,  the  state  department  of mental
  hygiene  or  the office of general services, since April first, nineteen
  hundred sixty-three pursuant to appropriations  or  reappropriations  as
  advances  from  the  capital construction fund, and the lands upon which
  such a facility is located, may be leased or conveyed to the  agency  by
  the  health and mental hygiene facilities improvement corporation or the
  commissioner of mental hygiene in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of
  subdivisions  one through five of this section, notwithstanding that the
  construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
  of such facility may have  been  completed  by  the  health  and  mental
  hygiene  facilities  improvement  corporation,  the  state department of
  mental hygiene or the office of general services.
    (d) Subject to such agreements with third parties as may  then  exist,
  the  health  and  mental  hygiene  facilities improvement corporation is
  hereby authorized and empowered to  enter  into  leases,  subleases  and
  other  agreements  with  the  agency  with respect to any mental hygiene
  facility described in paragraph (c), and the lands  upon  which  such  a
  facility  is  or  may  be  located, in accordance with the provisions of
  subdivision four of section  nine  of  the  health  and  mental  hygiene
  facilities  improvement  act  and  the  provisions  of  subdivisions one
  through five of this section; and the agency is  hereby  authorized  and
  empowered  to  accept any lease or conveyance of any such mental hygiene
  facility, and the lands upon which such a facility is or may be located,
  to acquire, construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate  or  improve  any  such
  facility,  and  to  issue  bonds  and  notes to provide sufficient funds
  therefor in accordance with the provisions of section  forty-seven-b  of
  this article and the provisions of subdivisions one through five of this
  section.
    7. a. The agency shall have the power to acquire by lease or deed from
  the  health  and  mental  hygiene facilities improvement corporation any
  real property acquired by the corporation pursuant to the provisions  of
  subdivision   six   of   section  nine  of  the  facilities  development
  corporation act (i) for the  purpose  of  constructing,  reconstructing,
  rehabilitating  or improving thereon one or more community mental health
  and developmental disabilities facilities or (ii)  for  the  purpose  of
  financing  the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation
  or improvement thereon of  one  or  more  community  mental  health  and
  developmental  disabilities  facilities,  pursuant  to the provisions of
  this article and the facilities development corporation act. The  agency
  is  hereby  authorized  to  lease  or  sublease  such  real property and
  facilities thereon to the corporation for the purpose of making the same
  available to a city or a county not wholly within a city,  for  use  and
  occupancy  in  accordance  with  the  provisions of a lease, sublease or
  other agreement between the corporation and such city or county.
    b. In the event that the agency shall fail, within  five  years  after
  the  date  of a lease or conveyance of such real property from such city
  or county to the corporation, to construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate or
  improve the  community  mental  health  and  developmental  disabilities
  facility  or  facility  thereon  for  which such lease or conveyance was
  made, as provided for in a lease, sublease or  other  agreement  entered
  into  by  such  city or county and the corporation, then, subject to the
  terms of any lease,  sublease  or  other  agreement  undertaken  by  the
  agency,  such  real  property and any facilities thereon shall revert to
  the corporation with right of re-entry thereupon, and such lease or deed
  shall be made subject  to  such  condition  of  reverter  and  re-entry;
  provided, however, that as a condition precedent to the exercise of such


 right  of  re-entry  the  corporation  shall pay to the agency an amount
  equal to the sum of the  purchase  price  of  such  real  property,  the
  depreciated  cost  of  any  community  mental  health  and developmental
  disabilities   facility   or   facilities   constructed,  reconstructed,
  rehabilitated or improved thereon and all  other  costs  of  the  agency
  incident  to  the  acquisition  of  such  lands  and  the  financing  of
  construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement relating  to
  such  community mental health and developmental disabilities facility or
  facilities, all as provided in the aforesaid lease,  sublease  or  other
  agreement entered into with the corporation.
    c.  No  real  property  or  interest  therein shall be acquired by the
  agency pursuant to this subdivision unless the title  thereto  shall  be
  approved by the attorney general.
    d.  The  attorney general shall pass upon the form and sufficiency and
  manner of execution of any deed  of  conveyance  and  of  any  lease  or
  sublease  of  real  property  authorized  to  be  acquired by the agency
  pursuant to this subdivision and the same shall not be effective  unless
  such deed, lease or sublease shall be so approved by him.




   §  47-d.  Health  facilities  bonds and notes. 1. Definitions. For the
  purposes of section forty-seven and this section:
    a. "Municipality" means a county, city or town constituting  a  social
  services  district  as  defined in sections two, sixty-one, seventy-five
  and seventy-five-a of the social services law, or any two or more of the
  foregoing which are acting jointly  to  provide  a  health  facility  or
  health facilities.
    b.  "Health  facility"  means  a building, a unit within a building, a
  laboratory, a classroom, a housing unit, a dining  hall,  an  activities
  center,  a  library, or any structure on or improvement to real property
  of any kind or description, including fixtures and equipment  which  are
  an integral part of any such building, unit, structure or improvement, a
  walkway,  a  roadway  or a parking lot, and improvements and connections
  for water, sewer, gas, electrical, telephone, heating, air  conditioning
  and  other  utility  services, or a combination of any of the foregoing,
  whether for patient care and treatment of staff, staff family or service
  use, located at or related to or constituting a hospital of, and located
  in, a municipality.
    c. "Health facilities bonds" and "health facilities notes" shall  mean
  bonds  and  notes,  respectively,  issued  by  the  agency  pursuant  to
  subdivision two of this section.
    d. "Health  facilities  improvement  program"  shall  mean  a  program
  undertaken  by  the  agency and the health and mental hygiene facilities
  improvement corporation for  the  purpose  of  constructing,  acquiring,
  reconstructing, rehabilitating or improving health facilities or causing
  such    facilities   to   be   constructed,   acquired,   reconstructed,
  rehabilitated or improved pursuant to  the  health  and  mental  hygiene
  facilities improvement act and this article.
    2.  Additional  powers of the agency. In accordance with any agreement
  entered into pursuant to this article and the health and mental  hygiene
  facilities  improvement  act:  a.  The  agency shall have powers: (i) to
  lease or  purchase  one  or  more  existing  health  facilities  from  a
  municipality  and cause such facility or facilities to be reconstructed,
  rehabilitated or improved by the health and  mental  hygiene  facilities
  improvement  corporation,  created  by  the  health  and  mental hygiene
  facilities improvement act, as its agent or, on any real property leased
  or purchased from a municipality to cause one or more health  facilities
  to   be   constructed  by  the  health  and  mental  hygiene  facilities
  improvement corporation as its agent; (ii) to lease or purchase from any
  person, firm or corporation real property for  the  purpose  of  causing
  health  facilities  to  be  constructed, reconstructed, rehabilitated or
  improved  by  the  health  and  mental  hygiene  facilities  improvement
  corporation  as  its agent; (iii) to lease or sublease to a municipality
  health facilities which have been constructed, acquired,  reconstructed,
  rehabilitated or improved by the agency pursuant to this article and the
  health and mental hygiene facilities improvement act; and (iv) to do all
  or any combination of the foregoing.
    b.  The  agency shall have power and is hereby authorized from time to
  time to issue negotiable bonds and notes in such principal amount as, in
  the opinion of the agency, shall be necessary, after taking into account
  other monies  which  may  be  available  for  the  purpose,  to  provide
  sufficient  funds  for  the  construction,  acquisition, reconstruction,
  rehabilitation or improvement of  health  facilities  pursuant  to  this
  subdivision  two, the payment of interest on health facilities bonds and
  health facilities notes issued for such purposes, the  establishment  of
  reserves  to  secure such bonds and notes, and all other expenditures of
  the agency  incident  to  and  necessary  or  convenient  for  any  such
  construction,    acquisition,    reconstruction,    rehabilitation    or


 improvement, provided, however, that the agency shall not  issue  health
  facilities  bonds  and health facilities notes in an aggregate principal
  amount  exceeding  eight  hundred  million  dollars,  excluding   health
  facilities   bonds   and   health  facilities  notes  issued  to  refund
  outstanding health facilities bonds or health facilities notes.
    3. Application of other provisions of article.  Except  as  stated  in
  section forty-seven, the other provisions of this article shall apply to
  health facilities bonds and health facilities notes issued by the agency
  pursuant  to this section, provided, however, that such bonds and notes,
  subject to any agreements with the holders of particular bonds or  notes
  pledging any specified portions thereof, shall be secured by a pledge to
  the  payment  thereof  of (i) rentals paid to the agency with respect to
  health facilities financed with the proceeds of such  bonds  and  notes,
  and (ii) any other assets, monies or accounts pledged or assigned to the
  agency as security for the payment of such rentals, and provided further
  that  no  resolution  or resolutions authorizing health facilities bonds
  and health facilities notes shall (i) pledge all or any part of the fees
  and charges made or received  by  the  agency  pursuant  to  subdivision
  eleven  of  section forty-four in connection with the making of mortgage
  loans or commitments therefor, or all or any part of the monies received
  in payment of such mortgage loans and interest thereon, or  (ii)  pledge
  all  or  any part of the mortgages of the agency or obligations securing
  the same, or (iii) provide as to the use and disposition  of  the  gross
  income  from  mortgages  owned  by  the  agency  or as to the payment of
  principal of mortgages owned by the agency, or (iv) pledge  all  or  any
  part  of the rentals paid to the agency under leases, subleases or other
  agreements for state university facilities and mental hygiene facilities
  entered into by the agency in  accordance  with  this  article,  or  (v)
  pledge or assign all or any part of any other assets, monies or accounts
  pledged or assigned to the agency as security for the payment of rentals
  for such state university facilities and mental hygiene facilities.
    4.  Health  facilities income accounts. a. The agency shall create and
  establish one or more special accounts (herein  referred  to  as  health
  facilities  income accounts) and shall pay into such accounts any monies
  which the agency shall receive in payment of rentals due  under  one  or
  more  leases  or  subleases  entered into pursuant to subdivision two of
  this section and any other monies which the agency shall receive from  a
  municipality  as security for or in payment of such rentals. Such monies
  and any other monies paid into such health facilities  income  accounts,
  may, in the discretion of the agency, but subject to agreements with the
  holders  of health facilities bonds and health facilities notes, be used
  by the agency (1) for the repayment of advances, if any, from the  state
  to  the  agency  in  connection  with  health  facilities,  and any real
  property  required  therefor,  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of
  repayment  agreements  related thereto which have been entered into with
  the director of the budget, (2) to pay all costs, expenses  and  charges
  of  financing  the  health  facilities  applicable  to  such  account or
  accounts including fees and expenses of trustees and paying agents,  (3)
  to  pay the administrative and other expenses of the agency allocable to
  the  services  performed  by  the  agency  in  the  financing   of   the
  construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
  of  health  facilities and matters relating thereto, (4) for the payment
  of the principal of and interest on health facilities  bonds  or  health
  facilities  notes  issued  by  the agency when the same shall become due
  whether at maturity or by call for redemption and for the payment of any
  redemption premium required to be paid where such  bonds  or  notes  are
  redeemed  prior  to  their  stated  maturities,  and  to purchase health
  facilities bonds or health facilities notes issued by the agency, or (5)


 for such other corporate purposes of the agency relating to the carrying
  out of its functions, powers and duties with respect to the financing of
  the  construction,  acquisition,   reconstruction,   rehabilitation   or
  improvement  of  health facilities as the agency in its discretion shall
  determine and provide.
    b. To assure the continued payment of rentals due under  one  or  more
  leases  or  subleases  entered  into pursuant to subdivision two of this
  section, the agency shall annually, not later  than  November  first  in
  each  year,  make and deliver to the appropriate chief fiscal officer of
  the municipality a certificate setting forth the amount, if any, due and
  not paid for the preceding fiscal year of the agency under such lease or
  sublease with  such  municipality.  In  the  event  of  the  failure  or
  inability  of  the  municipality  to  pay  over the stated amount to the
  agency on or before December first of the same year,  the  agency  shall
  forthwith  make and deliver to the comptroller of the state of New York,
  the  director  of  the  budget  of  the  state  of  New  York  and   the
  commissioners  of  health and social services of the state of New York a
  further certificate restating the amount due  and  not  paid,  and  such
  amount  shall  be  paid  over  to  the  agency,  upon the warrant of the
  comptroller on vouchers certified as  correct  by  the  commissioner  of
  health  and  approved by the commissioner of social services, out of the
  next payment of state aid to such municipality pursuant to section three
  hundred sixty-eight-a of the social services law or  funds  appropriated
  for  the  purpose  of  making  payments  on  behalf of such municipality
  pursuant to section three hundred sixty-seven-b  of  such  law.  To  the
  extent  any such payments to the agency are made from state aid payments
  pursuant to section three hundred sixty-eight-a of such law, the  amount
  of  such payments shall be deducted from the corresponding apportionment
  of state aid otherwise credited to  such  municipality,  and  the  state
  shall  not  be obligated to pay, nor shall such municipality be entitled
  to receive, by virtue of such deduction,  any  additional  or  increased
  apportionment  or payment of state aid pursuant to section three hundred
  sixty-eight-a of the  social  services  law.  To  the  extent  any  such
  payments  to the agency are made from funds appropriated for the purpose
  of making payments on behalf of such municipality  pursuant  to  section
  three hundred sixty-seven-b of such law, the amount of such payments may
  be  deducted  from  any  other  payments  of  state  assistance  to such
  municipality under the social services law and the state  shall  not  be
  obligated  to pay, nor shall the municipality be entitled to receive, by
  virtue of such deduction, any additional or increased  apportionment  or
  payment  of  such  state  assistance,  provided,  however,  that nothing
  contained in this sentence shall be construed to limit, impair,  impede,
  or  otherwise  adversely  affect in any manner the rights or remedies of
  the purchasers and holders and owners of any bonds or notes of the state
  or  any  agency  or  instrumentality,  public  benefit  corporation   or
  political  subdivision  thereof  under which such purchasers and holders
  and owners have any right of payment of such bonds or notes by  recourse
  to such state assistance monies.
    5.  Special  provisions.  Notwithstanding  any other provision of law,
  general, special or local, or any provision of any charter or ordinance:
    a. A municipality is hereby authorized to execute and deliver  to  the
  agency  for such consideration as may be determined by the municipality,
  the agency and the health  and  mental  hygiene  facilities  improvement
  corporation,  but  not  to exceed the cost of acquisition thereof to the
  municipality and the cost of improvements thereon, a lease  for  a  term
  not  exceeding  fifty years or a quit claim deed conveying to the agency
  all right, title and interest  of  such  municipality  in  and  to  real
  property,    for    the   purpose   of   constructing,   reconstructing,


 rehabilitating, or improving one or more health facilities  pursuant  to
  this  article  and  the health and mental hygiene facilities improvement
  act for subsequent lease or sublease to such municipality, in accordance
  with  the  terms  of any agreement entered into pursuant to this article
  and the health and mental hygiene facilities improvement act.
    b. A municipality is hereby authorized to lease or sublease  from  the
  agency  the  health facilities constructed, reconstructed, rehabilitated
  or improved pursuant to this article and the health and  mental  hygiene
  facilities  improvement  act,  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  any
  agreement entered into pursuant to this article and such  act.  At  such
  time  as  all rentals due or to become due to the agency pursuant to the
  terms of any such lease or sublease have been  paid  or  such  lease  or
  sublease   is   terminated  pursuant  to  the  provisions  thereof,  the
  jurisdiction of the agency over the real  property  leased  or  conveyed
  pursuant   to  paragraph  a  of  this  subdivision,  together  with  the
  improvements thereon shall cease and all interest real and  personal  in
  such  real  property and improvements vested in the agency shall vest in
  the municipality with right of re-entry thereon,  provided,  however  if
  such  real  property  were  leased  or  conveyed  to  the  agency  by  a
  municipality which constituted a city  social  services  district  which
  district   was   dissolved   pursuant   to  the  provisions  of  chapter
  twenty-eight of the laws of nineteen hundred seventy-two,  all  interest
  real  and  personal in such real property and improvements vested in the
  agency shall vest in the municipality  which  formerly  constituted  the
  city social services district with right of re-entry thereon.
    c.  No  real  property  or  interest  therein shall be acquired by the
  agency pursuant to this subdivision unless title thereto shall have been
  approved by the attorney general.
    d. The attorney general shall pass upon the form and  sufficiency  and
  manner  of  execution  of  any  deed  of  conveyance and of any lease or
  sublease to which the agency and a municipality  are  parties,  and  the
  same shall not be effective unless approved by him.
    e.  In the event that the agency shall fail within five years from the
  date of a lease or conveyance authorized pursuant to paragraph a of this
  subdivision five to construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate or improve  the
  health facilities thereon for which the lease or conveyance was made, as
  provided  for in any agreement entered into pursuant to this article and
  the health and mental hygiene facilities  improvement  act,  or  in  the
  event  that  such  health  facilities  shall  cease  to  be used for the
  purposes intended, then and in either event but subject to the terms  of
  any  lease,  sublease  or  other  agreement  between  the agency and the
  municipality, such real property  and  any  health  facilities  thereon,
  shall  revert  to  the municipality with right of re-entry thereupon and
  such lease or deed shall be made subject to such  conditions;  provided,
  however,  that as a condition precedent to the exercise of such right of
  re-entry the municipality shall pay to the agency an amount equal to the
  purchase price of such real property, the depreciated cost of any health
  facilities constructed, reconstructed, rehabilitated  or  improved,  and
  all  other  costs of the agency incident to the acquisition of such real
  property   and   the   financing   of   construction,    reconstruction,
  rehabilitation  or  improvement  relating  to  such  facilities,  all as
  provided in the aforesaid lease, sublease  or  other  agreement  entered
  into with such municipality.
    f.  In  the event that the agency shall determine that any portions of
  the real property leased or conveyed pursuant to  paragraph  a  of  this
  subdivision five are in excess of the real property needed to construct,
  reconstruct,  rehabilitate or improve the facility or facilities thereon
  for which the conveyance was made, as provided in any agreement  entered


 into  pursuant  to  this  article  and  the  health  and  mental hygiene
  facilities improvement act, the agency  may  terminate  its  lease  with
  respect  to  such excess portions of such real property or reconvey such
  excess  portions  to  the  municipality,  provided,  however,  that  the
  municipality  shall  pay  to  the  agency  an  amount   equal   to   the
  consideration, if any, paid by the agency to such municipality allocable
  to  such  excess real property and such other costs of the agency as are
  incident to the acquisition of such excess real property, all as may  be
  approved  by such municipality and the agency. Any monies so paid to the
  agency shall be used and applied,  subject  to  the  provisions  of  any
  contract  with  noteholders  and  bondholders,  for  the sole purpose of
  paying costs and expenses of the agency incident to the financing of the
  health facilities to be  constructed,  reconstructed,  rehabilitated  or
  improved  on such other portions of the real property as shall have been
  leased or conveyed to  the  agency  pursuant  to  paragraph  a  of  this
  subdivision five.
    g.    The   cost   of   construction,   acquisition,   reconstruction,
  rehabilitation or improvement of health  facilities  undertaken  by  the
  agency  pursuant  to  this  article  and  the  health and mental hygiene
  facilities improvement act may include the cost of  acquisition  of  any
  real  property  leased  or  conveyed  to  the  agency in accordance with
  paragraph a of this subdivision  five  and  the  cost  of  the  original
  furnishings,  equipment,  machinery  and apparatus needed to furnish and
  equip such facilities upon the completion of the work. The agency  shall
  have  power  to  acquire or lease and to hold real property required for
  the  construction,  acquisition,   reconstruction,   rehabilitation   or
  improvement  of  the health facilities undertaken by the agency pursuant
  to this article and the health and mental hygiene facilities improvement
  act and to provide the original furnishings,  equipment,  machinery  and
  apparatus   needed  to  furnish  and  equip  such  facilities  upon  the
  completion of  work  and  to  issue  its  bonds  and  notes  to  provide
  sufficient funds to pay the cost thereof.
    h.  A  municipality  is hereby authorized and empowered, in connection
  with any lease, sublease or other agreement with  the  agency  to  which
  such  municipality is a party, and subject to such agreements with third
  parties as may then exist, to:
    (1) pledge or assign to the agency all or any portion of the  revenues
  and  monies received or to be received by the municipality, which may be
  available for the purpose of paying rentals for the use  of  the  health
  facilities   constructed,   acquired,  reconstructed,  rehabilitated  or
  improved under such agreement, so that the payment of such  rentals  may
  be fully secured and protected;
    (2)  use  and  dispose  of  such  revenues and monies, or any portions
  thereof, for the purpose of defraying, in whole or in part (a) the  cost
  of  acquiring  any  real  property  for  the  purpose  of  constructing,
  acquiring,  reconstructing,  rehabilitating  or   improving   facilities
  thereon which may be constructed, acquired, reconstructed, rehabilitated
  or  improved  by  the agency pursuant to this article and the health and
  mental hygiene facilities improvement act, (b) the cost of financing the
  construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
  of  such  facilities,  and  (c)  the  cost  of  acquiring  the  original
  furnishings,  equipment,  machinery  and apparatus needed to furnish and
  equip such facilities upon the completion of the work;
    (3) set aside  rental  reserves  and  to  agree  to  the  maintenance,
  regulation and disposition thereof;
    (4) agree to limitations on the purposes to which the proceeds of sale
  of  agency  notes  or  bonds  may be applied and to the pledging of such


 proceeds to secure the payment of agency notes or bonds or of any issued
  thereof;
    (5) agree to limitations on the making of additional leases, subleases
  or  agreements  with the agency or with others, and the terms upon which
  such additional leases, subleases or agreements may be made;
    (6) upon receipt of any notice of assignment by the agency of any such
  lease, sublease or other agreement with the agency, or  of  any  of  its
  rights under such lease, sublease or other agreement, recognize and give
  effect  to  such  assignment  and to pay the assignee thereof rentals or
  other payments then due or which may become due under  any  such  lease,
  sublease  or  other  agreement which has been so assigned by the agency;
  and
    (7) agree to any other matters, of like or different character,  which
  in  any  way  affect  the  security or protection of the rental payments
  required to be made under the terms of such  lease,  sublease  or  other
  agreement with the agency.




   §  47-e.  Housing  program  bonds  and  notes. 1. Definitions. For the
  purposes of this section and paragraph (c) of subdivision one of section
  forty-seven of this chapter:
    (a) "Housing program" shall mean the housing  assistance  projects  or
  programs funded from an appropriation or an apportionment to the:
    (1)  housing  assistance  fund  created by section ninety-two-q of the
  state finance law;
    (2) the affordable housing corporation and deposited in the affordable
  housing development account established pursuant to section fifty-nine-b
  of this chapter;
    (3) the housing trust fund corporation and deposited  in  the  housing
  trust  fund account established pursuant to section fifty-nine-a of this
  chapter; and
    (4) the homeless housing and assistance account  established  pursuant
  to section fifty-nine-i of this chapter.
    (5)  Housing  project  repair  fund  created  by section sixty of this
  chapter.
    (b) "Housing program bonds and housing program notes" shall mean bonds
  and notes issued by the agency  pursuant  to  subdivision  two  of  this
  section.
    (c) "Code" shall mean the federal internal revenue code.
    2.  (a) Subject to the provisions of chapter fifty-nine of the laws of
  two thousand, in order to enhance and encourage the promotion of housing
  programs and thereby achieve the stated purposes and objectives of  such
  housing  programs,  the  agency  shall  have  the  power  and  is hereby
  authorized from time to time to issue negotiable housing  program  bonds
  and  notes  in  such  principal  amount as shall be necessary to provide
  sufficient funds  for  the  repayment  of  amounts  disbursed  (and  not
  previously  reimbursed) pursuant to law or any prior year making capital
  appropriations or reappropriations  for  the  purposes  of  the  housing
  program;  provided,  however,  that  the agency may issue such bonds and
  notes in an aggregate principal amount not  exceeding  thirteen  billion
  six  hundred  thirty-five  million  four  hundred  twenty-five  thousand
  dollars $13,635,425,000, plus a principal amount of bonds issued to fund
  the debt service reserve  fund  in  accordance  with  the  debt  service
  reserve fund requirement established by the agency and to fund any other
  reserves  that the agency reasonably deems necessary for the security or
  marketability of such bonds and to provide for the payment of  fees  and
  other  charges  and  expenses, including underwriters' discount, trustee
  and rating agency fees, bond insurance, credit enhancement and liquidity
  enhancement related to the issuance of such bonds and notes. No  reserve
  fund securing the housing program bonds shall be entitled or eligible to
  receive  state  funds apportioned or appropriated to maintain or restore
  such reserve fund at or to a particular level, except to the  extent  of
  any  deficiency  resulting  directly or indirectly from a failure of the
  state to appropriate or pay the agreed amount under any of the contracts
  provided for in subdivision four of this section.
    (b) In computing for the purposes of this section the aggregate amount
  of bonds and notes of the agency issued pursuant to this section,  there
  shall  be  excluded  (i) the amount of bonds and notes issued that would
  constitute interest under the code, and (ii) the  amount  of  bonds  and
  notes  issued  to  refund  bonds and notes, provided, that the amount so
  excluded under this subparagraph (ii) may exceed the amount of the bonds
  and notes which the refunding bonds or notes were issued to refund  only
  if  the  present  value  of  the aggregate debt service on the refunding
  bonds or notes does not exceed the present value of the  aggregate  debt
  service of the bonds or notes to be refunded, such present value in each
  case  to  be  calculated  by  using  the  effective interest rate of the


 refunding bonds or notes,  which  shall  be  that  rate  arrived  at  by
  doubling   the  semi-annual  interest  rate  (compounded  semi-annually)
  necessary to discount the debt service payments on the  refunding  bonds
  or  notes  from  the  payment  date  thereof to the date of issue of the
  refunding bonds or notes and to  the  price  bid  therefor,  or  to  the
  proceeds  received  by  the  agency  from the sale thereof, in each case
  including estimated accrued interest.
    (c) The agency shall annually prepare and approve a bond  sale  report
  which  shall  include  the  agency's bond sale guidelines, amendments to
  such guidelines since the last agency  report,  and,  if  necessary,  an
  explanation  of  the  bond  sale  guidelines and the results of any sale
  including, but not  limited  to,  the  underwriter's  discount  and  net
  interest  costs  of  bonds  sold  during the fiscal year. Such bond sale
  report shall also  identify  which  of  the  agency's  bond  sales  were
  conducted  as public sales and which were conducted as private sales and
  of those, which were taxable, and describe the participation of minority
  and women-owned business enterprise firms in such sales. Such bond  sale
  report  may  be  part  of  any  other  annual  report that the agency is
  required to make. The agency shall annually submit its bond sale  report
  to  the  comptroller  and copies thereof to the senate finance committee
  and the assembly  ways  and  means  committee.  The  agency  shall  make
  available  to  the public copies of its bond sale report upon reasonable
  request therefor. Nothing contained in this subdivision shall be  deemed
  to  alter,  affect  the  validity  of, modify the terms of or impair any
  contract or agreement made or entered into in violation of,  or  without
  compliance with, the provisions of this subdivision.
    (d)  The bonding authority granted by this section and the issuance of
  bonds for the purposes described therein shall in no way act to:
    (i)  delay  or  impede  the   obligation,   encumbrance   and   timely
  disbursement  of  funds  appropriated  or reappropriated for the housing
  program, or any financial commitments made pursuant to such  program  as
  defined in this section;
    (ii)  impair  or  impede the continued operation and administration of
  such program by the agency, any of its subsidiaries or the  division  of
  housing  and community renewal pursuant to law and rules and regulations
  thereby established.
    3. Subject to any agreements with the holders of particular  bonds  or
  notes pledging any specified portions thereof, the housing program bonds
  and  notes  shall  be  secured by a pledge to the payment thereof of the
  state payments made pursuant to the service  contracts  referred  to  in
  subdivision four of this section.
    4. (a) Notwithstanding the provisions of any general or special law to
  the  contrary,  and  subject  to  the  making  of  annual appropriations
  therefor by the legislature, in order  to  assist  the  agency  and  its
  subsidiary  corporations  in  undertaking  and  providing  services with
  respect to housing programs and  in  consideration  of  the  undertaking
  thereof  and  the  benefits to be derived therefrom by the people of the
  state, the director of the budget is authorized in any state fiscal year
  to enter into one or more service contracts, none of which shall  exceed
  thirty  years  in  duration,  with  the  agency,  upon such terms as the
  director of the budget and the agency agree, so as to  provide  annually
  to  the  agency  in  the  aggregate  a sum not to exceed the annual debt
  service payments required for the bonds and  notes  issued  pursuant  to
  this section.
    (b)  Any  service  contract  entered into pursuant to paragraph (a) of
  this subdivision shall provide that the obligation of  the  director  of
  the  budget  or  of  the  state  to  fund  or to pay the amounts therein
  provided for shall not constitute a debt of the state within the meaning


 of any  constitutional  or  statutory  provision  and  shall  be  deemed
  executory  only  to the extent of moneys available and that no liability
  shall be incurred by the state  beyond  the  moneys  available  for  the
  purpose,  and that such obligation is subject to annual appropriation by
  the legislature.
    (c) Any such contract or any payments made or to  be  made  thereunder
  may  be assigned and pledged by the agency as security for its bonds and
  notes authorized by this section.
    5. (a) Subject to the provisions of chapter fifty-nine of the laws  of
  two  thousand,  upon the issuance of housing program bonds or notes, the
  agency shall apply such amount of  the  proceeds  thereof  as  shall  be
  designated  and  specified in the bond or note resolution or resolutions
  authorizing the issuance of such bonds or notes to  the  specific  funds
  and/or  accounts of one or more housing programs. The bond resolution or
  resolutions authorizing the issuance of such bonds or notes  shall  only
  allocate  net proceeds of bonds or notes to a particular fund or account
  of a housing program if the legislature has authorized pursuant  to  law
  or  any prior year an advance to such fund or account, and the amount of
  such bond or note proceeds so allocated to such fund  or  account  shall
  not  exceed the total amount so authorized to be advanced. Such proceeds
  shall be disbursed to such a fund or account  in  accordance  with  such
  allocation  only for application to the repayment of advances previously
  or thereupon made and not previously repaid. Such proceeds  may  not  be
  transferred from an entity authorized to administer a housing program to
  the  state or a fund of the state, except in repayment of such advances.
  Except in the case of refunding bonds or notes authorized hereunder, any
  net proceeds not so allocated or disbursed shall be  utilized  first  to
  pay  debt service on the applicable bonds or notes in the current or the
  succeeding fiscal year and second  to  the  redemption  of  such  bonds;
  provided that such application may be adjusted to comply with applicable
  federal law as to federal tax exemption. For purposes of this paragraph,
  earnings  from  the  investment  of net proceeds shall be treated as net
  proceeds.
    (b) Each of the  entities  authorized  to  administer  the  respective
  housing  programs  is  hereby  authorized  to  accept  advances of funds
  referred to in paragraph (a) of this subdivision and to apply  any  such
  advances in such manner authorized by law and to repay any such advances
  from  the proceeds of housing program bonds or notes deposited therewith
  pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subdivision.
    (c) The state comptroller is hereby authorized  to  receive  from  the
  agency  repayments of moneys, if any, advanced by the state for purposes
  of the housing program and to deposit the same  to  the  credit  of  the
  capital  projects fund, the housing program fund, the housing assistance
  fund or other appropriate fund.






	   §  48.  Agreement  with the state. The state does hereby pledge to and
  agree with the holders of any notes or bonds issued under this  article,
  that  the  state will not limit or alter the rights hereby vested in the
  agency to fulfill the terms of any  agreements  made  with  the  holders
  thereof,  or  in  any way impair the rights and remedies of such holders
  until such notes or bonds, together  with  the  interest  thereon,  with
  interest  on  any  unpaid  installments  of  interest, and all costs and
  expenses in connection with any action or proceeding by or on behalf  of
  such holders, are fully met and discharged.  The agency is authorized to
  include this pledge and agreement of the state in any agreement with the
  holders of such notes or bonds.




   §  49.  State's  right to require redemption of bonds. Notwithstanding
  and in addition to any provisions for the redemption of bonds which  may
  be  contained  in  any contract with the holders of the bonds, the state
  may, upon furnishing sufficient funds therefor, require  the  agency  to
  redeem,  prior  to  maturity,  as  a  whole,  any  issue of bonds on any
  interest payment date not less than twenty years after the date  of  the
  bonds  of  such issue at one hundred five per centum of their face value
  and accrued interest or  at  such  lower  redemption  price  as  may  be
  provided  in  the  bonds in case of the redemption thereof as a whole on
  the redemption date. Notice of such redemption shall be published in  at
  least  two  newspapers  publishing  and  circulating respectively in the
  cities of Albany and New York at least twice, the first  publication  to
  be at least thirty days before the date of redemption. The provisions of
  this  section  relating  to  the  state's right to require redemption of
  bonds, shall not apply to state-supported debt, as  defined  in  section
  sixty-seven-a  of  the  state  finance  law,  issued by the agency. Such
  agency bonds shall remain subject to redemption pursuant to any contract
  with the holders of such bonds.




   §  50.  Remedies  of noteholders and bondholders. 1. In the event that
  the agency shall default in the payment of principal of or  interest  on
  any  issue of notes or bonds after the same shall become due, whether at
  maturity or upon call for redemption, and such  default  shall  continue
  for  a period of thirty days, or in the event that the agency shall fail
  or refuse to comply with  the  provisions  of  this  article,  or  shall
  default  in any agreement made with the holders of any issue of notes or
  bonds, the holders of twenty-five  per  centum  in  aggregate  principal
  amount  of  the  notes  or  bonds  of  such  issue  then outstanding, by
  instrument or instruments filed in the office of the clerk of the county
  of Albany and approved or acknowledged in the same manner as a  deed  to
  be  recorded,  may  appoint  a  trustee to represent the holders of such
  notes or bonds for the purposes herein provided.
    2. Such trustee may, and  upon  written  request  of  the  holders  of
  twenty-five  per  centum in principal amount of such notes or bonds then
  outstanding shall, in his or its own name:
    (a) by action or special  proceeding  in  accordance  with  the  civil
  practice  law  and  rules,  enforce  all  rights  of  the noteholders or
  bondholders, including the right to require the agency to  collect  fees
  and  charges  and  interest  and amortization payments on mortgage loans
  made by it adequate to carry out any agreement as to, or pledge of, such
  fees  and  charges  and  interest  and  amortization  payments  on  such
  mortgages,  and  other properties and to require the agency to carry out
  any other agreements with the holders of such  notes  or  bonds  and  to
  perform its duties under this title;
    (b) bring suit upon such notes or bonds;
    (c)  by  action or special proceeding require the agency to account as
  if it were the trustee of an express trust for the holders of such notes
  or bonds;
    (d) by action or special proceeding enjoin any acts  or  things  which
  may  be  unlawful  or  in violation of the rights of the holders of such
  notes or bonds;
    (e) declare all such notes or  bonds  due  and  payable,  and  if  all
  defaults  shall  be  made good, then, with the consent of the holders of
  twenty-five per centum of the principal amount of such  notes  or  bonds
  then outstanding, to annul such declaration and its consequences.
    3.  Such  trustee  shall in addition to the foregoing have and possess
  all of the powers necessary or  appropriate  for  the  exercise  of  any
  functions  specifically  set  forth  herein  or  incident to the general
  representation of bondholders or  noteholders  in  the  enforcement  and
  protection of their rights.
    4.  The  supreme  court shall have jurisdiction of any suit, action or
  proceeding by the trustee on behalf of such noteholders or  bondholders.
  The  venue  of  any such suit, action or proceeding shall be laid in the
  county of Albany.
    5. Before declaring due and payable the principal of  notes  or  bonds
  issued  in  connection  with any mortgage or other obligation securing a
  mortgage loan made by the agency, the trustee shall  first  give  thirty
  days'  notice  in  writing  to  the  governor,  to  the  agency,  to the
  commissioner of housing and community renewal, the state commissioner of
  health,  the  state  commissioner  of  mental  hygiene  or   the   state
  commissioner of social services, as the case may be, and to the attorney
  general of the state.




   §  51.  Monies  of  the agency. 1. All monies of the agency, except as
  otherwise authorized or provided in this article, shall be paid  to  the
  commissioner  of  taxation and finance as agent of the agency, who shall
  not commingle such monies with any other monies. Such  monies  shall  be
  deposited  in  a  separate  bank account or accounts. The monies in such
  accounts shall be paid out on  checks  signed  by  the  commissioner  of
  taxation  and finance on requisition of the chairman of the agency or of
  such other officer or employee or officers or employees  as  the  agency
  shall  authorize  to  make such requisition. All deposits of such monies
  shall, if required by the commissioner of taxation and  finance  or  the
  agency,  be  secured by obligations of the United States or of the state
  of a market value equal at all times to the amount of  the  deposit  and
  all  banks  and trust companies are authorized to give such security for
  such deposits.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the agency shall  have
  power,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the commissioner of taxation and
  finance, to contract with the holders of any of its notes or  bonds,  as
  to  the  custody,  collection,  securing, investment, and payment of any
  monies of the agency, of any monies held in trust or otherwise  for  the
  payment  of  notes or bonds, and to carry out such contract. Monies held
  in trust or otherwise for the payment of notes or bonds or in any way to
  secure notes or bonds and deposits of such monies may be secured in  the
  same  manner  as monies of the agency, and all banks and trust companies
  are authorized to give such security for such deposits.
    2. Subject to agreements with  noteholders  and  bondholders  and  the
  approval  of  the  comptroller,  the  agency shall prescribe a system of
  accounts.
    3. The comptroller,  or  his  legally  authorized  representative,  is
  hereby  authorized  and empowered from time to time to examine the books
  and accounts  of  the  agency  including  its  receipts,  disbursements,
  contracts,  reserve  funds,  sinking  funds,  investments, and any other
  matters relating to its financial standing. Such an examination shall be
  conducted by the comptroller at least once  in  every  five  years;  the
  comptroller  is  authorized, however, to accept from the agency, in lieu
  of such an  examination,  an  external  examination  of  its  books  and
  accounts made at the request of the agency.
    4.  The  agency  shall  submit to the governor, chairman of the senate
  finance committee, chairman of the assembly ways and means committee and
  the comptroller, within thirty  days  of  the  receipt  thereof  by  the
  agency,  a copy of the report of every external examination of the books
  and accounts of the agency other than copies  of  the  reports  of  such
  examinations made by the comptroller.




   §  51-a.  Federal  rental  assistance program administrative fees. All
  administrative fee monies  received  by  the  agency  from  the  federal
  government pursuant to section eight of the United States housing act of
  1937,  as  amended  by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974
  and subsequent amendments, shall be allocated according to the following
  schedule:
    1.  ninety  percent  of  such  fees  shall   be   allocated   to   the
  not-for-profit  corporations  or  local  government  agencies  providing
  services under such section eight;
    2. ten percent of such fees shall be retained by the state and  unless
  otherwise  allocated pursuant to an agreement between the agency and the
  division of housing and community renewal:
    (a) ninety-five percent of such  amount  shall  be  allocated  to  the
  division of housing and community renewal; and
    (b) five percent shall be retained by the agency.




   §  52. Notes and bonds as legal investment. The notes and bonds of the
  agency are hereby made securities  in  which  all  public  officers  and
  bodies  of this state and all municipalities and municipal subdivisions,
  all insurance companies and associations, and other persons carrying  on
  an  insurance  business,  all  banks,  bankers, trust companies, savings
  banks and savings associations, including savings and loan associations,
  building and loan associations, investment companies and  other  persons
  carrying   on   a   banking  business,  all  administrators,  guardians,
  executors,  trustees  and  other  fiduciaries,  and  all  other  persons
  whatsoever who are now or may hereafter be authorized to invest in bonds
  or  other  obligations  of  the  state,  may properly and legally invest
  funds, including capital, in their control or belonging to them.




   §  53. Exemption from taxation of property and income. The property of
  the agency and its income and operations shall be exempt from taxation.




   §  54.  Exemption  from  taxation  of  notes  and  bonds. It is hereby
  determined that the creation of the agency is in all  respects  for  the
  benefit  of  the  people  of  the state and for the improvement of their
  health, safety, welfare, comfort and security, and  that  said  purposes
  are  public purposes and that the agency will be performing an essential
  governmental function in the exercise of the powers conferred upon it by
  this article. The state covenants with the purchasers and all subsequent
  holders and transferees of notes and bonds  issued  by  the  agency,  in
  consideration  of the acceptance of and payment for the notes and bonds,
  that the notes and bonds of the agency, issued pursuant to this  article
  and  the  income  therefrom  and  all  its fees, charges, gifts, grants,
  revenues, receipts, and other monies received or to be received, pledged
  to pay or secure the payment of such notes or bonds shall at  all  times
  be  free  from  taxation,  except for estate and gift taxes and taxes on
  transfers.




   §   55.   Assistance   by  state  officers,  departments,  boards  and
  commissions.  1. The department of audit and control, department of law,
  commissioner of housing and division of housing,  and  all  other  state
  officers, departments, boards, divisions and commissions may render such
  services  to  the  agency  within  their  respective functions as may be
  requested by the agency.
    2. The commissioner of housing and community renewal and the  division
  of housing and community renewal are hereby designated to act for and in
  behalf of the agency in servicing the mortgage loans and equity loans of
  the  agency,  except  mortgage loans made to hospital corporations which
  are eligible borrowers as  defined  in  article  twenty-eight-B  of  the
  public health law, nursing home companies, non-profit corporations which
  are  eligible borrowers as defined in title five-A of article six of the
  social  services  law,  or  companies  incorporated  pursuant   to   the
  not-for-profit  corporations  law and article seventy-five of the mental
  hygiene law, and in carrying out the provisions of section  forty-four-a
  of  this  article,  and  shall  perform  such  functions and services in
  connection with the making, servicing and collection of such  loans  and
  pursuant  to  such  section  forty-four-a  of  this  article as shall be
  requested by the agency. The agency shall pay to the division of housing
  and community renewal from any of the monies available for such purpose,
  such amounts as are necessary to reimburse it for the  reasonable  costs
  of  the  services performed by the commissioner of housing and community
  renewal and the division of housing and community  renewal  pursuant  to
  this section.
    3. The state commissioner of health and the state department of health
  are  hereby  designated  to  act  for  and  in  behalf  of the agency in
  servicing the nursing home company mortgage loans of the agency and  the
  mortgage loans of the agency to hospital corporations which are eligible
  borrowers as defined in article twenty-eight-B of the public health law,
  and  shall  perform  such  functions and services in connection with the
  making, servicing and collection of such loans as shall be requested  by
  the  agency.  The  agency shall pay to the department of health from any
  monies of the agency available for such purpose,  such  amounts  as  are
  necessary  to reimburse the department of health for the reasonable cost
  of the services performed by the commissioner of health  and  department
  of health pursuant to this section.
    4.  The state commissioner of social services and the state department
  of social services are hereby designated to act for and in behalf of the
  agency in servicing the youth facilities project mortgage loans  of  the
  agency  and shall perform such functions and services in connection with
  the making, servicing and collection of such loans as shall be requested
  by the agency. The agency shall pay to the department of social services
  from any monies of the agency available for such purpose,  such  amounts
  as  are necessary to reimburse the department of social services for the
  reasonable cost of the services performed by the commissioner of  social
  services and department of social services pursuant to this section.
    5.  The  state commissioner of mental hygiene and the state department
  of mental hygiene are hereby designated to act for and in behalf of  the
  agency   in   servicing   the   community  mental  health  services  and
  developmental disabilities services  companies  mortgage  loans  of  the
  agency  and shall perform such functions and services in connection with
  the making, servicing and collection of such loans as shall be requested
  by the agency. The agency shall pay to the department of mental  hygiene
  from  any  monies of the agency available for such purpose, such amounts
  as are necessary to reimburse the department of mental hygiene  for  the
  reasonable  cost of the services performed by the commissioner of mental
  hygiene and department of  mental  hygiene  pursuant  to  this  section,


 including  such  amounts  as  are  necessary to reimburse the health and
  mental hygiene facilities improvement  corporation  for  the  reasonable
  cost  of  such  services  performed  by  the  health  and mental hygiene
  facilities  improvement  corporation upon request by the commissioner of
  mental hygiene pursuant to the provisions of section 75.25 of the mental
  hygiene law.
    6. The department of social services of  the  state  of  New  York  is
  hereby  designated  to  act for and in behalf of the agency in servicing
  the community senior citizens centers and  services  companies  mortgage
  loans  of  the  agency  and shall perform such functions and services in
  connection with the making, servicing and collection of  such  loans  as
  shall  be  requested  by  the  agency.  The  agency  shall  pay  to such
  department from any moneys of the agency available  for  such  purposes,
  such  amounts  as  are  necessary  to  reimburse such department for the
  reasonable cost of the services performed by such department pursuant to
  this section.






	   * §  56.  Reports.  1.  The  agency  shall submit to the governor, the
  chairman of the senate finance committee, the chairman of  the  assembly
  ways and means committee, the comptroller and the director of the budget
  within  ninety  days  after  the  end of its fiscal year, a complete and
  detailed report setting forth: (1) its operations  and  accomplishments;
  (2)  its receipts and expenditures during such fiscal year in accordance
  with the categories or classifications established by the agency for its
  operating and capital  outlay  purposes,  including  a  listing  of  all
  private  consultants  engaged  by  the  agency on a contract basis and a
  statement of the total amount paid to each such private consultant;  (3)
  its  assets  and  liabilities at the end of its fiscal year, including a
  schedule of its  mortgage  loans  and  commitments  and  the  status  of
  reserve,  special  or  other  funds; and (4) a schedule of its bonds and
  notes outstanding at the  end  of  its  fiscal  year,  together  with  a
  statement of the amounts redeemed and incurred during such fiscal year.
    2.  The agency shall provide the commissioner of housing and community
  renewal, on  a  timely  basis,  with  the  data  and  other  information
  necessary  to compile the report or reports required pursuant to section
  twenty of the public housing law.
    * NB Effective until July 23, 2025
    * § 56. Annual report. The agency shall submit to  the  governor,  the
  chairman  of  the senate finance committee, the chairman of the assembly
  ways and means committee, the comptroller and the director of the budget
  within ninety days after the end of its  fiscal  year,  a  complete  and
  detailed  report  setting forth: (1) its operations and accomplishments;
  (2) its receipts and expenditures during such fiscal year in  accordance
  with the categories or classifications established by the agency for its
  operating  and  capital  outlay  purposes,  including  a  listing of all
  private consultants engaged by the agency on  a  contract  basis  and  a
  statement  of the total amount paid to each such private consultant; (3)
  its assets and liabilities at the end of its fiscal  year,  including  a
  schedule  of  its  mortgage  loans  and  commitments  and  the status of
  reserve, special or other funds; and (4) a schedule  of  its  bonds  and
  notes  outstanding  at  the  end  of  its  fiscal  year, together with a
  statement of the amounts redeemed and incurred during such fiscal year.
    * NB Effective July 23, 2025




   §  56-a. Indemnification of members, officers and employees. The state
  shall save harmless and indemnify the respective members,  officers  and
  employees  of  the  agency  and  its subsidiary corporations pursuant to
  section seventeen of the public officers law against any claim,  demand,
  suit or judgment arising by reason of any act or omission to act by such
  member, officer or employee occurring in the discharge of his duties and
  within  the  scope  of  his  service  on  behalf  of  the  agency or its
  subsidiary corporations. In the event of  any  claim,  demand,  suit  or
  judgment  based  on allegations that financial loss was sustained by any
  person in connection with the acquisition,  disposition  or  holding  of
  notes,  bonds  or  other obligations of the agency, a member, officer or
  employee  of  the  agency  shall  be  saved  harmless  and   indemnified
  notwithstanding  any  limitations  contained  in such section seventeen,
  unless such individual is found by a final judicial determination not to
  have acted, in good faith, for a purpose which he reasonably believed to
  be in the best interests of the agency or not  to  have  had  reasonable
  cause  to  believe that his conduct was lawful. All of the provisions of
  section seventeen of the public officers law which are not  inconsistent
  with  this section shall apply to the members, officers and employees of
  the agency or its  subsidiary  corporations,  including  the  provisions
  relating  to  the  defense by the attorney general or private counsel of
  any civil action and the payment of legal costs incurred  in  connection
  with  the defense of any such action. Any member, officer or employee of
  the agency or its subsidiary corporations seeking to be  saved  harmless
  or indemnified or to claim any other benefits available pursuant to this
  section  or  section  seventeen  of the public officers law shall comply
  with the procedural requirements of such section seventeen. As  used  in
  this  section the terms "member", "officer" and "employee" shall include
  a former member, officer or employee, his estate or judicially appointed
  personal representative.




   §  57.  Insured  mortgage reserve fund. 1. The agency shall create and
  establish a special fund, to be known as the  insured  mortgage  reserve
  fund,  and  shall  pay  into  such fund all monies appropriated and made
  available by the state for the purposes  of  such  fund  and  any  other
  monies  from  any other source or sources available therefor. The monies
  held in such fund shall be used (1) to  meet  the  agency's  obligations
  under  an  agreement with the federal government pursuant to subdivision
  twenty-eight of section forty-four of this  article,  (2)  to  meet  the
  agency's  obligations  to  pay  the  principal  of and interest on notes
  issued for the purpose of making a mortgage  loan  to  a  company  which
  mortgage  loan  or  a  subsequent mortgage loan to such company has been
  insured by the federal government, only however to the extent  that  all
  other  revenues  of  the  agency,  including  the  proceeds of any sale,
  assignment or other disposition  of  a  mortgage  loan  insured  by  the
  federal  government,  available  for such purposes are not sufficient to
  meet such obligations of the agency, (3) to establish escrow accounts as
  may be required by  the  federal  government  as  a  condition  for  the
  issuance of mortgage insurance, (4) to pay for installation of such life
  safety  devices  as  may  be  required  by  the federal government which
  devices are in addition to and not in substitution for  any  requirement
  heretofore  imposed on the company, and (5) to pay closing costs arising
  out of the company's  obtaining  mortgage  insurance  from  the  federal
  government.  Any  income  or  interest  earned  by,  or increment to the
  insured mortgage reserve  fund  may  be  used  for  authorized  purposes
  including,  but  not limited to, the addition of such income or interest
  earned, or increment to the monies held in such fund  for  the  purposes
  herein provided, the repayment of appropriation expenditures made to the
  credit  of  such  fund, or to secure the payment of the principal of and
  interest on notes or revenue housing bonds.  Any portion of  the  monies
  held  in  such  fund  shall,  if  the federal government so requires, be
  segregated from any other portion thereof and applied solely to meet the
  agency's obligations under any agreement made  pursuant  to  subdivision
  twenty-eight   of  section  forty-four,  provided  that  the  amount  so
  segregated shall not  exceed  the  maximum  obligation  under  any  such
  contract or contracts.




   §  58.  Special revenue housing coverage reserve funds. The agency may
  create and establish one or more special funds to be  known  as  special
  revenue  housing  coverage  reserve  funds and may pay into such reserve
  funds any monies appropriated and made available by the  state  for  the
  purpose  of  such funds and any other monies which may be made available
  to the agency for the purposes of such funds from any  other  source  or
  sources.  The  monies  held  in  or credited to any such fund, except as
  hereinafter provided, shall be  used  solely  for  the  payment  of  the
  principal  of  or  interest  on  the revenue housing bonds of the agency
  secured by such fund as the same shall become due, whether  at  maturity
  or  upon  call  for  redemption,  and  for the payment of any redemption
  premium required to be paid  when  such  bonds  are  redeemed  prior  to
  maturity.  Any  income  or  interest earned by, or increment to any such
  special revenue housing coverage reserve fund may be used for authorized
  purposes including, but not limited to, the addition of such  income  or
  interest  earned,  or  increment to the monies held in such fund for the
  purposes herein provided, or the repayment of appropriation expenditures
  made to the credit of such fund.




   §  59.  Bond  reserve  insurance  fund.  The  agency  shall create and
  establish a special fund, to be known as the bond reserve insurance fund
  and shall pay into such fund all monies appropriated and made  available
  by  the  state  for the purposes of such fund and any other monies which
  may be made available to the agency for the purposes of such  fund  from
  any  other  source  or  sources.    All  monies held in the bond reserve
  insurance fund shall  be  used  by  the  agency  to  meet  the  agency's
  obligation  to  repay  principal  and interest on its outstanding bonds,
  solely to the extent all other revenues of the agency available for such
  purposes are not sufficient to meet such obligations of the agency.  Any
  income or interest earned by, or increment to the bond reserve insurance
  fund may be used for authorized purposes including, but not limited  to,
  the  addition  of  such  income  or interest earned, or increment to the
  monies held in such fund  for  the  purposes  herein  provided,  or  the
  repayment of appropriation expenditures made to the credit of such fund.




   § 59-a. Housing trust fund account. The housing trust fund corporation
  created  by  section  forty-five-a  of  this  chapter  shall  create and
  establish a special account to  be  known  as  the  housing  trust  fund
  account  and  shall  pay  into such account any moneys which may be made
  available to such corporation for the purposes of such account from  any
  source  including  but  not  limited  to moneys appropriated by and made
  available pursuant to appropriation by  the  state  and  any  income  or
  interest  earned  by, or increment to, the account due to the investment
  thereof or loans made pursuant to article eighteen of this chapter.  The
  moneys held in or credited to the housing trust fund account established
  under  this section shall be expended solely to carry out the provisions
  of article eighteen of this chapter.




   § 59-b. Affordable housing development account. The affordable housing
  corporation created by section forty-five-b of this chapter shall create
  and  establish  a  special account to be known as the affordable housing
  development account and shall pay into such account any moneys which may
  be made available to such corporation for the purposes of  such  account
  from  any source including but not limited to moneys appropriated by and
  made available pursuant to appropriation by the state and any income  or
  interest  earned  by, or increment to, the account due to the investment
  thereof or loans made pursuant to article nineteen of this chapter.  The
  moneys held in or credited to the affordable housing development account
  established under this section shall be expended solely to carry out the
  provisions of article nineteen of this chapter.




   §  59-c.  Insured housing initiatives fund. 1. The agency shall create
  and establish a  special  fund  to  be  known  as  the  insured  housing
  initiatives  fund  and  shall pay into such fund any moneys which may be
  made available to the agency for the purposes  of  such  fund  from  any
  source,  including,  but not limited to, moneys appropriated by and made
  available pursuant to appropriation by  the  state  and  any  income  or
  interest  earned  by,  or  increment  to, the fund due to the investment
  thereof or moneys payable to the agency under any contract entered  into
  pursuant  to subdivision two of this section.  Subject to the provisions
  of any contract  with  bondholders  and  noteholders  and  any  contract
  authorized  pursuant  to  this  section  for the provision of insurance,
  letters of credit or other financial mechanisms, the moneys held  in  or
  credited  to the insured housing initiatives fund established under this
  subdivision, in the discretion of the  agency,  shall  be  used  by  the
  agency  in  accordance with subdivision two of this section to enable it
  to reduce the debt service that would otherwise be payable by the agency
  on its bonds, notes and other obligations issued to make loans  pursuant
  to  subdivision twenty-nine-a of section forty-four of this article, and
  thereby to reduce the obligations of the borrower  to  the  agency.  The
  reduction  in  debt  service  as  a  result of any contract entered into
  pursuant to subdivision two of this section shall result solely  in  the
  reduction  of  rents  payable  by  low  income  individuals  or families
  residing in those units in the housing development assisted by the  fund
  that  are  required  to  be occupied by such individuals or families for
  interest on obligations issued to finance such housing development to be
  exempt from taxation pursuant  to  section  103(b)(4)  of  the  internal
  revenue  code of 1954, as amended. Provided, however, to the extent that
  such rents for such units are affordable to persons  or  families  whose
  income  is  not in excess of sixty-five percent of median income for the
  area, as defined by the agency, then any remaining savings  or  benefits
  shall  be applied to the further reduction of such rents for such units,
  and/or the reduction of rents payable by other low income individuals or
  families residing in the  housing  development  assisted  by  such  fund
  and/or  the  increase  in  the  occupancy  of  low income individuals or
  families residing in such housing development in excess of that required
  pursuant to section 103(b)(4) of the internal revenue code of  1954,  as
  amended.
    2. The agency may enter into contracts for the provision of insurance,
  letters  of credit or other financial mechanisms designed to reduce such
  debt service on bonds, notes and other  obligations  of  the  agency  in
  accordance  with  this  section,  so long as such obligations receive an
  investment grade rating from a recognized rating agency. The moneys held
  in or credited to the fund shall not be used to pay the principal of  or
  interest on such obligations of the agency, the principal of or interest
  on  the  obligations  of  the  borrower to the agency or any fees of the
  agency.
    3. For the purposes  of  this  section,  "low  income  individuals  or
  families"  shall  mean  persons or families with incomes of no more than
  eighty percent of the median income for the  area,  as  defined  by  the
  agency.
    4.  The agency shall account separately for all moneys received by the
  fund.




   §  59-d.  Turnkey/enhanced  housing  account.  The  housing trust fund
  corporation created by section forty-five-a of this article shall create
  and establish a special account to be  known  as  the  "turnkey/enhanced
  housing account" and shall pay into such account any moneys which may be
  made available to such corporation for the purposes of such account from
  any  source including but not limited to moneys appropriated by and made
  available pursuant to appropriation by  the  state  and  any  income  or
  interest  earned  by, or increment to, the account due to the investment
  thereof or loans made from the account pursuant to article eighteen-A of
  this chapter. The moneys held in or  credited  to  the  turnkey/enhanced
  housing  account established under this section shall be expended solely
  to carry out the provisions of  and  to  pay  expenses  associated  with
  article eighteen-A of this chapter.




   §  59-e.  Infrastructure development fund. The agency shall create and
  establish a special fund to be known as the "infrastructure  development
  fund"  and  shall  pay  into  such  fund  any  moneys  which may be made
  available to the corporation for the purposes  of  such  fund  from  any
  source,  including  but  not  limited to moneys appropriated by and made
  available pursuant to appropriation by  the  state  and  any  income  or
  interest  earned  by,  or  increment  to, the fund due to the investment
  thereof. The moneys held in or credited to the fund  shall  be  expended
  solely  to  carry  out  the provisions of and to pay expenses associated
  with article twenty-one of this chapter.




   § 59-g. Permanent housing for homeless families fund. The agency shall
  create  and  establish  a  special  fund  to  be known as the "permanent
  housing for homeless families fund" and shall pay  into  such  fund  any
  moneys  which  may  be  made available to the agency for the purposes of
  such  fund  from  any  source,  including  but  not  limited  to  moneys
  appropriated  by  and  made  available  pursuant to appropriation by the
  state and moneys made available by  cities  with  a  population  of  one
  million  or  more and any income or interest earned by, or increment to,
  the fund due to the investment thereof. The moneys held in  or  credited
  to  the fund shall be expended solely to carry out the provisions of and
  to pay expenses associated with article three-A of this chapter.




   §  59-h.  Manufactured home cooperative fund.  The agency shall create
  and establish a special fund  to  be  known  as  the  manufactured  home
  cooperative  fund  and  shall pay into such fund any moneys which may be
  made available to such agency for the purposes of  such  fund  from  any
  source  including  but  not  limited  to moneys appropriated by and made
  available pursuant  to  appropriation  by  the  state,  civil  penalties
  imposed pursuant to subdivision v of section two hundred thirty-three of
  the  real  property  law  and  any income or loan repayments or interest
  earned by, or increment to, the fund due to the  investment  thereof  or
  loans  made  pursuant to article twenty of this chapter. The moneys held
  in or credited to the manufactured  home  cooperative  fund  established
  under  this section shall be expended solely to carry out the provisions
  of article twenty of this chapter.




   §  59-i. Homeless housing and assistance account. The homeless housing
  and assistance corporation  created  by  section  forty-five-c  of  this
  chapter  shall create and establish a special account to be known as the
  homeless housing and assistance account and shall pay into such  account
  any  moneys  which  may  be  made  available to such corporation for the
  purposes of such account from any source including but  not  limited  to
  moneys  appropriated  by and made available pursuant to appropriation by
  the state and any income or interest earned by,  or  increment  to,  the
  account due to the investment thereof. The moneys held in or credited to
  the  homeless  housing  and  assistance  account  established under this
  section shall be expended solely to carry out the  provisions  of  title
  one of article two-A of the social services law.




   § 60. Housing project repair fund. 1. As used in this section, (a) the
  term  "current  economic  rent"  shall mean the rent or carrying charges
  determined by the commissioner to be sufficient,  together  with  monies
  available  to the company from the state, the federal government, or any
  other source, to provide for the payment of  (i)  all  current  mortgage
  interest,  fees,  charges,  and  amortization,  (ii)  all  current  real
  property taxes and water and sewer charges, or payments in lieu thereof,
  (iii) all other current operating expenses of the project, and (iv)  all
  current  payments  into  reserve  funds  required  by  the commissioner;
  provided,  however,  that  any  payments  required  for   reserves   for
  replacements shall be in an amount which on an aggregate annual basis is
  not  less  than  six-tenths  of one percent of the cost for constructing
  such project as determined by the commissioner, except that in the  case
  of a project receiving payments pursuant to this section which otherwise
  would be made from such reserve for replacements, the commissioner shall
  take  such  payments into account in determining the necessary amount of
  payments to reserves for replacements; and
    (b) the term "total economic rent" shall mean the sum of  the  current
  economic  rent, as defined in paragraph (a) of this subdivision, plus an
  amount  sufficient  to  amortize  all  mortgage  repayment   arrearages,
  including  fees  and  charges,  and  all  real  property tax arrearages,
  including applicable interest, if any, and all water  and  sewer  charge
  arrearages, including applicable interest, if any, of the company.
    2.  The  agency shall create and establish a special fund, to be known
  as the housing project repair fund and shall  pay  into  such  fund  all
  monies  appropriated  and  made available to the agency by the state for
  the purposes of such fund  and  any  other  monies  which  may  be  made
  available  to  the  agency  for the purposes of such fund from any other
  source or sources.
    3. Monies held in the housing project repair fund may be used  by  the
  agency to provide for the correction of construction-related problems in
  housing  projects  financed  by  the  agency  by  means of the necessary
  repair, reconstruction or replacement of any of the facilities  or  site
  conditions, the cost of which was included in the project cost and which
  form  an integral part of the project, and for such other purposes which
  may be necessary  to  effectuate  the  provisions  of  this  section.  A
  construction-related  problem shall mean any deficiency or defect in the
  design, construction or site preparation of a  project,  its  buildings,
  utilities  and  grounds;  provided,  however, a deficiency which results
  from conformance to design and construction standards in effect  at  the
  time  of  such  construction  shall  not  constitute such a construction
  related problem. The agency shall not expend monies  from  the  fund  as
  payment   to   any   housing   company   for   the   correction   of   a
  construction-related problem unless the following conditions  have  been
  met:
    a.   The  agency  has  either  (1)  received  a  certification  by  an
  independent consultant with appropriate qualifications  engaged  by  the
  agency  certifying  (i)  the scope and total cost of the corrective work
  required to be performed at the project after taking into  consideration
  emergency conditions, if any, which may exist, and such other factors as
  may  be  appropriate; (ii) the cost effectiveness of alternative methods
  of performing the corrective work; and (iii) the  extent  to  which  the
  corrective  work  to  be  performed  results from a construction-related
  problem, or (2) equivalent findings have been  made  in  arbitration  or
  other fact finding procedures established by agreement between a housing
  company, the commissioner and the agency; and
    b.  The  agency has found and determined that (i) the projected annual
  aggregate rent revenues for the project and any other  monies  available


 to  the company from the state or federal government or any other source
  as certified by the commissioner constitute current  economic  rent,  or
  (ii)  a  mortgage  modification agreement has been entered into with the
  housing  company which operates the project, after consultation with the
  commissioner and in accordance  with  the  guidelines  approved  by  the
  director  of the budget. Such a mortgage modification agreement shall be
  entered into only in  the  event  that  the  agency  projects  that  the
  imposition  of  total  economic  rent  will  require the company to vary
  rental rates or carrying charges by an amount that  exceeds  the  rental
  rates  or  carrying  charges of a company in effect immediately prior to
  the date of such a modification by the greater of  twenty  percentum  or
  ten  dollars  per  room per month. A mortgage modification agreement may
  permit the variation of rental rates or carrying charges over  a  period
  agreed  upon  by  the  agency  and  the  housing  company  not to exceed
  seventy-five months from the effective date of the initial variation  in
  rental  rates or carrying charges so as to result in the imposition of a
  current economic rent level at a date no later than the beginning of the
  seventy-sixth month, and shall make provision for  the  payment  by  the
  housing  company  of all current real property taxes and water and sewer
  charges, or payments in lieu thereof, and for the payment by the housing
  company of (i) all real property tax  arrearages,  including  applicable
  interest,  if  any,  over  a period not to exceed fifteen years from the
  effective date of the initial variation  in  rental  rates  or  carrying
  charges,   (ii)   all  water  and  sewer  charge  arrearages,  including
  applicable interest, if any, over a period not to exceed  fifteen  years
  from  the  effective  date  of  the initial variation in rental rates or
  carrying charges, (iii) all  mortgage  repayment  arrearages,  including
  fees  and charges, over a period not to exceed the scheduled date of the
  expiration of the mortgage repayment period pursuant to  the  provisions
  of  the  original  mortgage and (iv) any mortgage repayment deficiencies
  accumulated during the term of the mortgage modification agreement  over
  a period not to exceed ten years from the expiration of such agreement.
    4.  Monies shall not be available from the fund to reimburse a housing
  company for work performed  or  contracted  on  account  of  which  such
  housing  company  has received a credit against monies otherwise payable
  to the agency as mortgage repayments prior to the effective date of this
  section, nor for work required to maintain, or correct  deficiencies  or
  defects  in,  construction performed or contracted for by a municipality
  or public utility, nor for work for which federal monies  are  available
  as  determined  by  the  commissioner,  and  the agency shall not expend
  monies beyond those  required  to  meet  the  portion  of  the  cost  of
  correction  of  a  condition  which  constitutes  a construction-related
  problem, as determined by the agency;  provided,  however,  that  monies
  from  the  fund  may  be  used  to pay for the costs associated with the
  hiring of an independent consultant engaged by the agency to  effectuate
  the  purposes  of  this  section  and  for  otherwise  administering the
  provisions of this section.
    5. Notwithstanding any other provision  of  this  section  the  agency
  shall allocate fifteen per centum of the monies from the fund as payment
  to  housing  companies  financed  by  the agency or the state for energy
  conservation improvements  or  tenant  health  and  safety  improvements
  provided that the following conditions are met:
    a.  The agency has received a certification from the commissioner that
  energy saving or other modifications to  the  project  will  either  (i)
  result  in  savings  projected over a seven year term or (ii) rectify an
  imminent threat to tenant health and safety, and there is no alternative
  source of funding to make such modifications.


   b. The agency has reviewed the findings of the commissioner and is  in
  agreement with such findings.
    c.  The  agency has determined that the requirements of paragraph b of
  subdivision three of this section have been satisfied.
    d. The agency  has  determined  that  a  plan  for  performing  energy
  conservation  or  tenant  health and safety improvements as submitted by
  the housing company is the most cost-effective alternative available  to
  the housing company.
    The agency shall apportion such allocations among housing companies in
  an  equitable  manner  and shall not make any such allocation in a given
  year to a housing company which will, in such year, receive ten  percent
  or  more  of  the  monies  available  in  the fund for the correction of
  construction-related problems.
    6. To assist in the administration of  this  section,  the  agency  is
  authorized  to request the assistance of and utilize the services of any
  state  department,  agency,  board,   commission   or   public   benefit
  corporation,  and  any  such  department,  agency,  board, commission or
  public benefit corporation is authorized to provide such assistance  and
  service.
    7.  Nothing  contained  in  this  section  or in the administration or
  application hereof shall be construed as creating any private  right  of
  action on the part of any persons, firm or corporation against the state
  of  New York, the agency, the division of housing and community renewal,
  or any officer or employee thereof  based  upon  a  construction-related
  problem  and  neither the certification or finding of the existence of a
  construction-related  problem  as  provided  in  this  section  nor  the
  implementation  of  the  provisions of this section may be asserted as a
  defense by way of answer, counterclaim, or otherwise in  any  action  or
  proceeding  brought  to  enforce  the  provisions  of  a mortgage or any
  related agreement made by the agency  with  respect  to  a  project,  or
  brought by the commissioner with respect to a project, or brought by the
  commissioner  to  enforce  any  of the provisions of this chapter or any
  order made by him pursuant to this chapter. In  any  case  where  monies
  held  in  the  housing project repair fund have been expended to provide
  for the correction of any construction-related problem, the agency shall
  accede to any and all rights and remedies which the housing  company  on
  whose behalf such payment was made may have against any third party with
  respect  to  any such construction-related problem to the extent of such
  payment.
    8. Notwithstanding any other provisions of  this  section,  no  monies
  shall be expended from the housing project repair fund unless the agency
  has  submitted  a plan to the director of the budget and the comptroller
  describing the work required to repair the construction-related or other
  problem, or problems, which also describes the method to be used for the
  awarding of contracts for such work, and the director of the budget  and
  the  comptroller  have  approved the plan and all contracts let pursuant
  thereto as being in accordance with the provisions of this  section  and
  in  accordance with subdivision two of section one hundred twelve of the
  state finance law. In addition, no monies shall  be  expended  from  the
  housing  project  repair  fund  unless  the  director  of the budget has
  approved a plan detailing the scheduling of the work to be performed  to
  repair  any  such  construction-related or other problem or problems and
  the scheduling of the  payments  for  total  cost  of  the  work  to  be
  performed.  In  addition,  no  monies in excess of the total cost of any
  corrective work certified in accordance with paragraph a of  subdivision
  three  of  this  section  shall  be  expended from such fund without the
  approval of the director of the budget.


   9. Notwithstanding any other law, no monies shall be provided pursuant
  to this section unless a company shall require the tenants and occupants
  residing in the housing project or projects to submit an  annual  income
  affidavit  as  prescribed by the commissioner or the supervising agency,
  as  the  case  may  be,  together  with  proper  documentation as and if
  prescribed by the commissioner or the supervising agency,  as  the  case
  may be. Upon submission of such affidavit and documentation, if any, the
  company  shall  assess  such tenant or occupant the rental surcharge, if
  applicable, prescribed pursuant to section thirty-one of this chapter on
  the basis of the verified income of such  tenant  or  occupant.  If  the
  tenant   or   occupant   shall   fail   to  submit  such  affidavit  and
  documentation, or if such verification shall result  in  a  disagreement
  caused  by  understatement of income and the tenant shall have failed to
  correct such original affidavit and documentation on forms specified  by
  the  commissioner within sixty days of notification by certified mail by
  the commissioner addressed to the  tenant,  the  commissioner  shall  so
  notify  the  company. Thereupon, the company shall assess such tenant or
  occupant the maximum rental  surcharge  permitted  pursuant  to  section
  thirty-one of this chapter, and provided further, that the company, with
  the  approval of the commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case
  may be, may proceed to remove said tenant or occupant from occupancy  on
  the  ground  that  said tenant or occupant has materially misrepresented
  income. The failure of the tenant to accurately verify such income shall
  be prima facie evidence that such material misrepresentation was made by
  the  tenant.  The  provisions  of  any  other  law   to   the   contrary
  notwithstanding,  solely  for the purpose of verification of income, the
  commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case may be, may contract
  with the department of taxation and finance for  services  performed  by
  such  department in verifying income information forwarded by a company,
  the commissioner, or the supervising agency to such department.  Nothing
  contained  herein  shall  be  construed to authorize the commissioner to
  contract  with  such  department  to  provide  any  income   information
  whatsoever   and   such   agreement  shall  be  limited  solely  to  the
  verification of income  information.  No  officer  or  employee  of  the
  division  of housing and community renewal, the supervising agency, or a
  company shall be subject to any civil or criminal liability by reason of
  his forwarding to the department of taxation and finance of  any  income
  information pursuant to this subdivision, unless (i) such information is
  knowingly  and  willfully  materially  misrepresented by such officer or
  employee or (ii) such information is knowingly and willfully divulged to
  any person, except in the discharge  of  such  officer's  or  employee's
  duties  solely for the purpose of verification of income, for any reason
  whatsoever. The commissioner or the supervising agency as the  case  may
  be,  shall  promulgate rules and regulations to effect the provisions of
  this subdivision. The provisions of the state freedom of information act
  shall not apply to any income information obtained  by  a  company,  the
  commissioner, or the supervising agency, as the case may be, pursuant to
  the provisions of this subdivision.




   § 61. Inconsistent provisions in other laws superseded. Insofar as the
  provisions  of  this article are inconsistent with the provisions of any
  other law, general, special or local, the  provisions  of  this  article
  shall be controlling.




   §  61-a.  Actions. Except in an action for wrongful death, in any case
  founded upon tort a notice of claim shall be  required  as  a  condition
  precedent to the commencement of an action or special proceeding against
  the  agency,  any  of  its  subsidiary  corporations,  or  any  officer,
  appointee or employee thereof, and the provisions of section fifty-e  of
  the  general  municipal  law  shall govern the giving of such notice. No
  such action shall be commenced more than one year and ninety days  after
  the  cause of action therefor shall have accrued. An action for wrongful
  death shall be commenced in accordance with the notice of claim and time
  limitation provisions of title eleven of  article  nine  of  the  public
  authorities law.




   §  62.  Article  not  affected  if  in  part  unconstitutional. If any
  section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision  of  this
  article shall be unconstitutional or be ineffective in whole or in part,
  to  the  extent that it is not unconstitutional or ineffective, it shall
  be valid and effective and no  other  section,  subdivision,  paragraph,
  sentence, clause or provision shall on account thereof be deemed invalid
  or ineffective.




   §  63.  Legislative  findings  and declaration. The legislature hereby
  finds and declares that many homeless families live in  overcrowded  and
  often  dilapidated  welfare  hotels  in  cities with a population of one
  million or more; that welfare hotel placements  are  expensive  and  yet
  offer only minimal shelter services; and that while the state and cities
  with  a  population of one million or more must continue to develop cost
  effective alternatives to welfare hotels, ultimately  permanent  housing
  is  the  only  real  answer to the homeless problem. It is further found
  that absent development of more permanent housing, lengths  of  stay  in
  temporary  shelters will continue to increase forcing an even more rapid
  escalation in the welfare hotel population and the concomitant growth in
  total state emergency shelter spending.
    The legislature further finds that the New York  state  infrastructure
  trust  fund  provides a unique opportunity to increase permanent housing
  for homeless families. The legislature therefore finds  that  the  state
  should  dedicate  New York state infrastructure trust fund moneys to the
  creation of permanent housing for families in cities with  a  population
  of one million or more who are homeless or at risk of being homeless and
  primarily  for families referred from hotels, motels or tier II shelters
  for families; that such state funds shall be matched by an equal  amount
  of  city  funding  and  that  the  city  of  New York in the most recent
  homeless families plan submitted to the council of the city of New  York
  by   the   human   resources  administration  has  proposed  to  provide
  eighty-five million dollars for such  funding;  that  permanent  housing
  projects  shall  be  constructed  or rehabilitated and sites selected in
  accordance with a homeless families plan.
    The legislature further finds that the key elements of  such  projects
  shall  be:  identification by the city of proposed project sites; review
  by an advisory board of the sites proposed  by  the  city  in  order  to
  identify  those  buildings  and  properties  that  can  be expeditiously
  developed and produce the maximum number of units at the lowest cost per
  unit; approval of recommended  sites  by  the  city;  administration  of
  construction  or rehabilitation activities by the New York state housing
  finance agency; and selection of a developer or  developers  to  design,
  construct  or  rehabilitate  permanent  housing  projects  for  homeless
  families.




   §  64.  Definitions. The following terms, whenever used or referred to
  in this article, unless the context indicates otherwise, shall have  the
  following meanings:
    1. "Agency" shall mean the New York state housing finance agency.
    2. "City" shall mean cities with a population of one million or more.
    3. "Eligible homeless families" shall mean in cities with a population
  of  one  million  or  more  families  who  are  homeless  or who live in
  temporary or transitional housing and are unable to secure permanent and
  stable housing without special  assistance,  or  families  who  live  in
  permanent  housing who are in danger of becoming homeless, or such other
  categories of families at risk of being homeless as  determined  by  the
  commissioner of social services or a social services district.
    4.  "Permanent  housing  for  homeless  families  site review advisory
  board" or "board" shall mean the board referred to in section sixty-five
  of this article.
    5. "Permanent housing project  for  homeless  families"  or  "project"
  shall  mean  a  specific work or improvement, including lands, buildings
  and improvements acquired, owned, constructed, renovated, rehabilitated,
  managed or operated pursuant to this article,  and  such  incidental  or
  appurtenant facilities as may be approved by the agency.
    6.  "Eligible  project  costs" shall mean the reasonable and necessary
  cost  of  any  and  all  undertakings  for  planning,  financing,   land
  acquisition,  demolition,  construction,  rehabilitation,  equipment and
  site development, and such other expenses incurred in  relation  to  the
  project  with  respect  to  units  to  be  occupied by eligible homeless
  families as the agency may deem appropriate to effectuate  the  purposes
  of this article.
    7. "State" shall mean the state of New York.




   §  65.  Permanent  housing  for homeless families site review advisory
  board. 1. There is hereby created the  permanent  housing  for  homeless
  families site review advisory board. The board will consist of the state
  commissioner of housing and community renewal, the state commissioner of
  social   services,   the  commissioner  of  the  department  of  housing
  preservation and development of the city, the commissioner/administrator
  of  the  human  resources  administration   of   the   city,   and   two
  representatives  of  organizations  involved  in  providing housing. The
  governor of the state and the mayor of the city shall each  appoint  one
  of  the aforementioned representatives to the board. Any action taken by
  the members shall require the affirmative vote  of  a  majority  of  the
  members.  Any  member  who is not appointed by the governor or mayor may
  select a designee from their respective departments  or  divisions.  Any
  such designees shall have the power to attend and to vote at any meeting
  of  the  board  from  which the member is absent with the same force and
  effect as if the member were present and voting. Such designation  shall
  be  by  written  notice  filed  with  the board. The designation of such
  person shall continue until revoked at any time by written notice to the
  board. Notwithstanding any  inconsistent  provisions  of  law,  general,
  special  or  local, no officer or employee of the state, or of any civil
  division thereof, or any public benefit corporation, shall be deemed  to
  have  forfeited  or  shall  forfeit  his  or her office or employment by
  reason of acceptance of membership on the board created by this section.
    2. In carrying out its duties under this article the board may request
  the assistance of appropriate city and state  agencies,  public  benefit
  corporations  and  public  authorities.  The  aforesaid agencies, public
  benefit corporations and public authorities are  authorized  to  provide
  such  assistance  within  their  respective  functions  as the board may
  require.
    3. Notwithstanding any other provision of  law,  the  board  shall  be
  authorized  to  let contracts in such manner as it deems appropriate and
  to  execute  all   instruments   as   necessary   to   carry   out   its
  responsibilities.  The board may contract with the agency to provide for
  the reasonable and necessary expenses of the board.
    4. Moneys in the permanent housing for homeless families fund may  not
  be used to pay for any administrative or other expenses of the agency or
  board, provided however, that moneys in such fund may be used to pay for
  eligible project costs.






	   §  65-a.  Permanent  housing  projects  for homeless families. 1. Site
  identification; initial project description. For each proposed permanent
  housing project for homeless families, the city will identify a site  or
  sites for development of permanent housing for homeless families. If the
  site or sites are proposed to the board for rehabilitation, any building
  or  buildings  on  the  site  must be vacant. Prior to any action by the
  board, the city must submit to the board an initial project  description
  which  sets  forth,  to  the  extent  known,  (a)  a  detailed  physical
  description of the property and the number of eligible homeless families
  estimated to be served by the project; (b) the  tenant  population  that
  will be served by the project and how the project will address the needs
  of  these  tenants; (c) a description of other funding sources that will
  be used to develop the project, if any; (d) the  category  of  permanent
  housing  proposed  to be established; (e) a plan which provides that the
  units for eligible homeless families provided under this article will to
  the maximum extent practicable be occupied by eligible homeless families
  referred from hotels, motels or shelters that  are  regulated  by  title
  eighteen  of the official compilation of codes, rules and regulations of
  the state of New York; (f) where relevant, information  stating  whether
  the  city  intends to convey the project to a not-for-profit corporation
  or housing development fund company, and, unless  stated  otherwise,  it
  will  be  assumed  that  the  city  will  hold title to the project once
  completed;  (g)  a  proposed  development  timetable;  (h)  the   names,
  addresses and business background of the principals involved, the nature
  of  their fiduciary relationship and their financial relationship, past,
  present and future, to the project and to each  other;  (i)  information
  regarding  the  operation  of such project and the affordability of such
  project for eligible homeless families; and (j) such  other  information
  as  the  board  may  require. The board will also require in the project
  description  that  the  costs  associated  with  the   construction   or
  rehabilitation  of  those portions of projects that are not designed for
  occupancy by eligible homeless families are paid for  by  other  funding
  programs   or  sources,  and  that  completed  projects  must  meet  all
  applicable  city  or  state  codes  governing   such   construction   or
  rehabilitation.   With  the  approval  of  the  city,  a  not-for-profit
  corporation, housing development fund  company  or  a  person,  firm  or
  corporation  that  will  agree to limit its profits or rate of return of
  investors in accordance with a formula established or  approved  by  the
  agency,  may  submit to the board one or more sites along with a project
  description in the form prescribed above.
    2. After receipt of the initial project description  described  above,
  the  board  will review each proposed site and identify those sites that
  the  board  finds  suitable  for  construction  or  rehabilitation   for
  permanent  housing  for  eligible  homeless  families.  No  site  may be
  considered by the board unless the project proposed for  the  site  will
  carry  out  the  objectives  of the homeless families plan most recently
  submitted to the council  of  the  city  by  the  New  York  city  human
  resources administration.  In its review, the board will give preference
  to  those projects that will result in the lowest costs per unit, can be
  completed in the least amount of time, serve the greatest need for  such
  housing  and  also  provide  housing  for occupants who are not eligible
  homeless families.
    3. After it has completed its review, the board shall advise the mayor
  of the  city  of  its  recommendations  concerning  the  suitability  of
  proposed sites for development as permanent housing for the homeless. No
  project  shall  be  undertaken  by  the  agency pursuant to this article
  unless the project site has been approved by the advisory board.




   §  65-b.  Funds  for permanent housing projects for homeless families.
  The agency is authorized to receive and administer funds provided by the
  state and a city, as  well  as  grants-in-aid  and  gifts  of  real  and
  personal  property,  including  money, from any source whatsoever, to be
  used to develop permanent housing accommodations for  eligible  homeless
  families.  In  carrying out its duties under this article the agency may
  require the assistance of appropriate  city  and  state  departments  or
  agencies,  public  benefit  corporations  and  public  authorities.  The
  aforesaid departments, agencies, public benefit corporations and  public
  authorities  are  authorized  to  provide  such  assistance within their
  respective functions as the agency may require.




   §  65-c.  Approval  of  funding  agreement;  issuance  of requests for
  proposals. The city's funds for  such  projects  shall  be  provided  as
  payments,  grants or loans pursuant to a funding agreement or agreements
  with the agency. Any such agreement shall include the amount of  funding
  to  be  provided by the city, the manner in which the city will make the
  funds  available  to  the  agency  or  the  agency's  designee,  and   a
  description  of  the projects and project sites, and shall be subject to
  the approval of the mayor and the local legislative body  of  the  city.
  Notwithstanding  any inconsistent provisions of law, general, special or
  local, or charter, the mayor and the local legislative body  shall  take
  action  to approve or disapprove such agreement within sixty days of its
  submission, provided, however, that if the mayor  fails  to  approve  or
  disapprove the agreement during such period the mayor shall be deemed to
  have  approved  the  agreement  and  provided  further that if the local
  legislative body fails to approve or disapprove  such  agreement  during
  such  period the local legislative body shall be deemed to have approved
  the agreement. In the case of  a  project  for  which  a  not-for-profit
  corporation,  housing  development fund company or limited profit entity
  has provided sites with the city's approval, approval by the  mayor  and
  the  local  legislative  body  shall  not be required under this section
  where such project has already received approval from the mayor and  the
  local  legislative  body.  Upon  approval  by  the  mayor  and the local
  legislative body of such agreement, and upon satisfaction of such  other
  conditions  as  the  agency may establish, including but not limited to,
  satisfactory assurances from the city that projects  on  approved  sites
  will  receive  expedited reviews by city departments and agencies having
  jurisdiction over the project, the agency is authorized to issue one  or
  more  requests  for  proposals to developers who shall be not-for-profit
  organizations or persons, partnerships, corporations or  other  entities
  that will agree to limit their profits or rate of return of investors in
  accordance  with  a  formula  established or approved by the agency with
  respect to the project, for the development,  design,  construction,  or
  rehabilitation  of  permanent  housing  projects  for  eligible homeless
  families.  Approval  of  an  agreement  by  the  mayor  and  the   local
  legislative  body  pursuant  to  this  section  shall not itself require
  compliance with any local  land  use  review  procedure,  nor  shall  it
  constitute  an action for purposes of article eight of the environmental
  conservation law, provided, however, that this section shall  not  grant
  any  exemption  from  such  procedures  or laws if otherwise applicable.
  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  article  one-A   of   the   public
  authorities  law,  contracts entered into by the agency pursuant to this
  article shall not be subject to the provisions of article one-A  of  the
  public authorities law.




   §  65-d.  Selection  of developers. Following receipt by the agency of
  proposals in response to such request, the  agency  shall  evaluate  the
  proposals in consultation with appropriate city departments and agencies
  and  recommend  to the mayor of the city for his approval developers who
  are suitable and qualified to develop, design, construct or rehabilitate
  one or more permanent housing projects for eligible  homeless  families.
  The  agency is authorized to contract with any developer who is approved
  by the mayor for the development, design, construction or rehabilitation
  of such projects.




   §  66. Authorized courses of action. For each project, the agency will
  review and approve or disapprove a final project description  containing
  the  information  specified in section sixty-five-a of this article. The
  final project description shall include  the  identity  of  the  project
  owner.    After  consultation  with  the city and review of responses to
  requests for proposals and within the limit of funds  available  in  the
  permanent  housing  for  homeless  families fund, the agency shall award
  such contracts as it deems appropriate to developers in order to provide
  one or  more  projects  for  which  it  has  approved  a  final  project
  description.  In  proceeding with a project, the agency is authorized to
  take such  courses  of  action,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  the
  following,  as  may  be  necessary  or  useful in enabling the agency to
  accomplish its purposes:
    1. The developer may hold title to  the  project  during  development,
  construction and rehabilitation;
    2.  In  order  to facilitate project development, the agency may enter
  into a license agreement with the holder of the title to the project;
    3. Upon completion of construction or rehabilitation of the project by
  a developer who has taken title to the project, title shall be  conveyed
  in  accordance  with  the approved final project description, or, in the
  absence of a not-for-profit  corporation  or  housing  development  fund
  company  designated  by  the city to receive title to the project, title
  shall be conveyed to the city.




   §  67.  Liability  on obligations. 1. Except for obligations which the
  agency assumes by contract  for  the  construction,  rehabilitation  and
  development  period  of  any  project,  neither the agency nor the state
  shall have any responsibility  or  liability  as  to  the  construction,
  rehabilitation, operation, maintenance, repair or use of projects unless
  otherwise specifically provided by statute.
    2.  Any  contract  entered  into  pursuant to this article between the
  agency and the developer or owner of a project shall cite and set  forth
  subdivision one of this section.




   §  68.  State/city  allocations  of  permanent  housing  projects  for
  homeless families. 1. No contract shall be entered into by the agency or
  its  designee  in  connection  with  the  administration  of   projects,
  including  the payment of project costs, unless the agency is assured to
  its satisfaction that the  city  has  provided  or  will  provide  fifty
  percent  of  such  costs to the agency or its designee.  Moneys received
  from sources other than the city or  the  state  may,  at  the  agency's
  discretion,   be   expended   without   regard   to   such   limitation.
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, payments, grants  and  loans
  may be deposited by the agency directly with a lending institution at or
  before  the time of initial loan closing pursuant to an escrow agreement
  satisfactory to the agency.
    2. Moneys expended by the agency for  the  purposes  of  this  article
  shall   not   substitute   for   locally  funded  operating  or  capital
  expenditures which the city would  have  allocated  through  its  normal
  budgetary  process  to  programs  that  provide  permanent  housing  for
  homeless families in the absence of the funds provided for this program.
  All such moneys shall be used to increase locally  funded  operating  or
  capital  expenditures  for  permanent housing for homeless families to a
  level which is greater than the level which would have existed  if  such
  moneys  had not been provided by the state.  Nothing in this subdivision
  shall require the city to allocate funds for housing programs if in  the
  city's judgment such allocation would require an increase in taxation or
  a reduction in other city services.




   §  69. Compliance; general and administrative provisions. 1. The owner
  of each project shall be responsible for assuring  compliance  with  the
  terms  and  conditions  of  the  approved  project  description and this
  article. Any project owned by a not-for-profit corporation or a  housing
  development  fund  company shall be subject to such terms and conditions
  for a period of thirty-five years  or  such  longer  period  as  may  be
  provided  in  the  project  description.  No  project may be transferred
  except in accordance with  the  project  description,  and  the  project
  description may not be changed without the approval of the agency.
    2.   The   agency  shall  issue  and  promulgate  guidelines  for  the
  administration of this article. The guidelines shall include  provisions
  concerning   approval   of  project  descriptions,  the  eligibility  of
  developers for contracts under this article; funding  criteria  and  the
  funding determination process; supervision and evaluation of contracting
  developers;   reporting,   budgeting  and  record-keeping  requirements;
  provisions for modification and termination of contracts  and  recapture
  of  funds; and such other matters not inconsistent with the purposes and
  provisions of this  article  as  the  agency  shall  deem  necessary  or
  appropriate.






	   §  70.  General policy. It is hereby declared to be the policy of this
  article to encourage the investment of the savings of the people in  low
  rent housing accommodations, to protect such investment against loss and
  to assure a fair return thereon. To this end, every responsible official
  of the state shall, wherever necessary, take all reasonable steps to the
  end  that  the  security and safety of the mortgages referred to in this
  article shall be safeguarded and to maintain public  confidence  in  the
  stock and obligations of housing companies created under this article.




   §  71.  Definitions. The following terms, whenever used or referred to
  in this act, shall be construed as follows:
    1.  The  term  "housing  company"  means  a  limited-dividend  housing
  corporation,  a  partnership  (general  or limited) or a trust organized
  pursuant to this article.
    2. The term "project" means a specific work or improvement  undertaken
  by   a  housing  company,  which  shall  include  lands,  buildings  and
  improvements acquired or constructed to provide dwelling  accommodations
  within  the  rental  limitations  prescribed  by  this article, and such
  stores, offices, social, recreational,  communal  or  other  non-housing
  facilities  as  may  be  deemed  by the commissioner to be incidental or
  appurtenant to a project.
    3. The term "mutual" when applied to a housing company  shall  mean  a
  housing  company  which  is  a  corporation operated exclusively for the
  benefit of the persons or families who are entitled to  occupancy  in  a
  project of such housing company by reason of ownership of shares in such
  housing company.
    4.  The  term  "local  and  municipal  taxes"  means taxes levied by a
  county, city, village, town, school and special district but  shall  not
  include assessments for local improvements.
    5.  The  term  "state  urban  development corporation project" means a
  project of a limited-dividend housing company which is a  subsidiary  of
  the   New   York  state  urban  development  corporation,  as  the  term
  "subsidiary"  is  defined  in  the  New  York  state  urban  development
  corporation act.
    6. The term "capital" means, in the case of a corporation, its capital
  shares  issued  and  outstanding;  in  the  case  of  a partnership, the
  aggregate value of the money and property contributed  by  the  partners
  for  the  purpose of carrying on the business of the partnership, so far
  as such is credited to the partners on capital account; and in the  case
  of  a trust, the aggregate value of the money or property subject to the
  trust.




   §  72.  Housing  companies;  how created. 1. Three or more persons may
  become a housing company which is a  corporation,  for  the  purpose  of
  carrying  out  a  project or projects, on making, signing, acknowledging
  and filing a certificate which shall contain:
    (1) The name of the proposed housing company.
    (2) The purposes for which it is  to  be  formed  which  shall  be  as
  follows:  To acquire, construct, maintain and operate projects.
    (3)  The amount of the capital shares, and if any be preferred shares,
  the preference thereof.
    (4) The number of shares of which the capital shall  consist,  all  of
  which shall have a par value.
    (5)  The  city,  village  or  town  and county or borough in which its
  principal business office is to be located and the address to which  the
  secretary  of  state  shall  mail  a  copy  of  process in any action or
  proceeding against the housing company which may be served upon him.
    (6) Its duration, which shall not be less than twenty years.
    (7) The number of directors, which shall not be less than three.
    (8) The names and post-office addresses of the directors for the first
  year.
    (9) The names and post-office addresses  of  the  subscribers  to  the
  certificate and a statement of the number of shares which each agrees to
  take in the housing company.
    (10)  A  provision that the real property of the housing company shall
  not be sold, transferred or assigned except under and  pursuant  to  the
  terms and provisions of this article.
    (11)  A declaration that all of the subscribers to the certificate are
  of full age; that at least two-thirds of them are citizens of the United
  States and that at least one of them is a resident of the state  of  New
  York;  that at least one of the persons named as a director is a citizen
  of the United States and a resident of the state of New York.
    (12) That the secretary of state is designated as  the  agent  of  the
  housing company upon whom process in any action or proceeding against it
  may be served.
    2.  (1)  A  housing company may be created as a general partnership by
  the partners signing, acknowledging and filing as hereinafter provided a
  certificate which shall contain:
    (a) The matters set out in paragraphs one, two, five, six, and ten  of
  subdivision one of this section.
    (b) The names and post-office addresses of the partners.
    (c) A statement of the capital of the partnership.
    (d) A declaration that all the partners are of full age, that at least
  two-thirds  of them are citizens of the United States, and that at least
  one of them is a resident of the state of New York.
    (2) A housing company may be created as a limited partnership  by  the
  partners  filing as provided herein a copy of the certificate filed with
  the county clerk pursuant to article eight of the partnership  law.  The
  partners  shall  at  the  same time sign, acknowledge and file a further
  certificate which shall contain the matters set out in  paragraphs  one,
  two,  five,  six  and  ten  of  subdivision  one  of  this section and a
  declaration that all the general partners are of full age, and at  least
  two-thirds  of  them are citizens of the United States, and at least one
  of them is a resident of the state of New York.
    3. A housing company may be created as a trust by the settlor signing,
  acknowledging and filing as hereinafter  provided  a  certificate  which
  shall contain:
    (1)  The matters set out in paragraphs one, two, five, six, and ten of
  subdivision one of this section.
    (2) A statement of the capital of the trust.


   (3) The name and post-office address of the trustee or trustees.
    (4) The name and post-office address of any person having a beneficial
  interest, whether vested or contingent, under the trust.
    (5) A declaration that all the trustees are of full age; that at least
  two-thirds  of them are citizens of the United States, and that at least
  one of them is a resident of the state of New York.
    4. A certificate made pursuant to this section shall further contain a
  declaration that the housing company  has  been  organized  to  serve  a
  public  purpose  and  that  it  shall remain at all times subject to the
  supervision and control of the  commissioner  or  of  other  appropriate
  state  authority; that all real estate acquired by it and all structures
  erected by it, shall be  deemed  to  be  acquired  for  the  purpose  of
  promoting  the public health and safety and subject to the provisions of
  this article, and that the shareholders, partners or in the  case  of  a
  trust,  the  settlor,  trustees  or  beneficiaries as their interest may
  appear, shall be deemed to have  agreed  that  they  shall  at  no  time
  receive  or  accept  from  the  housing  company,  in repayment of their
  investment or interest in its capital, any sums in  excess  of  the  par
  value  of  the  shares,  or  of  the amount of their contribution to, or
  beneficial interest in capital, together with  cumulative  distributions
  upon  capital  at  the  rate  of  six per centum per annum, and that any
  surplus in excess of such amount if said company shall be dissolved,  or
  terminated,  in the case of a housing company which is a trust, shall be
  paid into the general fund of the state of New York if the buildings and
  improvements of the project have not received exemption from taxation by
  the municipality pursuant  to  subdivision  three  or  four  of  section
  ninety-three,  or  if  the  company  has  not  received  a loan from the
  municipality, but if such tax exemption or loan has been  received,  any
  remaining   surplus   shall  be  paid  into  the  general  fund  of  the
  municipality.
    5. A certificate made pursuant to the provisions of this  section  may
  provide  that in the event that income debenture certificates are issued
  by the housing company, the owners thereof may be given the  same  right
  to  vote  as  they  would  have if possessed of shares of equivalent par
  value in the case of a corporation or if they had contributed capital in
  the case of a partnership or had a beneficial interest under  the  trust
  vested  in  the  case  of a trust, of the amount of the income debenture
  certificates held by them.
    If  provision  is  made  for  the   issuance   of   income   debenture
  certificates,  interest  shall  be paid by the housing company on income
  debenture certificates only out of net earnings of the  housing  company
  that  would  be  applicable to payment of distributions if there were no
  income debentures.
    6. The certificate may  permit  the  retirement  of  income  debenture
  certificates  and  capital  of the housing company if, as and when there
  shall be funds available in the treasury of the housing company from the
  receipt of amortization or sinking fund installments for that purpose as
  provided for by this article, but the amount so retired shall not exceed
  ninety per centum of the par value of shares or amount  of  the  capital
  and  the  face  value of income debentures issued and outstanding at the
  time of the final completion of the building or  buildings  embraced  in
  the project.




   § 73. Consent of commissioner to creation of housing companies.  1. If
  any  certificate made pursuant to subdivision one of section seventy-two
  shall be presented to the secretary of state  he  shall  not  file  said
  certificate  unless  there shall accompany the same a certificate of the
  commissioner that he consents to the filing of such certificate. In  the
  case  of  a  housing  company  which  is  a  partnership  or  trust, the
  certificate shall be filed with the commissioner.
    2. The commissioner shall not accept for filing  a  certificate  of  a
  housing  company  which is a partnership (general or limited) or a trust
  unless there has first been filed with him a  partnership  agreement  or
  trust  agreement  as  the case may be, the terms and conditions of which
  shall be subject to his approval.






	   §  74.  Application  of  other  laws.  The  provisions of the business
  corporation law as hereafter from time to time amended  shall  apply  to
  housing  companies  which  are  corporations,  and the provisions of all
  applicable law shall apply to housing companies which  are  partnerships
  or  trusts,  except  where any such provisions are in conflict with this
  article.




   §  75. Designation of and service of process on secretary of state and
  registered agent. The provisions of sections three hundred  four,  three
  hundred five and three hundred six of the business corporation law shall
  apply   to  housing  companies  heretofore  or  hereafter  organized  as
  corporations under this article.




   §  76.  Limited  return  on  capital  and  debentures. No shareholder,
  partner  or  beneficiary  of  a  trust  having  an  interest  vested  in
  possession  in  any  housing  company formed hereunder shall receive any
  distribution on capital in any one year in excess of six per centum  per
  annum except that when in any preceding year distributions in the amount
  prescribed  in  the  certificate  shall  not  have been paid on the said
  capital, the shareholders, partners or beneficiaries, as  the  case  may
  be,  may  be  paid  such  deficiency without interest out of any surplus
  earned in  any  succeeding  years.  This  provision  shall  likewise  be
  applicable  to income debenture certificates and interest thereon at the
  rate specified in such certificates shall be cumulative.




   §  77.  Time  of payment of subscription or capital contributions.  1.
  Subscriptions to the shares or income debentures of  a  housing  company
  organized  as  a  corporation  shall  be  paid at such times and in such
  installments as the board of directors and the commissioner may require.
  If any default shall be made in the payment of  any  installment  as  so
  required,  the  board  of  directors  may  enforce  said subscription by
  appropriate action and upon their failure so to do said subscription may
  be enforced by the commissioner. At the option of the board of directors
  with the consent of the commissioner, the board of  directors  may  upon
  such  default  declare  the shares or income debentures and all previous
  payments thereon forfeited, after the expiration of twenty days from the
  service on the defaulting shareholder personally, or by mail directed to
  him at his address as shown on the books of the housing  company,  of  a
  written notice requiring him to make payment within twenty days from the
  service  of the notice at a place specified therein and stating that, in
  case of failure to do so,  his  shares  or  income  debentures  and  all
  previous  payments  thereon  will  be  forfeited.  Such shares or income
  debentures if forfeited may be reissued or reoffered  for  subscription.
  If  a  receiver  of  the  housing company has been appointed, all unpaid
  subscriptions shall be paid at such times and in  such  installments  as
  such receiver or the court may direct.
    2.   Capital  contributions  to  a  housing  company  organized  as  a
  partnership (general or limited) or a trust shall be paid at such  times
  and  in  such  installments  as  shall  be  provided  by the partnership
  agreement or  trust  agreement.  Such  partnership  agreement  or  trust
  agreement  shall  contain  provisions  for  enforcement of the terms and
  conditions thereof by the partners or trustees, or upon their failure to
  do so, by the commissioner, if any payment  so  required  shall  not  be
  made.  If  a  receiver  of  the  housing company has been appointed, all
  unpaid capital contributions shall be paid at such  times  and  in  such
  installments as such receiver or the court may direct.




   § 78. Consideration for capital and bonds. No housing company which is
  a corporation shall issue shares, nor shall a housing company which is a
  partnership  credit sums to the partners on capital account, nor shall a
  housing company which is a trust subject amounts to the  trust,  and  no
  housing company shall issue bonds or income debentures, except for money
  or  property  actually  received  for the use and lawful purposes of the
  housing company, provided, however, that a mutual  housing  company  may
  issue  shares for home owners purchase notes if the purchase transaction
  has received the written endorsement of the commissioner  in  accordance
  with  supplementary  rules  and  regulations  of  the  commissioner made
  therefor and if at least two hundred dollars in  money  or  property  is
  received  by  such  mutual  housing  company toward the issuance of such
  shares. The consideration for all capital, bonds  or  income  debentures
  based  upon  property  received  shall equal a valuation approved by the
  commissioner and such valuation shall be used  in  computing  actual  or
  estimated cost.
    In no event shall the capital of, and income debentures issued by, the
  housing  company  be  less  than  the  total of twenty per centum of the
  actual cost, as defined in this article,  of  any  project  or  projects
  undertaken pursuant to this article.
    The  commissioner  may  permit  capital  to  be  increased,  or income
  debentures to be issued, to an amount not exceeding three per centum  of
  the  estimated  total  cost,  or three per centum of the actual cost, if
  actual cost should exceed estimated  cost,  of  a  project  for  working
  capital to be used in connection with such project.




   §  79.  Minimum amount of capital and debentures. The entire amount of
  capital, together with any income debentures of a housing company  shall
  be  equivalent  to  at least twenty per centum of the actual cost of the
  project or projects which it operates except  that  in  the  case  of  a
  housing  company  which  receives  a  loan from the New York state urban
  development corporation, created by the New York state urban development
  corporation act, such amount shall be equivalent to at  least  five  per
  centum  of such actual cost. The provisions of this section shall not be
  applicable to any housing company if such company shall receive  a  loan
  from  a  municipality  pursuant  to  section  ninety-three of the public
  housing law, or if funds made available by the federal government or any
  instrumentality thereof, or any mortgage or mortgage  bonds  insured  by
  the  federal  housing  administrator or any other instrumentality of the
  federal government are used in financing the  project  in  whole  or  in
  part.




   §  80.  Income  debentures.  With the approval of the commissioner the
  certificate, or an amended certificate, may authorize  the  issuance  of
  income  debenture  certificates bearing no greater interest than six per
  centum per annum. In the case  of  a  housing  company  organized  as  a
  corporation the directors thereof may, with the consent of two-thirds of
  the holders of the preferred shares issued and outstanding, offer to the
  shareholders  of  the housing company, the privilege of exchanging their
  shares in such quantities and at such times as may be  approved  by  the
  commissioner  for  such income debenture certificates. In no event shall
  the amount of shares of the housing company be less than ten per  centum
  of the total of shares and income debentures.




   §  81. Mortgages and mortgage bonds. 1. (a) Any housing company formed
  under this article may, subject to the  approval  of  the  commissioner,
  borrow  funds  and  secure  the  repayment  thereof  by bond or note and
  mortgage or by an issue of bonds under trust indenture. Each mortgage or
  issue of bonds by a housing company formed hereunder shall  relate  only
  to  a  single  specified  project  and  no other and said bonds shall be
  secured by mortgage upon all of the real property of which said  project
  consists.
    (b)  First lien bonds or notes of such housing company when secured by
  a mortgage not exceeding four-fifths of the estimated cost prior to  the
  completion  of  the  project,  or  four-fifths of the appraised value or
  actual  cost,  whichever  shall  be  less,  after  such  completion,  as
  certified  by  the commissioner, are hereby declared securities in which
  all public officers and  bodies  of  the  state  and  of  the  municipal
  subdivisions,  all insurance companies and associations, and all savings
  banks and savings institutions, including savings and loan associations,
  in the state may properly and legally  invest  the  funds  within  their
  control.
    2. The bonds and notes so issued and secured and the mortgage or trust
  indentures  relating  thereto,  may  create a first or senior lien and a
  second or junior lien upon the real property embraced  in  any  project;
  provided, however, that the total mortgage liens shall not exceed eighty
  per centum of the estimated cost prior to the completion of the project,
  or  eighty  per  centum of the appraised value or actual cost, whichever
  shall be less, as certified by the commissioner after  such  completion.
  Where  there  is  a  first  and a second mortgage lien upon the property
  embraced in a project, only the first or senior lien  thereon  shall  be
  deemed  a  security  in  which  such  officers, bodies, corporations and
  associations may invest the funds within their control. Such  bonds  and
  mortgages,  notes  and  mortgages  or  trust indentures may contain such
  other clauses and provisions as shall be approved by  the  commissioner,
  including  the right to assignment of rents and entry into possession in
  case of default and including in the case of a housing company which  is
  a  partnership  or  trust  the right of the partners or trustees, as the
  case may be, to be free of any personal liability  thereunder;  but  the
  operation of the housing project in the event of such entry by mortgagee
  or  receiver  shall  be  subject  to the regulations of the commissioner
  under this article.  Provisions  for  the  amortization  of  the  bonded
  indebtedness  or  notes  of  indebtedness of companies formed under this
  article shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner.
    3. (a) So long as funds made available by the  federal  government  or
  any  instrumentality  thereof  or  any mortgage, mortgage bonds or notes
  guaranteed or insured by the federal government or  any  instrumentality
  thereof,  or  any  mortgage  or  mortgage  bonds  or  notes  secured  by
  obligations so guaranteed or insured, or tax exempt  obligations  issued
  pursuant  to section eleven of the United States housing act of nineteen
  hundred thirty-seven, are used in financing, in whole or  in  part,  any
  project  under  this article, the capital structure of a housing company
  undertaking such project and the proportionate amount of the cost of the
  lands and improvements to be represented by mortgages,  bonds  or  notes
  shall  be  entirely  in  the  discretion  of  the  commissioner; and all
  restrictions as to the amounts to be represented by mortgages,  mortgage
  bonds, mortgage notes, income debentures or shares shall be inapplicable
  to  such  projects  or  to  housing companies undertaking such projects,
  except that the bonds, notes, mortgages, debentures and shares  covering
  any  project  shall not exceed the actual final cost of such project, as
  defined in this article.


   (b) Notwithstanding anything contained in paragraph (b) of subdivision
  one of this section, first lien bonds or other  obligations  of  housing
  companies,  secured by a first mortgage upon all of the real property of
  a project and not exceeding the estimated cost prior to  the  completion
  of  the  project, or the appraised value or actual cost, whichever shall
  be less, after such completion, as certified by  the  commissioner,  are
  hereby  declared  securities  in which all public officers and bodies of
  the state and of the municipal subdivisions, all insurance companies and
  associations, and all savings banks and savings institutions,  including
  savings  and  loan  associations,  in the state may properly and legally
  invest the funds within their control, provided that
    (1) the federal housing  commissioner  has  insured,  or  has  made  a
  commitment to insure, such mortgage; or
    (2)  such  bonds  or other obligations are guaranteed or insured to at
  least forty per centum of the principal amount thereof under title three
  of an act of congress of the United States  entitled  the  "Servicemen's
  Readjustment  Act  of 1944," or are secured by obligations so guaranteed
  or insured; or
    (3) such bonds or other obligations evidence a loan for the purpose of
  financing construction and are to be guaranteed or  insured  under  said
  title   three,   as   hereinabove  provided,  upon  completion  of  such
  construction, and all funds advanced on  such  loan  are  guaranteed  or
  insured  under  said  title  three  to the extent of at least thirty per
  centum of such advance, or are secured by obligations so  guaranteed  or
  insured.
    *  4.  So  long  as  funds  made available by the New York state urban
  development  corporation,  pursuant  to  the  New   York   state   urban
  development corporation act, are used in financing, in whole or in part,
  any project under this article, all restrictions as to the amounts to be
  represented   by  mortgages,  mortgage  bonds,  mortgage  notes,  income
  debentures or capital shall be  inapplicable  to  such  projects  or  to
  housing  companies  undertaking such projects, provided however that any
  mortgage loan from the New York state urban development  corporation  to
  housing companies undertaking such projects shall not exceed ninety-five
  per centum of project cost, as certified by the commissioner.
  * NB (Effective until ruling by Internal Revenue Service)
    *  4.  So  long  as  funds  made available by the New York state urban
  development corporation or the New York state  housing  finance  agency,
  pursuant  to the New York state urban development corporation act or the
  New York state housing finance agency act, as the case may be, are  used
  in  financing,  in whole or in part, any project under this article, all
  restrictions as to the amounts to be represented by mortgages,  mortgage
  bonds,   mortgage   notes,   income   debentures  or  capital  shall  be
  inapplicable to such projects or to housing companies  undertaking  such
  projects,  provided  however  that  any  mortgage loan from the New York
  state urban development  corporation  or  the  New  York  state  housing
  finance  agency,  as  the  case may be, to housing companies undertaking
  such projects shall not exceed ninety-five per centum of  project  cost,
  as certified by the commissioner.
  * NB (Effective pending ruling by Internal Revenue Service)
    5. The capital structure of a housing company acquiring a project from
  a  company  organized  pursuant to article eleven of this chapter may be
  fixed by the  commissioner,  notwithstanding  any  limitations  in  this
  article  as  to the amount to be represented by mortgages, debentures or
  capital.




   § 82. Limitations. No housing company shall:
    1. Acquire any real property or interest therein unless it shall first
  have  obtained  approval  of  the  project  from the commissioner, and a
  certificate that such acquisition is necessary  or  convenient  for  the
  public  purpose  defined  in this article, and unless any deed, lease or
  other instrument by which such real  property  or  interest  therein  is
  acquired  contains  a  statement  that  the  conveyance  is to a housing
  company organized pursuant  to  article  four  of  the  private  housing
  finance law.
    2.  Sell, exchange, transfer or assign any real property except (a) to
  a municipality wherein a project is to be located, for  public  purposes
  only  and  upon such terms and conditions, with or without compensation,
  as the commissioner may approve, or with  the  written  consent  of  the
  commissioner  to  another housing company formed under this chapter, and
  (b) for a price not in excess of the cost of the said property less  any
  amounts  paid  in  amortization  of  the  mortgage  indebtedness and the
  retirement of capital, plus so much of the distribution  on  capital  of
  the said housing company as shall have been unpaid, and accrued interest
  on  the  mortgage  indebtedness  and income debenture certificates. Real
  property surplus to the needs  of  the  housing  company  may  be  sold,
  exchanged,  transferred  or  assigned to any person, partnership, trust,
  firm or corporation upon such terms and conditions as  the  commissioner
  may approve.
    3. Encumber or lease all or any part of its real property to any other
  person,  partnership,  trust,  firm,  or  public or private corporation,
  without the written consent of the commissioner, provided, however, that
  leases conforming to the regulations and rules of the  commissioner  and
  for  actual  occupancy by the lessees may be made without the consent of
  the commissioner. Any conveyance, encumbrance, lease or  sub-lease  made
  in  violation  of  the  provisions  of  this section and any transfer or
  assignment thereof shall be void.
    4. Pay interest returns on its mortgage indebtedness at a higher  rate
  than  six per centum per annum, or at the rates of interest of mortgages
  or mortgage bonds insured by the federal housing administration  or  any
  other  instrumentality  of the federal government applicable at the time
  the housing company incurs the mortgage indebtedness, or at such  higher
  rates  as  may be approved by the commissioner, or pay interest upon its
  income debenture certificates at a rate higher than six per  centum  per
  annum.
    5.  Issue  its  shares,  in  the  case of a housing company which is a
  corporation, credit sums to partners on capital account, in the case  of
  a  housing company which is a partnership, subject amounts to the trust,
  in the case of a housing company  which  is  a  trust,  and  no  housing
  company shall issue debentures and bonds covering any project undertaken
  by  it in an amount greater in the aggregate than the total actual final
  cost of such project, including the  lands,  improvements,  charges  for
  financing  and supervision approved by the commissioner and interest and
  other carrying charges during construction, and an allowance for working
  capital to be approved by the commissioner but not exceeding  three  per
  centum  of  the  estimated cost or of the total actual final cost of the
  project if that shall be greater than the estimated cost.
    6. Mortgage any  real  property  without  first  having  obtained  the
  consent of the commissioner.
    7.  Issue  any  securities  or evidences of indebtedness without first
  having obtained the approval of the commissioner.
    8. Use any building erected or acquired by it for other  than  housing
  purposes,  except  that  when permitted by law the story of the building
  above the cellar or basement and the space below such story may be  used


 for  stores,  co-operative  or community purposes, and when permitted by
  law the roof may be used for co-operative or community purposes.
    9.  Charge  or  accept  any  rental  for housing accommodations in any
  project constructed, acquired, operated or managed by it  in  excess  of
  the prices approved by the commissioner.
    10.  Enter  into  contracts  for  the payment of salaries to officers,
  employees, directors, partners, trustees or beneficiaries except subject
  to the approval of the commissioner and under such  regulations  as  the
  commissioner may from time to time prescribe.
    11.  Enter  into contracts for the construction or for the substantial
  repair, improvement or operation  of  projects  except  subject  to  the
  approval   of  the  commissioner  and  under  such  regulations  as  the
  commissioner may from time to time prescribe.
    12. Voluntarily dissolve, or  in  the  case  of  a  trust,  terminate,
  without first having obtained the consent of the commissioner.
    13. Make any guaranty without the approval of the commissioner.
    14. Without the prior approval of the commissioner as to the terms and
  conditions  thereof, sell, lease, or otherwise convey all or any part of
  a project to an authority.
    The commissioner may declare that any of the limitations set forth  in
  this  section  shall  be  inapplicable,  in  whole or in part, to mutual
  housing companies after the period of municipal tax exemption granted to
  such mutual housing  company  projects  pursuant  to  this  article  has
  expired.






	   §  82-a. Redevelopment loans. Notwithstanding any provision of section
  eighty-one or eighty-two of  this  article  to  the  contrary,  where  a
  housing  company  undergoes  a  comprehensive  redevelopment  plan,  the
  commissioner may approve a loan and encumbrance of such  project  in  an
  amount  in  excess  of  actual  cost  of the project, provided that such
  amount  represents  cost  of  capital  improvements,  redevelopment   or
  acquisition  by  a new owner, any consequent rent increase is not unduly
  burdensome to the tenants,  and  the  housing  company  enters  into  an
  agreement  to  remain  subject  to  the provisions of this article for a
  period of no less than fifteen years  from  issuance  of  the  loan  and
  encumbrance.




   §   83.   Execution  of  housing  company  projects.  No  building  or
  construction shall be undertaken by  any  housing  company  without  the
  approval of the commissioner. Such approval shall be conditioned upon:
    1.  The  submission of a plan in such form and with such assurances as
  the commissioner may prescribe, to raise at least twenty per  centum  of
  the  actual cost of the lands and improvements through investment in the
  capital of such  housing  company  together  with  the  sale  of  income
  debentures, where provided for by such plan; and to raise the balance by
  mortgage  bonds  which  shall not exceed eighty per centum of the actual
  cost of the said project. The  plan  may  provide  for  the  raising  of
  working  capital  in an amount to be approved by the commissioner not to
  exceed three per centum of the actual cost  through  investment  in  the
  capital  and  sale of income debentures of the housing company. Wherever
  reference is made in this article to cost of projects, or  of  buildings
  and  improvements  in  projects,  such  cost  shall  include charges for
  financing and supervision approved  by  the  commissioner,  including  a
  reasonable  proportion  to be fixed by the commissioner, of the expenses
  of the commissioner, applicable to the examination  and  supervision  of
  the  project,  and  carrying charges during construction required in the
  project, including interest on  borrowed,  and  where  approved  by  the
  commissioner, on invested capital. Notwithstanding the provisions of any
  other  general, special or local laws, all moneys payable by the project
  to reimburse  the  commissioner  for  his  expenses  applicable  to  the
  examination and supervision of the project during construction as herein
  provided shall be paid to the executive department.
    2. The acceptance of a designee of the commissioner as a member of the
  board  of  directors  of said housing company. In the case of all mutual
  companies an additional director shall be designated by the commissioner
  at the creation of the company and shall serve from  the  time  of  such
  designation  at least until a board of directors has been elected by the
  tenants entitled to occupancy in the project by reason of  ownership  of
  shares  in  such  company.  Such directors appointed by the commissioner
  need not be stockholders or  meet  other  qualifications  which  may  be
  prescribed  by  the  certificate of incorporation or the by-laws. In the
  absence of fraud or bad faith the director appointed by the commissioner
  shall not be personally liable for the debts, obligations or liabilities
  of the corporation.
    3. The approval by the commissioner of the plans,  specifications  and
  estimated  costs  of  the  proposed housing facilities in respect to the
  conformity thereof to reasonable standards of health, sanitation, safety
  and provision for light and air.
    4. When required by the commissioner, and except  in  the  case  of  a
  housing  company  which  is  a  subsidiary  of  the New York state urban
  development corporation, created by the New York state urban development
  corporation act, the designation by the  commissioner  with  respect  to
  each  project  approved  by  him  of a trustee, which shall be a banking
  corporation authorized to perform  trust  functions,  and  such  trustee
  shall  receive moneys received by the housing company as its capital, or
  as proceeds of its mortgage bonds, notes or income debentures  and  make
  payment  therefrom  for  the  acquisition  of  land, the construction of
  improvements and other items entering into cost of land and improvements
  upon presentation of draft, check or order signed by a proper officer or
  designee  of  the  housing  company  and  countersigned  by   the   said
  commissioner  or  a person designated by him for said purpose. Any funds
  remaining in the custody of said trustee after  the  completion  of  the
  said  project and payment or arrangement in a manner satisfactory to the
  commissioner for payment in full therefor shall be paid to  the  housing
  company.


   5. No such project shall be approved in contravention of any planning,
  zoning,   sanitary   and   building  laws,  ordinances  and  regulations
  applicable to the municipality in which the project is situated.
    6. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision five hereof, no state
  urban  development  corporation  project  shall  be  approved  unless it
  complies  with  the  requirements  of  local  laws,  ordinances,  codes,
  charters  or regulations applicable to the construction, reconstruction,
  rehabilitation, alteration or improvement of such project, except  where
  the  state  urban development corporation, in its discretion, finds such
  compliance not feasible or practicable, in which event no  such  project
  shall  be approved unless it complies with the requirements of the state
  building construction  code,  formulated  by  the  state  building  code
  council pursuant to article eighteen of the executive law, applicable to
  such   construction,   reconstruction,   rehabilitation,  alteration  or
  improvement. No county, city, town or village shall have power to modify
  or change the drawings, plans or specifications  for  the  construction,
  reconstruction,  rehabilitation,  or  improvement of any such project or
  the construction, plumbing, heating, lighting or other mechanical branch
  of work necessary to complete the work in question, nor to require  that
  any  person, firm or corporation employed on any such work shall perform
  any such work in any other or different manner  than  that  provided  by
  such plans and specifications, nor to require that any such person, firm
  or  corporation  obtain  any  other  or  additional authority, approval,
  permit or certificate, from such county, city,  town  or  village  as  a
  condition  of  doing  such  work,  nor  shall  any condition whatever be
  imposed by any such county, city, town or village  in  relation  to  the
  work  being  done, and the doing of any such work by any person, firm or
  corporation in accordance  with  the  terms  of  such  drawings,  plans,
  specifications  or  contracts  shall  not  subject  said person, firm or
  corporation to any liability or penalty, civil or criminal,  other  than
  as  may  be  stated  in  such  contracts  or  incidental  to  the proper
  enforcement thereof; nor shall any county, city, town  or  village  have
  power  to  require  that  any  subsidiary  of  the  New York state urban
  development  corporation,  or  any  lessee  therefrom  or  successor  in
  interest  thereto,  obtain  any other or additional authority, approval,
  permit, certificate or certificate of occupancy from such county,  city,
  town  or village as a condition of owning, using, maintaining, operating
  or  occupying  any   project   acquired,   constructed,   reconstructed,
  rehabilitated  or  improved by any such subsidiary of the New York state
  urban development corporation.




   § 84. Regulation of housing companies. The commissioner may:
    1.  Order  such  repairs as will preserve the health and safety of the
  occupants of such buildings and structures owned or operated by  housing
  companies, and the maintenance thereof in proper condition and repair.
    2.  Order all housing companies to do such acts as may be necessary to
  comply with the provisions of the law, the rules and regulations adopted
  by the commissioner, or  the  terms  of  any  project  approved  by  the
  commissioner, or to refrain from doing any acts in violation thereof.
    3. Examine all housing companies and keep informed as to their general
  condition,  their  capitalization and the manner in which their property
  is constructed, leased,  operated  or  managed  with  respect  to  their
  compliance with all provisions of law and orders of the commissioner.
    4.  Either  himself  or  through  his  inspectors  or  employees  duly
  authorized by him, enter in or upon and inspect the property, equipment,
  buildings,  plants,  offices,  apparatus  and  devices  of  any  housing
  companies;  examine  all books, contracts, records, documents and papers
  of any  housing  companies  and  by  subpoena  duces  tecum  compel  the
  production thereof.
    5.  In  his discretion, prescribe uniform methods and forms of keeping
  accounts, records and books to be observed  by  housing  companies,  and
  after  a  hearing  to  prescribe  by  order accounts in which particular
  outlays and receipts shall be entered, charged or credited.
    6. Require every housing company to  file  with  the  commissioner  an
  annual  report  setting  forth  such information as the commissioner may
  require,  verified  by  the  oath  of  the  president,   vice-president,
  treasurer,  secretary,  general manager or receiver, if any, thereof, or
  by the person required to file the same. Such report  shall  be  in  the
  form,  cover  the  period  and  be  filed  at the time prescribed by the
  commissioner. The commissioner may further require specific  answers  to
  questions  upon  which  the  commissioner may desire information and may
  also require such housing company to file periodic reports in the  form,
  covering the period, and at the time prescribed by the commissioner.
    7.  (a)  Administer  oaths,  take  affidavits, hear testimony and take
  proof under oath at public or private hearings; (b) subpoena and require
  the attendance of witnesses and  the  production  of  books  and  papers
  pertaining to any investigation and inquiries authorized by this article
  and examine them in relation to any matter concerning which the power to
  investigate  is  granted;  (c)  issue commissions for the examination of
  witnesses who are out of the state or unable to attend before him or are
  excused from attendance; (d) investigate into the affairs of  a  housing
  company  and  into  the  dealings, transactions or relationships of such
  company with third persons; (e) intervene, as a matter of right, in  any
  action  or  proceeding  of  which  notice  shall be given, affecting the
  project of a housing company; (f) take such  steps  in  such  action  or
  proceeding as may be necessary to protect the public interest.
    With  regard to duties or liabilities arising out of this article, the
  state or the commissioner may be sued in the same manner  as  a  private
  person.  No costs shall be awarded against the commissioner or the state
  in any such litigation.
    8. Waive, in whole or in part,  any  of  the  regulatory  powers  over
  mutual  housing companies vested in him by this article after the period
  of municipal tax  exemption  granted  to  such  mutual  housing  company
  projects pursuant to this article has expired.
    8-a.  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  law, with respect to
  projects completed prior to July first, nineteen hundred eighty-five, no
  limited  dividend  housing  company  shall  be  required  to   pay   the
  commissioner any fees for the audit or other regulation of the company.


   9.  From time to time make, amend and repeal rules and regulations for
  carrying into effect the provisions of this article.
    10.  Modify  supervision  of  a  housing  company  upon  finding  that
  duplicative supervisory functions may impose an undue regulatory  burden
  or  unnecessary  expenditure of agency resources, by taking such actions
  as are deemed appropriate, including consolidating supervisory functions
  associated with different  programs,  and  entering  into  memoranda  of
  understanding  with  other  agencies  for  the allocation of supervisory
  functions.




   §  84-a.  Additional  supervision and regulation of housing companies.
  The commissioner shall require that every company file with him,  within
  six  months  of  the  effective  date  of  regulations implementing this
  section and in such format as the commissioner shall prescribe an energy
  audit  report  which   identifies   potential   energy-saving   building
  improvements,  including  alterations,  modifications and adjustments to
  the building  structure,  heating,  cooling,  lighting  and  ventilation
  systems;  their  relative  costs; potential energy and cost savings; and
  simple payback periods, which for the purpose of this section shall mean
  that  period  of  time  within  which  the  estimated   cost   of   such
  improvements,  exclusive of the cost of capital, would be recovered from
  the savings generated by reduced energy consumption resulting  from  the
  improvements.  The  energy audit shall be conducted by a public utility,
  an engineer or architect licensed by the state, or the managing agent or
  other representative of the company. A copy of the energy audit  report,
  required  herein,  shall  be  given  to  any  duly  constituted tenant's
  association or  cooperator's  advisory  council  and  a  copy  shall  be
  available  for  inspection  and  copying  by  any  individual tenant who
  requests it. The commissioner shall  also  require  that  every  company
  certify  by  March  thirty-first,  nineteen hundred eighty-four that all
  compatible conservation measures identified in the energy  audit  report
  which  have  simple  payback  period  of  one  year  or  less  have been
  implemented; provided, however, if the  commissioner  determines  within
  sixty days of the date the energy audit report is filed that one or more
  of  such identified conservation measures cannot be implemented by March
  thirty-first, nineteen hundred eighty-four,  given  the  projected  rent
  revenues  and  any  other  monies  available to the company from reserve
  funds, loans or grants from the state or federal government or any other
  source, the  implementation  of  such  conservation  measures  shall  be
  provided for according to a schedule prescribed by the commissioner.




   §  85.  Control  of rentals. 1. The commissioner shall fix the maximum
  rental per room to be charged the tenants of the dwellings furnished  by
  a  housing company, the average of such rentals for the dwellings in any
  project not to exceed the maximum  average  rental  prescribed  by  law,
  except  as provided in section eighty-seven. Such maximum average rental
  rate shall be determined upon the basis of the actual final cost of  the
  project  containing  such rooms so as to secure, together with all other
  income of the housing company, a sufficient income to meet all necessary
  payments to be made by said housing company, as hereinafter  prescribed,
  and  such  room  rental  rates  shall  be  subject  to  revision  by the
  commissioner from time to time. The payments to be  made  by  a  housing
  company shall be
    (a)  All  fixed charges, and all operating and maintenance charges and
  expenses which shall include a charge to be fixed by the commissioner to
  reimburse him in whole or  in  part  for  the  expenses  of  inspection,
  supervision  and  auditing,  taxes, assessments, insurance, amortization
  charges in amounts approved by the commissioner to amortize the mortgage
  indebtedness in whole or in part,  improvements  and  additions  to  the
  projects  to  the extent and in the amount approved by the commissioner;
  depreciation charges if, when and to the extent deemed necessary by  the
  commissioner;   reserves,   sinking  funds  and  expenses  essential  to
  operation and management of the  project  in  amounts  approved  by  the
  commissioner.
    (b)  A  distribution  not  exceeding the maximum fixed by this article
  upon the capital of the housing company allotted to the project  by  the
  commissioner, and interest on income debentures.
    (c)  Where  feasible  in  the discretion of the commissioner a sinking
  fund in an amount to be  fixed  by  the  commissioner  for  the  gradual
  retirement  of the capital, and income debentures of the housing company
  to the extent permitted by this article.  When  tenants  own  shares  or
  income  debentures  in  a  housing  company, a sinking fund may with the
  approval and subject to the regulations of the commissioner  be  set  up
  and  maintained  out  of  the net profits applicable to surplus and used
  subject to the regulations of the commissioner for the purchase  at  not
  to  exceed  par and accrued interest of the shares and income debentures
  held by tenants ceasing to be occupants  of  the  buildings;  shares  so
  purchased  may be resold by the housing companies. The moneys payable by
  the  project  to  reimburse  the  commissioner  for  the   expenses   of
  inspection, supervision and auditing as herein provided shall be paid to
  the executive department. Letting, subletting or assignment of leases of
  apartments  in  such  buildings  or  structures  at greater rentals than
  prescribed by the order of the commissioner are prohibited and all  such
  leases shall be void for all purposes.
    2.  For the purpose of calculating rentals in such dwellings, alcoves,
  dining bays, and similar accommodations where their existence is legally
  permissible, and bathrooms in the case of apartments of three  rooms  or
  less,  may,  in  the  discretion of the commissioner, be counted as half
  rooms; bathrooms in apartments of  four  rooms  or  more  shall  not  be
  counted as rooms or half rooms.
    3.  In projects where the land is leased from a municipality the value
  of the land shall be taken at a sum fixed by the board, body or  officer
  designated   by   the   local  legislative  body  and  approved  by  the
  commissioner. For all  the  purposes  of  this  article  (including  the
  provisions  of  section  eighty-one)  the determination of the actual or
  estimated cost of projects involving leased lands shall be made  on  the
  basis  provided  in  section  eighty-three  and  other  sections of this
  article in the case of projects involving land purchased  in  fee  by  a
  housing company, except that in projects involving leased land the value


 of  the land leased, ascertained in the manner described above, shall be
  used instead of the cost of the land in determining the  total  cost  of
  the  land and improvements comprising the project. In projects involving
  leased  land,  the rental, if any, during the period of construction may
  be included as part of the cost of the project.  The  sections  of  this
  article  requiring  the  investment of at least one-fifth of the cost of
  the projects capital and income debentures shall not apply  to  projects
  involving  leased  land  but  in  such  projects  the value of the land,
  ascertained in the manner described above, plus the amount  obtained  by
  the  investment  in  the  capital  and  income debentures of the housing
  company shall be at least one-fifth of the cost of the project, and  the
  amounts,  if any, to be raised by mortgage indebtedness shall not exceed
  four-fifths of such cost.




   §  85-a.  Selection  of  tenants  and occupants. 1. The dwellings in a
  housing company project, other than a mutual project, shall be available
    (a) If such project was completed or acquired on or after July  first,
  nineteen  hundred  fifty-five,  for  persons  or families whose probable
  aggregate annual income at the time of admission does not  exceed  seven
  times  the  rental  (including the value or cost to them of heat, light,
  water and cooking fuel) of the dwellings to be furnished such persons or
  families, except that in the case of persons or families with  three  or
  more dependents, such ratio shall not exceed eight to one;
    (b)  If  such  project  was  completed  prior  to July first, nineteen
  hundred fifty-five, for persons or  families  whose  probable  aggregate
  annual  income  at the time of admission does not exceed seven times the
  rental (including the value or cost to them of heat,  light,  water  and
  cooking fuel) of the dwellings to be furnished such persons or families,
  except  that  in  the  case  of  persons  or families with three or more
  dependents, such ratio shall not exceed eight to one;
    (c) In the event that the income of a person or family residing  in  a
  project  increases  and  the ratio to the rental of the dwelling becomes
  greater than prescribed by law for admission  or  in  this  subdivision,
  whichever  is  greater, and the income is not more than fifty per centum
  above the income so prescribed for admission to the  dwelling  and  such
  increased  income  continues  for  a period of three months or more, the
  housing company may permit such person or family to continue  to  remain
  in  occupancy provided the housing company is convinced that such person
  or family cannot secure other safe and sanitary dwelling accommodations,
  or by reason of other facts the removal of such person  or  family  from
  the  project  would  occasion  other  undue  hardship  to such person or
  family. However, such person or family shall pay a rental  surcharge  in
  accordance with a schedule of surcharges promulgated by the company with
  the  approval  of the commissioner and in no event shall such removal be
  effected against any person or family which was in  occupancy  prior  to
  July first, nineteen hundred eighty-three;
    (d) In the event that the ratio of the income of a person or family to
  the  rental  of the dwelling becomes greater than that prescribed by law
  for admission or in this subdivision, whichever is greater, and is  more
  than  fifty  per  centum above the income so prescribed for admission to
  the dwelling and such increased income continues for a period  of  three
  months,  the  housing  company  shall  require  such person or family to
  remove from the dwelling and may  take  such  steps,  including  summary
  proceedings,  as  are  necessary  to effect the removal of the person or
  family. A three months' period shall be given such person or  family  to
  find  new accommodations. Pending removal from the dwelling, such person
  or family shall pay a rental surcharge in  accordance  with  a  schedule
  promulgated  by the company with the approval of the commissioner. In no
  event shall a removal otherwise authorized by this paragraph be effected
  against any person or family which was in occupancy prior to July first,
  nineteen hundred eighty-three.
    2. The dwellings in  any  mutual  housing  company  project  shall  be
  available
    (a)  In  the case of such projects constructed or acquired on or after
  July first, nineteen hundred fifty-five, for such  persons  or  families
  whose  probable  aggregate  annual income during the period of occupancy
  does not exceed, the greater of (i) the median income for  such  persons
  or  families  for the metropolitan statistical area in which the project
  is  located,  or  if  a  project  is  located  outside  a   metropolitan
  statistical area, the median income for such persons or families for the
  county  in  which the project is located, as most recently determined by
  the United States department of housing and urban development, in  which


 case  any  person  or family becoming eligible for admission pursuant to
  this subparagraph shall pay,  from  the  time  of  admission,  a  rental
  surcharge as provided for in subdivision three of this section, computed
  on  the  basis  of  the income limitations applicable to such persons or
  families in the absence of this subparagraph, or (ii)  seven  times  the
  rental  (including  the  value or cost to them of heat, light, water and
  cooking fuel) of the dwellings to be furnished such persons or families,
  except that in the case of  persons  or  families  with  three  or  more
  dependents, such ratio shall not exceed eight to one. For the purpose of
  determining  the  eligibility  of tenant cooperators in a mutual housing
  company project, there shall be  added  to  the  total  annual  carrying
  charges  an amount equal to six per centum of the investment of a person
  or family in the equity obligations of such housing company and, to  the
  extent  authorized  by the commissioner or the supervising agency as the
  case may be, the value or cost to them of repainting and the replacement
  of fixtures and appliances;
    (b) In the case of such projects  constructed  prior  to  July  first,
  nineteen hundred fifty-five, for such persons or families whose probable
  aggregate  annual income during the period of occupancy does not exceed,
  the greater of (i) the median income for such persons  or  families  for
  the metropolitan statistical area in which the project is located, or if
  a project is located outside a metropolitan statistical area, the median
  income  for such persons or families for the county in which the project
  is located, as most recently determined by the United States  department
  of  housing  and  urban  development, in which case any person or family
  becoming eligible for admission pursuant to this subparagraph shall pay,
  from the time of admission,  a  rental  surcharge  as  provided  for  in
  subdivision  three  of this section, computed on the basis of the income
  limitations applicable to such persons or families  in  the  absence  of
  this  subparagraph,  or (ii) seven times the rental (including the value
  or cost to them of heat, light, water and cooking fuel) of the dwellings
  to be furnished such persons or families, except that  in  the  case  of
  persons  or families with three or more dependents, such ratio shall not
  exceed eight to one; provided, however, that, in the discretion  of  the
  commissioner  upon application of the mutual housing company, the income
  limitations set forth in paragraph (a)  of  this  subdivision  shall  be
  applicable to such projects, and, in such case, investment in the equity
  obligations  of  such  housing companies shall include: the value of the
  stock of said housing company at  time  of  purchase;  all  moneys  paid
  towards the rental of the dwellings which are allocated to the reduction
  of  the principal amount of the mortgage loan secured by a mortgage lien
  on the real property of the housing company; and all accruals to equity,
  approved by the commissioner, resulting from capital improvements;
    (c) The limitations as to income contained hereinabove  in  paragraphs
  (a) and (b) of this subsection shall not apply in mutual housing company
  projects after the period of municipal tax exemption of such project has
  expired,  and  provided  the commissioner has waived his rights over the
  control of rentals and selection of tenants under this article;
    (d) No occupant whose income increases shall be  compelled  to  vacate
  the  project  unless  the  ratio of his income to rental of the dwelling
  becomes greater by fifty per centum or more than is prescribed by law at
  the time of admission or in this subdivision, whichever is greater,  and
  unless at the same time he shall be discharged from all liability on any
  note, bond or other evidence of indebtedness relating thereto, and there
  shall  be  repaid to such person by the housing company all sums paid to
  such company for or on account  of  the  purchase  of  stock  or  income
  debentures  as  a  condition of such occupancy. The housing company may,
  with the approval of the commissioner, permit such occupant whose income


 increases and the ratio of income to  rental  of  the  dwelling  becomes
  greater  by  fifty  per  centum or more than is prescribed by law at the
  time of admission or in  this  subdivision,  whichever  is  greater,  to
  occupy  the  dwelling  for  not more than three years from the time such
  increase in income first accrues unless such occupancy is extended  with
  the  approval of the commissioner. In no event shall a removal otherwise
  authorized by this paragraph be effected against any  person  or  family
  which  has  been  in  occupancy  prior  to  July first, nineteen hundred
  eighty-three. However, such occupant shall pay  a  rental  surcharge  in
  accordance with a schedule of surcharges promulgated by the company with
  the approval of the commissioner.
    3.  Twenty-five  per centum of rental surcharges collected pursuant to
  this section on account of rentals payable prior to July first, nineteen
  hundred eighty-three shall be paid by the company  to  the  municipality
  which has granted tax exemption pursuant to section ninety-three of this
  article  as  a  credit  against the grant of tax exemption, the value of
  such tax exemption and of such credit to be determined on an  individual
  dwelling  unit  basis. In the event that such tax exemption has not been
  granted, or in the event the period of tax exemption has expired, or  in
  the  event  that  a  sum  equal  to the total of all accrued taxes as to
  individual dwelling units where such tax exemption was granted have been
  paid to the municipality, the excess, if  any,  of  surcharges  and  all
  surcharges  imposed  after June thirtieth, nineteen hundred eighty-three
  shall be applied to the expenses of operation and management as approved
  by the commissioner.
    4. The commissioner may approve or disapprove  an  application  for  a
  lease  in accordance with the income limits prescribed herein and, where
  there is discrimination in violation of section six hundred two of  this
  chapter,  may  compel  a  housing  company  to  grant a lease or renewal
  thereof to a person or family as a tenant in the project.
    5. The "probable aggregate annual income" means the annual  income  of
  the  chief wage earner of the family plus all other income of members of
  the family over the age of twenty-one years, plus a  proportion  of  the
  income  of members under the age of twenty-one years to be determined by
  the commissioner, excluding therefrom a deduction  of  fifteen  thousand
  dollars  from  the  income  of secondary wage earners of the family or a
  larger deduction if approved by  the  commissioner  or  the  supervising
  agency,  as the case may be, except that the company, as approved by the
  commissioner, may exclude a proportion of the income of other members of
  the family  over  the  age  of  twenty-one  years  for  the  purpose  of
  determining  eligibility  for  admission  or continued occupancy, or for
  establishing the rental of such family, or for all such purposes.
    6. A company may rent one or more dwelling units to a social  services
  official  or duly authorized agency, as defined in section three hundred
  seventy-one of the social services law,  for  the  operation  of  agency
  boarding  homes  or  group  homes  or to any public agency as defined in
  section four hundred sixty-one  of  the  general  municipal  law,  which
  provides residences and social services to dependent aged persons.
    7.  (a)  For  the  purpose of enabling lower income elderly persons to
  continue in occupancy  without  paying  rentals  in  excess  of  a  fair
  proportion of their income, any municipality having a population of less
  than  one million is authorized to make and to contract to make periodic
  payments to a company in an amount not exceeding the difference  between
  the  rent  or  carrying charges for the dwellings occupied by such lower
  income persons and one-third of  their  net  probable  aggregate  annual
  income,  where  such  rent  or carrying charges exceed such one-third of
  income; provided that the aggregate amount of periodic  payments  to  be
  made  in  accordance  with  contracts  entered  into by the municipality


 during any fiscal year thereof pursuant to this subdivision, subdivision
  nine of section thirty-one, section one hundred twenty-six  and  section
  five  hundred  seventy-seven-a  of  this  chapter  shall  not exceed the
  aggregate  amount of all real property taxes paid or payable during such
  fiscal year by all companies organized pursuant to this article, article
  II, article V and article XI of this chapter and the aggregate estimated
  receipts  of  all  such  companies  in  such  fiscal  year  from  rental
  surcharges collected or to be collected pursuant to this chapter.
    (b)  Such payments shall be made only on account of a person or family
  in occupancy where the head of the household is sixty-two years  of  age
  or  older  and  is  not a recipient of public assistance pursuant to the
  social services law, and where the net probable aggregate annual  income
  of  the  person or family in occupancy does not exceed six thousand five
  hundred dollars a year. Notwithstanding the  provisions  of  subdivision
  twenty-nine of section two of this chapter net probable aggregate annual
  income  as  used  in this subdivision shall mean annual income of family
  members from all sources after deduction  of  federal,  state  and  city
  income  taxes; provided that any municipality may provide that increases
  in benefits under the social security act which take effect  after  such
  person or family has assumed occupancy shall not be taken into account.
    (c) A company having a contract with the municipality pursuant to this
  subdivision  may  not  collect  from persons or families in occupancy on
  whose account such payments are  made  any  rentals  in  excess  of  the
  amounts specified in such contract.
    8. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, persons or families
  with  two or more dependents whose probable aggregate annual income does
  not exceed one hundred twenty-five percent  of  the  limitations  as  to
  income  applicable  without reference to this subdivision, shall also be
  eligible for admission to the project  on  the  understanding  that  any
  person  or family becoming eligible by reason hereof, shall pay from the
  time of admission a rental surcharge computed on the basis of the income
  ratios applicable to such person  or  family  in  the  absence  of  this
  subdivision.  In  applying  the  provisions of paragraphs (c) and (d) of
  subdivision one and of paragraph (d) of subdivision two of this  section
  to  a family becoming eligible by reason of this subdivision, the "ratio
  prescribed by law" shall mean such ratio as would be prescribed  in  the
  absence of this subdivision.
    9.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions of this section or any law to the
  contrary, any limited dividend mutual housing company which:
    (a) owns or operates a project or projects that  are  located  in  the
  county  of  Queens and were constructed or acquired prior to July first,
  nineteen hundred sixty-five; and
    (b) did not receive a loan, construction subsidy,  mortgage,  mortgage
  guarantee  or  any  other form of financial assistance from the state of
  New  York  or  from  any  state  agency,  authority  or  public  benefit
  corporation created by the state; and
    (c) is no longer required to pay rental surcharges to the municipality
  in which it is located; and
    (d)  has commenced paying real property taxes on the value of the land
  and improvements pursuant to a resolution adopted by the governing  body
  of the municipality in which it is located; and
    (e)  has  determined,  by  a  two-thirds  vote of the directors of the
  housing company taken on or before July first of each year  that  rental
  surcharges  based  on  incomes  of  persons  or families residing in the
  project, as specified in this article or any other provision of law, are
  not required for the purpose of maintaining or operating said project or
  projects. Any such vote shall be preceded by  a  timely  notice  to  the
  project's shareholders that such vote will take place;


 shall  be  excused  from  undertaking  a  survey  of  the  aggregate and
  individual annual incomes  of  persons  or  families  residing  in  such
  project or projects constructed or acquired by such housing company, and
  shall  not  be required to impose rental surcharges based on the incomes
  of such persons or families.
    10. A housing company shall accept federal reimbursement under section
  eight  of  the  Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 in lieu of
  such amount in rent payment for a person qualifying under such  act  and
  residing  in  a  project  of  such  company. A housing company shall not
  reject an applicant for an apartment solely on the  basis  that  all  or
  part  of  the  rent shall be paid under section eight of the Housing and
  Community Development Act of 1974.




   § 85-b. Resale price of shares. Notwithstanding any other provision of
  this  article  and  subject to any regulation not inconsistent with this
  section which may be promulgated by the commissioner:
    (a) The resale price of shares in a mutual company shall be  fixed  by
  the  mutual  company,  subject  to the approval of the commissioner, and
  shall be equal to (1) the consideration  the  selling  tenant-cooperator
  paid  for  such  shares  and  (2)  any capital assessments and voluntary
  capital contributions approved by  the  commissioner  and  paid  by  the
  selling  tenant-cooperator  to  the  mutual  company,  to the extent not
  already included in the consideration paid  for  such  shares,  and,  if
  established  by  the  mutual  company,  (3) a proportionate share of the
  actual aggregate amortization paid on all existing and  prior  mortgages
  on  the project in reduction of total outstanding principal indebtedness
  during such period as shall be fixed by the board of  directors  of  the
  mutual  company, to the extent not already included in the consideration
  paid for such shares, and (4) reasonable administrative charges.
    (b) The aggregate amount to be paid to the  selling  tenant-cooperator
  with respect to the sale of the selling tenant-cooperator's shares shall
  be fixed by the board of directors of the mutual company, subject to the
  approval   of   the   commissioner,  and  shall  be  equal  to  (1)  the
  consideration the selling tenant-cooperator paid for  such  shares,  (2)
  any  capital assessments and voluntary capital contributions approved by
  the commissioner and paid by the selling tenant-cooperator to the mutual
  company, to the extent not already included in  the  consideration  paid
  for  such  shares, and (3) a proportionate share of the actual aggregate
  amortization paid by the selling tenant-cooperator on all  existing  and
  prior  mortgages  on  the  project  in  reduction  of  total outstanding
  principal indebtedness during such period as shall be fixed by the board
  of directors pursuant to subdivision (a) of this section, to the  extent
  not  already  included in the consideration paid for such shares. To the
  extent that a selling tenant-cooperator may be  entitled  to  an  amount
  less  than  the  resale  price  of  his  shares, the difference shall be
  retained by the mutual company.
    (c) The board of  directors  may,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the
  commissioner,  establish  a  general  policy pursuant to which a selling
  tenant-cooperator who had occupied more than one dwelling unit  is  paid
  an  amount  measured  by his proportionate share of the actual aggregate
  amortization paid during his period of  occupancy  on  all  existing  or
  prior   mortgages   on  the  project.  To  the  extent  that  a  selling
  tenant-cooperator may be entitled to an amount greater than  the  resale
  price   of   shares,   the   difference  may  be  paid  to  the  selling
  tenant-cooperator by the mutual company.
    (d) The "proportionate share of the actual aggregate amortization paid
  on all existing and prior mortgages  on  the  project"  referred  to  in
  subdivision  (a)  of  this  section  shall  be in the same ratio to such
  actual aggregate amortization as  the  number  of  shares  held  by  the
  selling  tenant-cooperator at the time of sale bears to the total number
  of shares of issued and outstanding capital stock of the mutual  company
  during such period.
    (e) Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the continued use
  of  any  method  of calculating resale price adopted by a mutual company
  and approved by the commissioner prior to the  effective  date  of  this
  section.




   §  86.  Reduction  of  rentals in housing company projects.  If in any
  calendar or fiscal year the gross receipts of any housing company should
  exceed the payments or charges specified  in  section  eighty-five,  the
  sums necessary to pay distributions or interest accrued or unpaid on any
  shares,  income debentures or other capital, and the authorized transfer
  to surplus, the balance  shall,  unless  the  board  of  directors,  the
  partners  or  the trustees, as the case may be, with the approval of the
  commissioner shall deem such balance  too  small  for  the  purpose,  be
  applied  to  the  reduction  of  rentals,  for such year or years as the
  commissioner may specify, or to the further reduction  of  any  mortgage
  indebtedness, or both, as the commissioner may determine.




   §  87.  Increase  of rentals in housing company projects.  Whenever it
  shall appear that the interests  of  lienholders,  creditors,  debenture
  holders,  shareholders,  partners  or  beneficiaries cannot otherwise be
  safeguarded, the  commissioner  shall,  notwithstanding  the  limitation
  prescribed  in  this  article upon maximum average rental, have power by
  his order made upon written application of a housing  company  or  of  a
  lienholder,  a  creditor,  or of holders of ten per centum of the income
  debentures of the housing company, or, in the case of a housing  company
  which is a corporation, the holders of ten per centum of the shares, or,
  in  the  case  of a housing company which is a partnership, the partners
  having an interest in capital equal to ten per centum  thereof,  or,  in
  the case of a housing company which is a trust, the beneficiaries having
  a  beneficial  interest  in  capital equal to ten per centum thereof, to
  authorize such housing company to increase rentals  beyond  the  maximum
  provided in this article as follows:
    (a)  If  the  application  is  made  before occupancy of the dwellings
  embraced in the project and it is  shown  to  the  satisfaction  of  the
  commissioner  that  owing  to  causes  beyond the control of the housing
  company or contingencies which in the opinion of the commissioner  could
  not   reasonably   have   been  anticipated,  the  maximum  rentals  are
  insufficient to meet the payments authorized in section  eighty-five  in
  which  event  the  commissioner may authorize an increase in the minimum
  amount necessary to enable such housing company to make such payments.
    (b) If the application is made after occupancy the order shall be made
  only after a public hearing. Said hearing shall be  held  upon  no  less
  than  twenty  days'  written notice to the tenants and such notice shall
  have annexed thereto a copy of the application for increase in  rentals.
  No  such  order  or  authorization  shall  be  made  or given unless the
  commissioner shall find that because of changes in  economic  conditions
  in  their  application  to the project with respect to which request for
  increased rentals shall have been made or because of special assessments
  or causes or contingencies beyond the control of  the  housing  company,
  affecting such project, the maximum rentals fixed as herein provided are
  insufficient  to  meet the payments authorized in section eighty-five of
  this  article  and  unless  the  commissioner  shall  find   that   such
  insufficiency  cannot be corrected by reasonable economies in management
  and operation of said project. The commissioner shall not authorize  any
  increase  in rentals in excess of the minimum amount necessary to enable
  the said housing company to make the said payments authorized in section
  eighty-five. Any order by the commissioner shall be final and conclusive
  upon all questions within his jurisdiction, with respect to the  project
  affected  thereby,  unless  reversed  or modified on appeal therefrom as
  hereinafter provided. Within thirty days after notice of the  filing  of
  the  order of the commissioner has been sent to the said housing company
  and served upon the said tenants affected thereby in such manner as  the
  commissioner  shall  prescribe,  an appeal may be taken to the appellate
  division of the supreme court in the department  in  which  the  project
  affected by the order is located, from such order of the commissioner by
  any  party  in  interest.  If  notice  of such appeal is served upon the
  commissioner, he shall, within thirty days thereafter,  serve  upon  the
  parties  in  interest a statement of his conclusions of fact and rulings
  of law in such case. The commissioner may also in his discretion certify
  to such appellate  division  of  the  supreme  court  questions  of  law
  involved  in his order. Such appeal and the questions so certified shall
  be heard in a summary manner and shall have precedence  over  all  other
  civil  cases  in such court. The commissioner shall be deemed a party to
  every such appeal.


   An appeal may also be taken by the commissioner or  by  any  party  in
  interest  to  the court of appeals in the same manner and subject to the
  same limitations as is now provided in civil actions. It  shall  not  be
  necessary  to  file  exceptions to the rulings of the commissioner.  The
  commissioner  shall not be required to file a bond upon an appeal by him
  to the court of appeals. Upon final determination of such an appeal, the
  commissioner shall enter an order in accordance therewith.




   §  88. Surplus.  The amount of net earnings transferable to surplus in
  any year after making or providing for the payments specified  in  items
  (a),  (b)  and  (c)  of  subdivision  one of section eighty-five of this
  article shall be subject to the approval of the commissioner. The amount
  of such surplus shall not exceed twelve per centum  of  the  outstanding
  capital and income debentures of the housing company, but the surplus so
  limited  shall  not  be  deemed to include any increase in assets due to
  reduction  of  mortgage  or  amortization  or   similar   payments.   On
  dissolution  of  any  housing  company,  organized as a corporation, the
  shareholders shall in no event receive more than the par value of  their
  shares  plus accumulated, accrued or unpaid dividends at the rate of six
  per centum per annum; on dissolution of a housing company organized as a
  partnership, the partners shall in no event receive more than the  value
  of   their   paid   in  capital  plus  accumulated,  accrued  or  unpaid
  distributions on capital at the rate of six per  centum  per  annum;  on
  termination of a housing company organized as a trust, the beneficiaries
  shall  in  no event receive more than the value of the money or property
  subject to the trust plus accumulated, accrued or  unpaid  distributions
  on  capital  at  the rate of six per centum per annum; on dissolution of
  any housing company income debenture holders shall in no  event  receive
  more   than  the  face  value  of  income  debentures  outstanding  plus
  accumulated, accrued and unpaid interest at the rate of six  per  centum
  per  annum. Any remaining surplus shall be paid into the general fund of
  the state of New York, if the buildings  and  the  improvements  of  the
  project  have  not  received exemption from taxation by the municipality
  pursuant to subdivision three or four of section ninety-three and if the
  company has not received a loan from the municipality, but if  such  tax
  exemption or loan has been received, any remaining surplus shall be paid
  into the general fund of the municipality.




   §  89. Consolidated projects; operation of more than one project.  The
  commissioner may permit  the  consolidation  of  two  or  more  approved
  projects  or  the  extension or amendment of any approved project or the
  consolidation of any approved project with a proposed project. In any of
  these events, the consolidated project shall be treated as  an  original
  project  and  an  application  shall  be  submitted as in the case of an
  original project and rents and costs  may  be  averaged  throughout  the
  consolidated  or  extended project. The commissioner may likewise permit
  any housing company to organize and operate more than one project or  to
  take  over  any  project  heretofore approved by the commissioner and to
  operate it independently of other projects of the housing company.   The
  commissioner  may  in  his  discretion  decline  to permit more than one
  project to be operated by the same housing company.




   § 90. Purchase by housing companies.  Before any housing company shall
  purchase  the  property  of  any other housing company, it shall file an
  application with the commissioner in the manner hereinbefore provided as
  for a new project and shall obtain the consent of  the  commissioner  to
  the purchase and agree to be bound by the provisions of this article and
  the  commissioner  shall  not give his consent unless it is shown to the
  satisfaction of the commissioner that the project is  one  that  can  be
  successfully operated according to the provisions of this article.




   §  91.  Proceedings  against  housing  companies.    1.  Whenever  the
  commissioner shall be of the opinion that a housing company  is  failing
  or  omitting,  or is about to fail or omit to do anything required of it
  by law or by order of the commissioner or is doing or  is  about  to  do
  anything,  or  permitting anything, or is about to permit anything to be
  done, contrary to and in violation  of  law  or  of  any  order  of  the
  commissioner,  or which is improvident or prejudicial to the interest of
  the public, the lienholders, the shareholders,  partners,  beneficiaries
  or  the tenants, the commissioner shall commence an action or proceeding
  in the supreme court of the state  of  New  York  in  the  name  of  the
  commissioner,  in  accordance  with the provisions of the civil practice
  law and rules for the purpose of having such  violations  or  threatened
  violations  stopped and prevented, and in such action or proceeding, the
  court may appoint a temporary or permanent receiver or both. Such action
  or proceeding shall be commenced by a petition  to  the  supreme  court,
  alleging the violation complained of and praying for appropriate relief.
  It  shall  thereupon  be  the duty of the court to specify the time, not
  exceeding twenty days after service of a copy of  the  petition,  within
  which  the  housing  company  complained of must answer the petition. In
  case of default in answer or after answer the  court  shall  immediately
  inquire  into  the  facts  and circumstances in such manner as the court
  shall direct without other or formal pleadings, and without  respect  to
  any  technical  requirements.  Such  other persons or corporations as it
  shall seem to the court necessary or proper to join as parties in  order
  to  make  its order or judgment effective, may be joined as parties. The
  final judgment in any such action or proceeding shall either dismiss the
  action or proceeding or direct that an order or an injunction, or  both,
  issue, or provide for the appointment of a receiver as prayed for in the
  petition, or grant such other relief as the court may deem appropriate.
    2.  In  the  event  that a municipality shall make a loan to a housing
  company, the municipality, as well as the commissioner, shall  have  the
  powers enumerated in subdivision one of this section.




   § 92. Reorganization.  1. Reorganization of housing companies shall be
  subject  to  the supervision and control of the commissioner and no such
  reorganization  shall  be  had  without   the   authorization   of   the
  commissioner.
    2.  Upon all such reorganizations the capital structure of the housing
  company shall  be  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  commissioner  in
  accordance with the provisions of section seventy-eight of this article.




   §  93. Tax exemptions. 1. Any housing company shall be exempt from the
  payment  of  any  and  all  franchise,  organization,  income,  mortgage
  recording  and other taxes to the state and all fees to the state or its
  officers.
    2. Bonds and mortgages and the income debenture  certificates  of  all
  housing  companies  are  declared  to be instrumentalities of the state,
  issued for public purposes and shall, together with interest thereon, be
  exempt from taxation. Distributions on capital of said  companies  shall
  be exempt from taxation by the state.
    3. Any municipality in which projects of housing companies are located
  is  authorized  to  exempt  the  buildings  and  improvements created in
  connection with such projects  from  local  taxation,  and  should  said
  municipality  exempt  such buildings and improvements from such taxation
  the buildings and improvements of said company shall to  the  extent  of
  such exemption be exempt from any and all state taxation. This provision
  shall  apply only to projects completed prior to January first, nineteen
  hundred thirty-nine.
    4. Any municipality in which projects of housing companies are located
  is authorized, through its local legislative body, to exempt from  local
  and  municipal taxes, other than assessments for local improvements, all
  or part of the value of the property included in any  such  projects  as
  represents an increase over the assessed valuation of the real property,
  both  land and improvements, acquired for the project at the time of its
  acquisition by  the  housing  company  which  originally  undertook  the
  project;  and  should  a  municipality  grant  such  tax  exemption, all
  projects of housing companies shall to  the  extent  of  such  municipal
  exemption  and  during  the  period  thereof, be exempt from any and all
  state taxes. Such exemption of projects from taxation by a  municipality
  and  the  state  shall  not  extend to projects erected prior to January
  first, nineteen  hundred  thirty-nine  nor  to  projects  erected  after
  January  first,  nineteen  hundred  seventy-three  and  prior to January
  first, nineteen hundred seventy-nine.
    5. The tax exemption specified in subdivisions three and four of  this
  section  shall  not  operate  for  a  period  of  more than fifty years,
  commencing in each instance from the date on which the benefits of  such
  exemption first become available and effective.
    6.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of subdivisions four and five of
  this section, the real property  owned,  acquired,  leased,  managed  or
  operated  by  a  state  urban  development  corporation project shall be
  exempt from all local and municipal taxes,  other  than  assessment  for
  local  improvements, to the extent of the value of the property included
  in such project as represents an increase over the assessed valuation of
  the real property, both land and improvements acquired for  the  project
  on the date of its acquisition by the housing company. The tax exemption
  shall  operate  and  continue  so  long  as  the  mortgage loans of such
  limited-dividend housing company are outstanding, but in no event for  a
  period  of  more  than forty years, commencing in each instance from the
  date when such limited-dividend  housing  company  first  acquired  such
  property.  If  a  state urban development corporation project qualifying
  for tax exemption  pursuant  to  this  subdivision  is  sold,  with  the
  approval  of  the  commissioner,  to  another  limited-dividend  housing
  company, such successor company shall be entitled to all the benefits of
  this subdivision.
    7. Any project that received a tax exemption under this  section  may,
  upon  the  expiration  of  the  tax  exemption  period,  be  granted  an
  additional tax exemption period of up to fifty years, or until such time
  as the project is no longer operated under the restrictions and for  the
  purposes set forth in this article, whichever is sooner.




   §  94. Foreclosure. 1. In any foreclosure action the commissioner, and
  the municipality if it has made  a  loan  to  the  housing  company,  in
  addition  to  other  necessary parties, shall be made parties defendant;
  and the commissioner and the municipality shall take all steps  in  such
  action  necessary  to protect the interest of the public therein, and no
  costs shall be awarded against  him  or  the  municipality.  Foreclosure
  shall  not  be decreed unless the court to which application therefor is
  made shall be satisfied that the interests of the lienholder or  holders
  can  not  be adequately secured or safeguarded except by the sale of the
  property. In any such proceeding, the court shall be authorized to  make
  an   order  increasing  the  rentals  to  be  charged  for  the  housing
  accommodations in the project involved  in  such  foreclosure,  but  not
  exceeding  the  maximum  average  rentals  fixed  herein, or appoint the
  commissioner as a  receiver  of  the  property  and  in  the  event  the
  municipality  has made a loan to the housing company, appoint an officer
  or employee of the municipality, or grant such other and further  relief
  as  may  be reasonable and proper. In the event of a foreclosure sale or
  other judicial sale, the property shall, except as provided in the  next
  succeeding paragraph of this section, be sold only to a housing company,
  unless  the  court  shall  find that the interest on the bonds cannot be
  earned under the restrictions imposed by the provisions of this  article
  and  that  the  proceeding  was brought in good faith. In such event the
  property shall be sold free of all restrictions imposed by this  article
  and  all  the  benefits  theretofore  granted under this article to such
  project shall thereupon terminate.
    2. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section,  wherever
  it  shall  appear  that a government, the New York state housing finance
  agency, the New York state urban development corporation, created by the
  New York state urban development corporation  act,  the  New  York  city
  housing   development  corporation,  Battery  Park  city  authority,  an
  organization or entity investing or participating in a loan pursuant  to
  subdivision  one  of  section  fifteen of this chapter, or a corporation
  subject  to  the  supervision  of  the  state  department  of  financial
  services,  shall have loaned on a mortgage which is a lien upon any such
  property, such government, New York state housing  finance  agency,  New
  York   state  urban  development  corporation,  New  York  city  housing
  development corporation, Battery Park city authority, an organization or
  entity investing or participating in a loan  pursuant  to  said  section
  fifteen  or a corporation subject to such supervision, or any trustee or
  trustees, or any successor trustee or trustees, for the benefit  of  any
  one  or  more  of  the  aforesaid  classes  shall  have all the remedies
  available to a mortgagee under the laws of the state of New  York,  free
  from  any  restrictions  contained  in  this  section  except  that  the
  commissioner shall be made a party defendant and that  the  commissioner
  shall  take  all  steps necessary to protect the interests of the public
  and no costs shall be awarded against him or her




   §  95.  Judgments  against  housing companies not relating to mortgage
  indebtedness.  In the event of a judgment against a housing  company  in
  any  action not pertaining to the collection of a mortgage indebtedness,
  there shall be no sale of any of  the  real  property  of  such  housing
  company  except upon sixty days' written notice to the commissioner and,
  if the municipality has made a loan  to  the  housing  company,  to  the
  municipality  in  which  the  project  is  located. Upon receipt of such
  notice the commissioner and the municipality shall take such steps as in
  its judgment may be necessary to protect the rights of all parties.




   §  96.  Voluntary  dissolution.   1. Notwithstanding any provisions in
  this article to the contrary, a housing company  organized  pursuant  to
  this   article  after  April  first,  nineteen  hundred  sixty-two,  may
  voluntarily be dissolved, or in the case of a housing company which is a
  trust, be terminated, without the consent of the commissioner, not  less
  than  twenty  years after the occupancy date upon the payment in full of
  the remaining balance of principal and interest due and unpaid upon  the
  mortgage   or  mortgages  and  of  any  and  all  expenses  incurred  in
  effectuating such voluntary dissolution or termination.
    2. Upon such dissolution or termination, title to the project  may  be
  conveyed  in  fee  to  the  owner  or  owners  of  its capital or to any
  corporation, partnership or trust designated  by  it  or  them  for  the
  purpose,  or  the  company  may be reconstituted pursuant to appropriate
  laws relating to the formation and conduct of corporations, partnerships
  or trusts, provided, however, that prior  to  any  such  dissolution  or
  termination  and  conveyance  or reconstitution payment shall be made of
  all current operating expenses,  taxes,  indebtedness  and  all  accrued
  interest  thereon  and  the  par  value  of  the shares or amount of the
  capital of such company and accrued distributions  in  respect  thereof.
  If  after  making  such  payments and after conveyance of the project, a
  surplus remains in the treasury of the  housing  company,  such  surplus
  shall,   upon   dissolution   or   termination  be  distributed  to  the
  shareholders, partners or beneficiaries, as their interests may  appear.
  After   such   dissolution   or  termination  and  conveyance,  or  such
  reconstitution, the provisions of  this  article  shall  become  and  be
  inapplicable  to  any  such project and its owner or owners, and any tax
  exemption granted with respect  to  such  project  pursuant  to  section
  ninety-three hereof shall cease and terminate.




   §  97.  Corporations  in  existence  prior  to  enactment  of article.
  Nothing in this  article  contained  shall  be  deemed  to  require  the
  reincorporation  of  any  public limited dividend housing company or any
  private limited dividend housing company heretofore organized under  the
  provisions of chapter eight hundred twenty-three of the laws of nineteen
  hundred  twenty-six,  entitled  "state housing law," as amended prior to
  the enactment of this article,  nor  to  alter  or  affect  any  rights,
  privileges, powers, benefits, or immunities granted to such corporations
  by  the  provisions  of any law, general, special or local. Such housing
  companies  shall  exist,  continue  to  function  and  they  and   their
  stockholders,  debenture holders, tenants, mortgagees, creditors and all
  other persons having an  interest  therein  shall  possess  the  powers,
  rights  and  privileges,  be  subject  to  the  duties, restrictions and
  liabilities, of this article, provided that the legality, terms, rights,
  duties, limitations, privileges and immunities with  respect  to  rents,
  dividend  returns, mortgage interest, state and local tax exemptions and
  investments in  such  companies  heretofore  made  and  of  transactions
  heretofore had by such companies shall not be affected by the provisions
  of  this  article,  but  the  same  shall continue to be governed by the
  provisions of chapter eight hundred twenty-three of the laws of nineteen
  hundred twenty-six and amendatory acts thereto, and for  such  purposes,
  such  chapter  and  amendatory acts thereto shall continue to be in full
  force and effect.




   §  100.  Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited and
  referred to as the "Redevelopment Companies Law."




   §  101.    Policy  of state and purpose of act.  It is hereby declared
  that in certain areas of municipalities located within this state  there
  exist  substandard conditions and insanitary housing conditions owing to
  obsolescence, deterioration and dilapidation of buildings, or  excessive
  land  coverage,  lack  of  planning, of public facilities, of sufficient
  light, air and space, and improper  design  and  arrangement  of  living
  quarters;  that  there  is  not  in  such  areas  a sufficient supply of
  adequate, safe and sanitary dwelling accommodations properly planned and
  related to public  facilities;  that  modern  standards  of  urban  life
  require  the  housing  be  related  to  adequate  and  convenient public
  facilities; that the aforesaid  substandard  and  insanitary  conditions
  depress  and  destroy the economic value of large areas and by impairing
  the  value  of  private  investments  threaten  the  sources  of  public
  revenues;  that  the public interest requires the clearance, replanning,
  reconstruction and neighborhood rehabilitation of such  substandard  and
  insanitary  areas, together with adequate provision for recreational and
  other facilities incidental and appurtenant  thereto  according  to  the
  requirements  of  modern urban life and that such clearance, replanning,
  reconstruction and neighborhood  rehabilitation  are  essential  to  the
  protection  of  the  financial stability of such municipalities; that in
  order to protect the sources  of  public  revenue  it  is  necessary  to
  modernize  the  physical  plan  and conditions of urban life; that these
  conditions cannot be remedied by  the  ordinary  operations  of  private
  enterprise;  that  provision must be made to encourage the investment of
  funds in corporations, partnerships  and  trusts  engaged  in  providing
  redevelopment facilities to be constructed according to the requirements
  of  city  planning  and  in  effectuation  of  official  city  plans and
  regulated by law as to  profits,  dividends  and  disposition  of  their
  property  or franchises; that provision must be made to enable insurance
  companies to provide such facilities, subject to regulation by law as to
  the return from such facilities and the disposition of property acquired
  for such  purpose;  and  that  provision  must  also  be  made  for  the
  acquisition  for  such  corporations,  partnerships,  limited  liability
  companies and trusts and companies  at  fair  prices  of  real  property
  required   for  such  purposes  in  substandard  areas  and  for  public
  assistance of  such  corporations,  partnerships  and  trusts  and  such
  companies   by   the  granting  of  partial  tax  exemptions;  that  the
  cooperation of the state and its subdivisions is necessary to accomplish
  such  purposes;  that  the  clearance,  replanning  and  reconstruction,
  rehabilitation and modernization of substandard and insanitary areas and
  the  provision  of adequate, safe, sanitary and properly planned housing
  accommodations  in  effectuation  of  official  city   plans   by   such
  corporations,  partnerships,  limited liability companies and trusts and
  such companies in these areas are public uses  and  purposes  for  which
  private  property  may  be acquired for such corporations, partnerships,
  limited liability companies and trusts and such  companies  and  partial
  tax  exemption  granted  for  such  corporations,  partnerships, limited
  liability companies and trusts and such companies; that these conditions
  require the creation of the agencies,  instrumentalities,  corporations,
  partnerships  and  trusts  hereinafter  prescribed  for  the  purpose of
  attaining the ends herein recited;  and  the  necessity  in  the  public
  interest  for the provisions hereinafter enacted is hereby declared as a
  matter of legislative determination.




   § 102. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall
  mean and include:
    1.  "Project." A specific work or improvement to effectuate all or any
  part of a plan including lands,  buildings  and  improvements  acquired,
  owned,  constructed,  managed  or operated in an area by a redevelopment
  company  or  an  insurance  company  providing  dwelling  accommodations
  pursuant  to  this  article  and  such business, commercial, cultural or
  recreational facilities appurtenant thereto as may be approved  pursuant
  to section one hundred fourteen of this article.
    2.  "Supervising  agency." The municipal comptroller in a municipality
  having a comptroller; in a municipality having no comptroller the  chief
  financial  officer  of such municipality; except that in the city of New
  York it shall be the department of housing preservation and development.
  However, as to any insurance company providing  dwelling  accommodations
  pursuant  to  this  article, or if any of the stock and income debenture
  certificates having voting power of a redevelopment company are  or  are
  to  be  issued  to  one or more insurance companies, the term shall mean
  only the superintendent of financial services.
    3. "Local and municipal  taxes."  Taxes  levied  by  a  county,  city,
  village,  town,  school  and  special  district  but  shall  not include
  assessments for local improvements.
    3-a. "Redevelopment company." A corporation, partnership  (general  or
  limited),  limited  liability  companies or trust created as provided in
  section one hundred three of this article.
    4. "Capital." In the case of a corporation, the capital shares of that
  corporation for the time being issued and outstanding; in the case of  a
  partnership,  the  aggregate value of the money and property contributed
  by the partners for the purpose of  carrying  on  the  business  of  the
  partnership,  so  far  as  such  is  credited to the partners on capital
  account; in the case of a limited liability company, the aggregate value
  of the money and property contributed by the members for the purpose  of
  carrying on the business of the company; and in the case of a trust, the
  aggregate value of the money or property subject to the trust.
    5.  "Federally-aided mortgage." A mortgage loan made or insured by the
  federal government  or  any  agency  or  instrumentality  thereof  or  a
  mortgage  loan  entered  into  in  conjunction with a housing assistance
  payments contract in connection with  new  construction  or  substantial
  rehabilitation  or  moderate rehabilitation pursuant to section eight of
  the United States housing act of 1937, as amended.
    6. The term "mutual" when applied to  a  redevelopment  company  shall
  mean a redevelopment company which is a corporation operated exclusively
  for the benefit of the persons or families who are entitled to occupancy
  in  a  project  of  such redevelopment company by reason of ownership of
  shares in such redevelopment company.




   §  103.  Redevelopment  companies;  how  created.  1.  A redevelopment
  company may be created  as  a  corporation  by  three  or  more  persons
  signing, acknowledging and filing a certificate which shall contain:
    (1) The name of the proposed redevelopment company.
    (2)  The  purposes  for  which  it  is  to be formed which shall be as
  follows:  To acquire one or more areas under a plan  or  plans,  and  to
  construct,  own, maintain, operate, sell and convey projects pursuant to
  the terms and provisions of this article.
    (3) The amount of the capital shares, and if any be preferred  shares,
  the preference thereof.
    (4)  The  number  of shares of which the capital shall consist, all of
  which shall have a par value.
    (5) The city, village or town in which its principal  business  office
  is  to  be  located;  if  located  in  the city of New York, the borough
  thereof in which it is to be located.
    (6) Its duration, which shall not be less than twenty years.
    (7) The number of directors, which shall not be less  than  three  and
  who  need not be shareholders. One additional director may be designated
  by the supervising agency, and, in the case  of  all  mutual  companies,
  such  additional  director shall be designated by the supervising agency
  at the creation of the company and shall serve from  the  time  of  such
  designation  at least until a board of directors has been elected by the
  tenants entitled to occupancy in the project by reason of  ownership  of
  shares  in  such  company.  The  directors  appointed by the supervising
  agency need not  meet  any  of  the  qualifications  prescribed  in  the
  certificate of incorporation or the by-laws, and in the absence of fraud
  or  bad  faith shall not be personally liable for the debts, obligations
  or liabilities of the corporation.
    (8) The names and post-office addresses of the directors for the first
  year.
    (9) The names and post-office addresses  of  the  subscribers  to  the
  certificate and a statement of the number of shares which each agrees to
  take in the redevelopment company.
    (10) A provision that, so long as this article shall remain applicable
  to  any  project  of the redevelopment company, the real property of the
  redevelopment company shall not be sold, transferred or assigned  except
  as permitted by the terms and provisions of this article.
    (11)  A declaration that all of the subscribers to the certificate are
  of full age; that at least two-thirds of them are citizens of the United
  States and that at least one of them is a resident of the state  of  New
  York;  that at least one of the persons named as a director is a citizen
  of the United States and a resident of the state of New York.
    (12) A declaration that the redevelopment company has  been  organized
  to serve a public purpose and that it shall be and remain subject to the
  supervision  and control of the supervising agency except as provided in
  this article, so long as this article remains applicable to any  project
  of  the  redevelopment  company;  that  all  real  and personal property
  acquired by it and all structures erected by it, shall be deemed  to  be
  acquired or created for the promotion of the purposes of this article.
    (13)  A declaration that, upon the dissolution of the company pursuant
  to  the  provisions  of  subdivision  one   of   section   one   hundred
  twenty-three,  the  property  may be conveyed in fee as provided in said
  subdivision.
    (14)  A  declaration  that  mortgage  indebtedness,  income  debenture
  certificates and capital of the redevelopment company may be retired if,
  as  and when there shall be funds available for amortization purposes in
  the treasury of the redevelopment company.


   (15) A declaration that in the event of a violation by a company of  a
  provision  of  its  certificate  or  of law or any rules and regulations
  promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article, the  supervising
  agency  may,  by written notice, as provided by this article, advise the
  directors,  partners  or trustees, as the case may be, of the company of
  its desire to remove any or all of the existing directors or to  appoint
  a  manager or managers of the partnership or trust who shall exclusively
  exercise all of the powers of such partners or trustees, as the case may
  be, for the duration of the appointment of such manager or managers.  In
  the  event that the company fails to comply with the requirements of the
  supervising agency within thirty days  from  date  of  mailing  of  said
  written notice, the supervising agency may, with the written approval of
  any  mortgagee  and  without  further  notice  to  the company or to its
  directors, partners or  trustees,  as  the  case  may  be,  remove  such
  directors  in the case of a redevelopment company which is a corporation
  or any of them from office and appoint such person  or  persons  as  the
  supervising  agency,  in its sole discretion, deems advisable, including
  officers or employees of the supervising agency,  as  new  directors  to
  serve in the places of those removed or appoint such manager or managers
  in  the  case of a redevelopment company which is a partnersnip or trust
  who shall exclusively exercise all of the powers  of  such  partners  or
  trustees,  as  the  case may be. Directors or managers so appointed need
  not meet qualifications which may  be  prescribed  by  the  certificate,
  by-laws,  partnership  or trust agreement, or other rules or regulations
  of the company. In the absence of  fraud  or  bad  faith,  directors  or
  managers  so  appointed  shall  not  be  personally  liable  for  debts,
  obligations or liabilities of the  company.  Directors  or  managers  so
  appointed  shall serve only for a period coexistent with the duration of
  such violation or until the supervising agency is assured, in  a  manner
  satisfactory  to it, against violations of a similar nature. Officers or
  employees of the supervising agency who are appointed as such  directors
  or managers shall serve in such capacity without compensation.
    (16)  A  designation  of  the  secretary  of  state  as  agent  of the
  corporation upon whom process against it may  be  served  and  the  post
  office  address  within  or without this state to which the secretary of
  state shall mail a copy of any process against it served upon him.
    (17) If the corporation is to have a registered agent,  his  name  and
  address  within  this state and a statement that the registered agent is
  to be the agent of the corporation upon whom process against it  may  be
  served.
    2. (1) A redevelopment company may be created as a general partnership
  by  the  partners  signing,  acknowledging  and  filing  as  hereinafter
  provided a certificate which shall contain:
    (a) The matters set out  in  paragraphs  one,  two,  five,  six,  ten,
  twelve,  thirteen,  fourteen  and  fifteen  of  subdivision  one of this
  section.
    (b) The names and post-office addresses of the partners.
    (c) A statement of the capital of the partnership.
    (d) As to all the partners who are individuals, a declaration that (i)
  all such partners are of full age; (ii) all of them if there be no  more
  than  two  and at least two-thirds of them if there be more than two are
  citizens of the United States; and (iii) at  least  one  of  them  is  a
  resident  of  the  state  of  New York; and as to all partners which are
  corporations,  a  declaration  that  each  such  corporation  is  either
  incorporated  under  the  laws  of the state of New York or is a foreign
  corporation duly authorized to do business in the state of New York.
    (2) A redevelopment company may be created as a limited partnership by
  the partners filing as provided herein a copy of the  certificate  filed


 with  the county clerk pursuant to article eight of the partnership law.
  The partners shall at the same time sign, acknowledge and file a further
  certificate which shall contain the matters set out in  paragraphs  one,
  two,   five,  six,  ten,  twelve,  thirteen,  fourteen  and  fifteen  of
  subdivision one of this section and a  declaration  as  to  all  of  the
  general   partners   which   shall   comply  with  the  requirements  of
  subparagraph (d) of paragraph one of this subdivision.
    2-a. A redevelopment company may be created  as  a  limited  liability
  company  by the members signing, acknowledging and filing as hereinafter
  provided a certificate which shall contain:
    (1) The matters set out  in  paragraphs  one,  two,  five,  six,  ten,
  twelve,  thirteen,  fourteen  and  fifteen  of  subdivision  one of this
  section.
    (2) The names and post-office addresses of the members.
    (3) A statement of the capital of the limited liability company.
    (4) As to all the members who are individuals, a declaration that  (a)
  all  such  members  are of full age; (b) all of them if there be no more
  than two and at least two-thirds of them if there be more than  two  are
  citizens  of  the  United  States;  and  (c)  at  least one of them is a
  resident of the state of New York; and  as  to  all  members  which  are
  corporations,  a  declaration  that  each  such  corporation  is  either
  incorporated under the laws of the state of New York  or  is  a  foreign
  corporation duly authorized to do business in the state of New York.
    3.  A  redevelopment  company may be created as a trust by the settlor
  signing, acknowledging and filing as hereinafter provided a  certificate
  which shall contain:
    (1)  The  matters  set  out  in  paragraphs  one, two, five, six, ten,
  twelve, thirteen, fourteen  and  fifteen  of  subdivision  one  of  this
  section.
    (2) A statement of the capital of the trust.
    (3) The name and post-office address of the trustee or trustees.
    (4) The name and post-office address of any person having a beneficial
  interest, whether vested or contingent, under the trust.
    (5) As to all the trustees who are individuals, a declaration that (i)
  all  such trustees are of full age; (ii) that all of them if there be no
  more than two and at least two-thirds of them if there be more than  two
  are  citizens  of the United States; and (iii) that at least one of them
  is a resident of the state of New York; and as to all trustees which are
  corporations,  a  declaration  that  each  such  corporation  is  either
  incorporated  under  the  laws  of the state of New York or is a foreign
  corporation duly authorized to do business in the state of New York.
    4. A certificate made pursuant to this section shall further contain a
  declaration  that  after  providing  for   all   expenses,   taxes   and
  assessments,  there  shall  be  paid annually out of the earnings of the
  redevelopment company, a sum for interest on  and  amortization  of  any
  mortgage  indebtedness  and  depreciation  charges  if,  when and to the
  extent deemed necessary by the supervising  agency,  plus  interest  not
  exceeding  six  per  centum  on  outstanding  income  debentures  and  a
  distribution  to  the  shareholders,  to  the   partners   or   to   the
  beneficiaries of the trust having interests vested in possession, as the
  case  may  be, not exceeding six per centum of the total of the capital;
  that the obligation in respect of such payments shall be cumulative, and
  any deficiency in interest, amortization, depreciation and  distribution
  in  any  year  shall  be  paid either from any cash surplus derived from
  earnings remaining in the  treasury  of  the  redevelopment  company  in
  excess of the amount necessary to provide such cumulative annual sums or
  from the first available earnings in subsequent years; and that any cash
  surplus   derived  from  earnings  remaining  in  the  treasury  of  the


 redevelopment company in excess of the amount necessary to provide  such
  cumulative  annual sums shall upon the dissolution of, or in the case of
  a redevelopment company which is a trust the termination of, the company
  be paid into the general fund of the municipality.
    5.  A  certificate made pursuant to the provisions of this section may
  provide that in the event that income debenture certificates are  issued
  by  the  redevelopment company, the owners thereof may be given the same
  right to vote as they would have if possessed of  shares  of  equivalent
  par  value  in  the  case  of  a  corporation or if they had contributed
  capital in the case of a partnership, or had a beneficial interest under
  the trust vested in the case of a trust,  of  an  amount  equal  to  the
  amount of the income debenture certificates held by them.
    If  provision  is made for the issue of income debenture certificates,
  interest shall be paid by the redevelopment company on income  debenture
  certificates  only out of net earnings of the redevelopment company that
  would be applicable to payment of distributions if there were no  income
  debentures.




   §  104.    Consent  of supervising agency to creation of redevelopment
  companies.  A certificate or a copy of a certificate  made  pursuant  to
  section  one hundred three of this article shall be presented for filing
  to the secretary of state in  the  case  of  a  corporation  or  limited
  liability  company  and  to  the  supervising  agency  in  the case of a
  partnership or trust.  No certificate or any amendment thereto shall  be
  filed without the prior written consent of the supervising agency.  Such
  consent  of  the  supervising agency shall not be given in the case of a
  partnership (general or limited), a limited liability company or a trust
  unless there has been filed with the supervising  agency  a  partnership
  agreement,  operating agreement  or trust agreement, as the case may be,
  the terms and conditions of which shall be subject to  the  approval  of
  the supervising agency.




   §  105.  Application  of other corporation laws. The provisions of the
  business corporation law as presently in effect and  as  hereafter  from
  time  to  time amended, shall apply to redevelopment companies which are
  corporations, except where such provisions  are  in  conflict  with  the
  provisions of this article. In the event that any action with respect to
  which  the  holders of income debentures shall have the right to vote is
  proposed to be taken with regard to a redevelopment company which  is  a
  corporation, then notice of any meeting at which such action is proposed
  to be taken shall be given to such holders in the same manner and to the
  same  extent  as  if they were shareholders entitled to notice of and to
  vote at such meeting, and any certificate filed pursuant to law  in  the
  department  of state with respect to any such action, whether taken with
  or without meeting, and any affidavit required by law to be  annexed  to
  such certificate, shall contain the same statements or recitals and such
  certificate  shall  be  subscribed  and acknowledged, and such affidavit
  shall be made, in the same manner as if such holders  were  shareholders
  holding shares of an additional class of shares entitled to vote on such
  action,  or  with  respect  to  the  proceedings  provided  for  in such
  certificate.




   §  105-a.  Application  of  other  laws. The provisions of the limited
  liability company law as presently in effect and as hereafter from  time
  to  time  amended,  shall  apply  to  redevelopment  companies which are
  limited  liability  companies,  except  where  such  provisions  are  in
  conflict with the provisions of this article.




   §  106.  Powers of redevelopment companies. Each redevelopment company
  shall have and may exercise such of the powers conferred by law as shall
  be necessary in conducting the business of a redevelopment  company  and
  consistent with the provisions of this article.




   §  107.  Limited  return  on  investment. Subject to the provisions of
  section one hundred twenty-three of this article, there  shall  be  paid
  annually  out  of  the  earnings  of  the  redevelopment  company, after
  providing for all expenses, taxes and assessments, a sum for interest on
  and amortization of any mortgage indebtedness and  depreciation  charges
  if,  when  and to the extent deemed necessary by the supervising agency,
  plus a distribution of six per centum on the capital  and  interest  not
  exceeding  six  per centum on outstanding income debentures; except that
  in  the  case  of  redevelopment  companies  formed   prior   to   April
  twenty-ninth  nineteen  hundred  sixty, and subject to the provisions of
  section one hundred twenty-three of this article, there  shall  be  paid
  annually  out  of  the  earnings  of  the  redevelopment  company, after
  providing for all expenses, taxes and assessments  a  sum  for  interest
  amortization, depreciation and distributions, equal to but not exceeding
  six  per centum of the total actual final cost of the project as defined
  by subdivision two of section one hundred twelve of  this  article;  the
  obligation  in  respect  of  such  payments shall be cumulative, and any
  deficiency in interest, amortization, depreciation and distributions  in
  any  year  shall  be  paid  either  from  any  cash surplus derived from
  earnings remaining in the  treasury  of  the  redevelopment  company  in
  excess of the amount necessary to provide such cumulative annual sums or
  from  the  first  available  earnings  in subsequent years; and any cash
  surplus  derived  from  earnings  remaining  in  the  treasury  of   the
  redevelopment  company in excess of the amount necessary to provide such
  cumulative annual sums shall, upon the dissolution of, or in the case of
  a redevelopment company which is a trust the termination of the company,
  be paid into the general fund of the municipality  except  as  otherwise
  contemplated  by subdivision five of section one hundred twenty-three of
  this article.




   §  108.  Consideration for capital and bonds. No redevelopment company
  which is a corporation shall issue shares,  nor  shall  a  redevelopment
  company  which  is  a partnership credit sums to the partners on capital
  account, nor shall a redevelopment company which is a limited  liability
  company  credit  sums  to  the  members  on capital account, nor shall a
  redevelopment company which is a trust subject amounts to the trust, and
  no  redevelopment  company  shall  issue  bonds  or   income   debenture
  certificates  except for money or property actually received for the use
  and lawful purposes of the  redevelopment  company,  provided,  however,
  that  a  mutual  redevelopment  company may issue shares for home owners
  purchase notes if the purchase  transaction  has  received  the  written
  endorsement  of  the commissioner in accordance with supplementary rules
  and regulations of the commissioner made therefor and if  at  least  two
  hundred  dollars  in  money  or  property  is  received  by  such mutual
  redevelopment  company  toward  the  issuance  of  such  shares.     The
  consideration  for  all  capital, bonds or income debenture certificates
  based upon property received shall equal a  valuation  approved  by  the
  supervising  agency  and  such  a  valuation  shall be used in computing
  actual or estimated cost.




   § 109. Minimum amount of capital and debentures. Except as provided in
  this  section  the  capital of a redevelopment company together with any
  income debentures shall in no event be less than the total  of  ten  per
  centum of the actual cost of any project or projects undertaken pursuant
  to  this  article.  The  supervising  agency  may  permit  capital to be
  increased or income debenture certificates  to  be  issued  for  working
  capital  to  be  used  in  connection with such project to an amount not
  exceeding three per centum of the estimated cost, or three per centum of
  the total actual final cost, if that should exceed the estimated cost of
  a project.
    The provisions  of  this  section  shall  not  be  applicable  to  any
  redevelopment  company if funds made available by the federal government
  or any instrumentality  thereof,  or  any  mortgage  or  mortgage  bonds
  insured   by   the   federal   housing   administrator   or   any  other
  instrumentality of the federal government  are  used  in  financing  the
  project in whole or in part.




   § 110. Income debentures. With the approval of the supervising agency,
  the   certificate  creating  a  redevelopment  company,  or  an  amended
  certificate, may authorize the issuance of income debenture certificates
  bearing no greater interest than six per centum per annum.  Such  income
  debenture  certificates  and  any instrument under which they are issued
  may contain such other provisions, including provision for  amortization
  by  serial  maturities,  through  the  operation  of  a  sinking fund or
  otherwise, as may be approved by the supervising agency.




   §  111.  Mortgages  and  mortgage  bonds.  Any  redevelopment company,
  subject to the approval of the supervising agency, may borrow funds  and
  secure  the  repayment  thereof  by  bond and mortgage or by an issue of
  bonds under a trust indenture. Each mortgage or  issue  of  bonds  of  a
  redevelopment  company  shall  relate only to a single specified project
  and to no other and such bonds shall be secured by mortgage upon all  of
  the real property of which such project consists.
    First  lien  bonds  of  such  redevelopment  company when secured by a
  mortgage not exceeding ninety per centum of the estimated cost prior  to
  the  completion  of  the  project,  and in no event exceeding ninety per
  centum of the actual cost upon such  completion,  as  certified  by  the
  supervising  agency,  or,  in  the  case  of  a  completed  project, not
  exceeding ninety per centum of the appraised value  or  such  previously
  certified actual cost, whichever is less, are hereby declared securities
  in  which  all  public  officers  and  bodies  of  the  state and of its
  municipal subdivisions, all insurance companies  and  associations,  all
  savings  banks  and  savings  institutions,  including  savings and loan
  associations, executors, administrators,  guardians,  trustees  and  all
  other fiduciaries in the state may properly and legally invest the funds
  within their control.
    First  lien bonds of such a redevelopment company issued under a trust
  indenture and pursuant to a building loan contract, or a  building  loan
  bond  and  building loan mortgage under which advances are made pursuant
  to a building loan contract, where the aggregate principal amount to  be
  issued  or  advanced  does not exceed ninety per centum of the estimated
  cost prior to the completion of the project, and in any event  does  not
  exceed  ninety  per  centum  of the actual cost upon such completion, as
  certified by the supervising agency, are hereby declared  securities  in
  which all banks, savings banks, savings institutions and trust companies
  in  addition  to  all  such  officers,  bodies, companies, associations,
  institutions and fiduciaries may properly and legally invest  the  funds
  within their control; provided, however, that such investment is made as
  a  construction  loan  with  a  maturity of not to exceed two years. The
  maturity of any such construction loan may be extended from time to time
  with the approval of the board of directors or  trustees  of  the  bank,
  savings  banks,  savings institutions or trust company holding such loan
  but no one such extension shall be for a period of  time  exceeding  six
  months.
    The  bonds  so  issued and secured and the mortgage or trust indenture
  relating thereto, may create a first or senior lien and a  secondary  or
  junior  liens  upon the real property embraced in any project; provided,
  however, that the total mortgage  liens  shall  not  exceed  ninety  per
  centum of the estimated cost prior to the completion of the project, and
  shall  not in any event exceed ninety per centum of the actual cost upon
  such completion, or, in the case of a completed project,  not  exceeding
  ninety  per  centum  of the appraised value or such previously certified
  actual cost, whichever is  less.  Such  bonds  and  mortgages  or  trust
  indentures  may  contain  such  other clauses and provisions as shall be
  approved by the supervising agency, including the right to assignment of
  rents and entry into possession in case of default and including in  the
  case  of  a  redevelopment  company  which is a partnership or trust the
  right of the partners or trustees, as the case may be, to be free of any
  personal liability thereunder; but the operation of the housing  project
  in  the event of such entry by mortgagee or receiver shall be subject to
  regulations promulgated by the supervising agency.  Provisions  for  the
  amortization  of  the bonded indebtedness of companies formed under this
  article shall be subject to the approval of the supervising  agency.  So
  long   as  funds  made  available  by  the  federal  government  or  any


 instrumentality thereof or any mortgage or mortgage  bonds,  insured  by
  the  federal  housing  administrator or any other instrumentality of the
  federal government are used in financing,  in  whole  or  in  part,  any
  project  under  this  article,  the capital structure of a redevelopment
  company undertaking such project and the  proportionate  amount  of  the
  cost  of  the  lands  and improvements to be represented by mortgages or
  bonds shall be entirely in the discretion of the supervising agency; and
  all restrictions as to the maturity of any construction loan and  as  to
  the  amounts  to  be  represented  by  mortgages, mortgage bonds, income
  debentures or capital shall be  inapplicable  to  such  projects  or  to
  redevelopment  companies  undertaking  such  projects,  except  that the
  bonds, mortgages, debentures and capital covering any project shall  not
  exceed  the  total  actual  final  cost  of  such  project as defined in
  subdivision two of section one hundred twelve of this article.
    Interest rates on mortgage indebtedness shall not exceed  the  greater
  of
    (a) six percentum per annum,
    (b)  the  rate  prescribed by the superintendent of financial services
  pursuant to section fourteen-a of the banking law,
    (c) the rates of mortgages or mortgage bonds insured  by  the  federal
  housing  administration  or  any  other  instrumentality  of the federal
  government and
    (d) such rate as may be approved by the supervising  agency  provided,
  however,  that  the  applicable rate for purposes of paragraphs (b), (c)
  and (d), of this section one hundred eleven shall be the rate applicable
  or approved at the time the redevelopment company  incurs  the  mortgage
  indebtedness.
    As  used in this section the term "bond" includes a note heretofore or
  hereafter made.




   §  111-a.  Participation by certain corporations and individuals.  Any
  bank, savings bank, savings institution, savings and  loan  association,
  trust company, insurance company or association, or fiduciary authorized
  to invest in mortgages and mortgage bonds of a redevelopment company, or
  any  combination  of  the foregoing, shall have power to participate and
  invest, singly or jointly, with the New York  city  housing  development
  corporation  in  a bond or note and single participating mortgage, or in
  separate bonds or notes and mortgages pursuant to this article.  In  the
  event  of  such  participation,  the  interest  of each shall have equal
  priority as to lien in proportion to the amount of loan so secured,  but
  need  not  be equal as to interest rate, time or rate of amortization or
  otherwise.




   §  111-b. Mortgage modification provisions for redevelopment companies
  in cities with a population of one million or more. 1. For  purposes  of
  this   section,   "restrictive  agreement"  shall  mean  a  binding  and
  irrevocable  agreement  between  the  redevelopment  company   and   the
  supervising  agency providing that such redevelopment company for a term
  of five years from the date of such agreement (i) shall not  voluntarily
  dissolve or reconstitute pursuant to section one hundred twenty-three of
  this article, (ii) shall exercise any and all available options to renew
  any  housing  assistance  payments contract pursuant to section eight of
  the United States Housing  Act  of  nineteen  hundred  thirty-seven,  as
  amended,  and  any successor rent subsidy program, (iii) shall not cause
  such a contract  to  be  terminated  by  reason  of  such  redevelopment
  company's  noncompliance  with  any of the terms thereof, and (iv) shall
  not voluntarily cause or permit such a contract to  expire,  to  not  be
  extended, to not be renewed, or to be terminated.
    2. Notwithstanding the provisions of this article or the provisions of
  any  law, general or special, in cities with a population of one million
  or more, a redevelopment company with a federally-aided mortgage  formed
  pursuant  to  this  article  may  borrow  funds and secure the repayment
  thereof by note and  mortgage  or  any  other  manner  approved  by  the
  supervising  agency,  provided,  however,  that (a) such approval by the
  supervising agency shall be conditioned upon  a  restrictive  agreement,
  and  (b)  such  redevelopment company may not increase the rents paid by
  the tenants to pay for any such increase in  indebtedness  that  is  not
  attributable to project cost.




   §  112.  Limitations.  In  addition  to limitations prescribed by this
  article a redevelopment company shall not have power to:
    1. Acquire any real property or interest  therein  for  a  project  or
  projects  unless  the  supervising agency and the local legislative body
  determine as provided in this article that such acquisition is necessary
  or convenient for the public purpose defined in this article, and unless
  any deed, lease or other instrument  by  which  such  real  property  or
  interest therein is acquired contains a statement that the conveyance is
  to  a  redevelopment  company  organized pursuant to article five of the
  private housing finance law.
    2. Create its capital, or issue its debentures and and bonds  covering
  any  project undertaken by it in an amount greater in the aggregate than
  the total actual final cost of such project. The  actual  cost  of  such
  project   shall   include   the  cost  of  the  lands  and  improvements
  constituting the project  and  charges  for  financing  and  supervision
  approved  by  the  supervising agency, condemnation charges and interest
  and other carrying charges during  the  period  of  acquisition  and  of
  construction.  The  total  actual  final  cost  shall be deemed to be an
  amount equal to such actual cost plus an allowance for working  capital.
  Such  allowance  for working capital shall not exceed an amount equal to
  three per centum of the estimated cost or of the total actual final cost
  of the project if that shall be greater than the estimated cost.
    3. Enter into contracts for the payment of  salaries  to  officers  or
  employees,  or  for  the  construction  or  for  the substantial repair,
  improvement or operation of projects except subject to the  approval  of
  the supervising agency.




   § 112-a. Redevelopment loans. Notwithstanding any provision of section
  one  hundred  eleven  or  one  hundred  twelve  of  this  article to the
  contrary,  where  a  redevelopment  company  undergoes  a  comprehensive
  redevelopment  plan,  the  supervising  agency  may  approve  a loan and
  encumbrance of such project in an amount in excess of actual cost of the
  project,  provided  that  such  amount  represents   cost   of   capital
  improvements,   redevelopment,  or  acquisition  by  a  new  owner,  any
  consequent rent increase is not unduly burdensome to  the  tenants,  and
  the  redevelopment company enters into an agreement to remain subject to
  the provisions of this article for a period  of  no  less  than  fifteen
  years from issuance of the loan and encumbrance.




   §  113.  Use of projects. The project or projects of any redevelopment
  company shall be designed and used primarily for housing  purposes,  but
  portions   of  the  project  may  be  planned  and  used  for  business,
  commercial, cultural or recreational  purposes  appurtenant  thereto  as
  approved in the project.




   §  114.  Procedure  for  submission  and  approval of plan or project.
  Every plan or plan of a project  proposed  by  a  redevelopment  company
  shall  contain a general description of the area to be redeveloped and a
  statement of the plan of redevelopment with such detail  of  information
  with  reference  thereto  as may be necessary to a general understanding
  thereof. Where  changes  in  the  city  map  and  zoning  amendments  or
  variances  are  necessitated  by  such plan or project, such amendments,
  variances and changes shall be  submitted  together  with  the  plan  or
  project herein and considered as part thereof.
    After  preliminary  approval  thereof  by the supervising agency as to
  conformity with the provisions and purposes of this article, every  such
  plan  or plan of a project shall be submitted to the planning commission
  for approval of the plan or plan of the project relating to:
    1. Height and bulk of structures, density of population and percentage
  of land coverage by structures as to their conformity with the  purposes
  of  this  article and with the master plan, if any; and the relationship
  of the density of population contemplated by the plan  or  plan  of  the
  project  to  the  distribution  of the population of the municipality in
  other areas or parts thereof, and
    2.  Provision,  if  any,  for  business   or   commercial   facilities
  appurtenant to the plan or project, relationship to existing and planned
  public   facilities,   adequacy  and  planned  rearrangement  of  street
  facilities and provisions for  light,  air,  cultural  and  recreational
  facilities  as to their conformity with the purposes of this article and
  their  adequacy  for  accommodation  of  the   density   of   population
  contemplated by the plan or plan of the project.
    Where  a  project  consists  substantially of the rehabilitation of an
  existing structure or structures, and no changes in  the  city  map  and
  zoning  amendments  or  variances  are  necessitated by the project, the
  supervising agency may waive the preparation and submission of the  plan
  or plan of a project.
    Where a plan or plan of a project has been prepared and submitted, the
  planning  commission,  after  public  hearing,  notice of which shall be
  published at least ten days prior thereto in the official publication of
  the municipality, or if none exists, in a newspaper circulating  in  the
  municipality, on the plan or plan of a project, may:
    a. Issue an unqualified certificate of approval thereof, or
    b.  Issue  a certificate of conditional or qualified approval thereof,
  with or without recommendations, or
    c. Disapprove thereof.
    After action thereon by the planning commission, such plan or plan  of
  a  project with a proposed form of contract between the municipality and
  the redevelopment company or, when all stock,  debentures  and  mortgage
  bonds  of  the  company  are  owned  or  are  to be owned by one or more
  insurance companies, between the municipality, redevelopment company and
  such  insurance  company  or  companies  shall  be  submitted   by   the
  redevelopment company, with a certificate of approval of the supervising
  agency and the certificate or a statement of action, if any, on the plan
  or project by the planning commission, to the local legislative body for
  its  approval  of  the  project as to conformity with the provisions and
  purposes of this article, the extent of the tax exemption to be  granted
  pursuant  to  section  one hundred twenty-five, the amount and nature of
  the property to be  condemned  for  the  redevelopment  company  by  the
  municipality  and  the  terms  and conditions of payment therefor by the
  redevelopment company, the amount of publicly owned land  or  facilities
  to  be  sold to the redevelopment company or exchanged for redevelopment
  company-owned lands and the  availability  of  other  suitable  dwelling


 accommodations  for  families  living  in the area or part thereof to be
  affected by the plan or plan of the project.
    As  part of an approved project the local legislative body may require
  a redevelopment company to dedicate to the municipality  or  any  agency
  thereof  in the manner provided by law specified portions of the land in
  a project for parks,  streets,  public  recreational  and  other  public
  purposes.
    The  contract  shall regulate the rents to be charged for rooms in the
  project and may contain such other  provisions,  not  inconsistent  with
  this article, as may be deemed necessary or desirable for the financing,
  construction, operation and supervision of the project.
    In  any  case  where a plan or plan of a project has been prepared and
  submitted and the planning commission shall have issued a certificate of
  unqualified approval, or where preparation and submission of a  plan  or
  plan  of  a  project  has  been  waived  by  the  supervising  agency in
  accordance with the provisions of this section, approval of the  project
  by the local legislative body may be by resolution adopted by a majority
  of the whole number of votes authorized to be cast by all of the members
  thereof. In any case where a plan or plan of a project has been prepared
  and  submitted  and  the  planning  commission  shall  not have issued a
  certificate of unqualified approval, the plan or plan of a  project  may
  nevertheless  be  approved  by  the local legislative body, after public
  hearings thereon, by resolution adopted by a three-fourths vote  of  the
  whole  number  of  votes  authorized  to  be  cast by all of the members
  thereof. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, changes in the city
  map, zoning amendments, or variances contained  in  the  plan  shall  be
  deemed  approved by the local legislative body when it approves the plan
  or project. Any such changes in the  city  map,  zoning  amendments,  or
  variances  shall  become  effective on the date on which the supervising
  agency shall file a  resolution  with  the  local  legislative  body  in
  implementation  thereof.    The  local legislative body is authorized to
  enter into  the  necessary  contract  or  contracts  on  behalf  of  the
  municipality.
    If  the  contract  parties are a municipality, a redevelopment company
  and one or more insurance companies which own or will  own  all  of  the
  stock, debentures, bonds and mortgage indebtedness of such redevelopment
  company,  or  if the project is undertaken by an insurance company, then
  the certificate of the supervising agency approving such contract  shall
  terminate  the  functions  of  the  supervising  agency pursuant to this
  article, and after the execution of such contract all references  herein
  to  the  approval  or  other  action  by the supervising agency shall be
  inapplicable to the project provided for in such contract  and  to  such
  redevelopment company or the insurance company undertaking such project.




   §  115.  Limitation on changes. It shall be unlawful during the period
  of tax exemption, granted pursuant to section one hundred twenty-five of
  this article, for any redevelopment company or any successor in interest
  to its title to a project or any part thereof to change  or  modify  any
  feature  of  a  project for which approval of the planning commission is
  required by this article,  without  the  approval  of  such  commission,
  except by a three-quarters vote of the local legislative body.




   §   116.   Transfer   of   real  property  to  redevelopment  company.
  Notwithstanding any requirement of law to the contrary or the absence of
  direct provision therefor in the instrument under which a  fiduciary  is
  acting,  every  executor,  administrator,  trustee,  guardian  or  other
  person, holding trust funds or acting in a  fiduciary  capacity,  unless
  the  instrument  under which such fiduciary is acting expressly forbids,
  the state, its subdivisions, municipalities, all  other  public  bodies,
  all  public  officers,  persons, partnerships and corporations organized
  under  or  subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  insurance   law,   the
  superintendent  of  financial  services  as  conservator,  liquidator or
  rehabilitator of any such person, partnership or corporation, owning  or
  holding  any  real  property  within  an area, may grant, sell, lease or
  otherwise transfer any such real property to a redevelopment company and
  receive and hold any cash, stock, income debentures,  bonds,  mortgages,
  or  other  securities  or  obligations,  secured or unsecured, exchanged
  therefor by such redevelopment company and may execute such  instruments
  and  do  such acts as may be deemed necessary or desirable by them or it
  and by the  redevelopment  company  in  connection  with  a  project  or
  projects.  An  insurance  company which has undertaken a project through
  direct ownership and/or lease may  transfer  to  the  project  any  real
  property  which  it  owns or holds within an area and the actual cost of
  such property to the insurance company shall be included  in  the  total
  actual final cost of such project.




   §  117.  Rules  and  regulations.  The  planning  commission  and  the
  supervising agency, respectively, shall have power  to  make  rules  and
  regulations  to  carry  out  their  powers  and  duties pursuant to this
  article and to effectuate the purposes thereof.




   §  118.  Fees.  The supervising agency, the local legislative body and
  the planning commission, if any, may each adopt a reasonable schedule of
  fees to be paid by redevelopment companies upon  the  filing  with  said
  supervising  agency,  local legislative body or planning commission of a
  plan, plans for a project or  projects,  amendments  thereto  and  other
  instruments  in  connection  therewith and redevelopment companies shall
  pay reasonable fees to the said supervising agency as said agency  shall
  prescribe for processing a redevelopment plan and for the supervision of
  construction  and  for  the audit, regulation and general supervision of
  the management of the company, which  fees  shall  be  set  aside  in  a
  separate  account  and  shall  be  used  to  pay  for  the  expenses  of
  administering and carrying  out  the  provisions  of  the  redevelopment
  companies law.




   §  119.  Acquisition.  A municipality may take property by acquisition
  pursuant to the provisions of the eminent domain  procedure  law  for  a
  redevelopment  company,  provided  the  contract  or  contracts executed
  pursuant to section one hundred fourteen contain a requirement that  the
  company  shall  pay to the municipality all sums expended or required to
  be expended  by  the  municipality  in  the  acquisition  of  such  real
  property,  provision  as  to  the time of payment and manner of securing
  payment thereof, and provisions requiring that the municipality receive,
  before proceeding with the  acquisition  of  such  real  property,  such
  assurances  as to payment or reimbursement by the redevelopment company,
  or otherwise, as the local legislative body may deem advisable. Upon the
  execution of such contract or contracts the company shall  cause  to  be
  made two copies of surveys or maps of the real property described in the
  contract, one of which shall be filed in the office of the redevelopment
  company,  one  in  the  office  of  the corporation counsel or chief law
  officer of the municipality, and one in the office in which  instruments
  affecting  real  property in the county are recorded. Upon compliance by
  the redevelopment company with the applicable terms  and  conditions  of
  such  contract  or  contracts  the municipality shall proceed to acquire
  title to the real property in accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the
  eminent  domain  procedure law and when title to the real property shall
  have vested in the  municipality,  it  shall  convey  the  same  to  the
  redevelopment company upon final compliance by the redevelopment company
  with  such  terms  and conditions. As soon as title shall have vested in
  the municipality, the redevelopment company may, upon the  authorization
  of  the mayor, enter upon the real property taken, take over and dispose
  of existing improvements, and carry out the terms of  the  project  with
  respect thereto.
    Real  property in an area, needed or convenient for the project, which
  is to be acquired pursuant to this  section,  may  be  acquired  by  the
  municipality for the project, including any property devoted to a public
  use,  whether  or  not held in trust, notwithstanding that such property
  may have been previously acquired  or  is  owned  by  a  public  utility
  corporation, it being hereby expressly determined that the public use in
  conformity  with  the  provisions  of  this  article  shall  be deemed a
  superior public use. The local  legislative  body  may  consent  to  the
  acquisition  of  property owned by the municipality, whether or not such
  property be held in trust, or  may  sell  or  lease  any  such  property
  necessary or convenient for a project of a redevelopment company without
  public bidding, provided notice of such sale or lease is published and a
  public  hearing  is  held before the local legislative body. The term of
  any such lease shall not be limited by any  provision  of  any  general,
  special  or local law or city charter limiting the period of time during
  which a lease or any renewal thereof may run. Real property belonging to
  a public utility corporation may not be acquired without the approval of
  the commission or other officer or tribunal having regulatory power over
  such corporation.
    An award of compensation shall not  be  increased  by  reason  of  any
  increase  in  the  value  of  the  real property caused by the assembly,
  clearance  or  reconstruction,  or  proposed  assembly,   clearance   or
  reconstruction  for the purposes of this article of the real property in
  an area.
    A local legislative body, upon payment therefor or upon  exchange  for
  other  lands, may convey to any redevelopment company land in any street
  or public place which is duly closed or  discontinued  pursuant  to  the
  plan of a project.
    Notwithstanding  the  provisions of any general, special or local law,
  charter or ordinance, the local legislative body  of  a  city  having  a


 population  of  one million or more may, upon the request of or with the
  approval of the board of  education  of  such  city's  school  district,
  grant,  sell,  lease  or  otherwise  transfer  any  lands  or  rights or
  interests  therein or thereto, including fee interests, easements, space
  rights or air rights or other rights or interests owned by such city and
  occupied or reserved for school  purposes  and  needed  therefor,  to  a
  redevelopment  company  where  necessary  for the joint development of a
  project and a school or appurtenant facilities without  public  bidding,
  provided notice of such lease or contract for the sale or other transfer
  of such lands or rights or interests therein or thereto is published and
  a  public  hearing  is  held before such local legislative body. No such
  sale, lease or transfer  of  lands  or  rights  therein  or  thereto  is
  authorized  where the development of a project contemplates the erection
  of housing facilities over an existing school or playground.  The  terms
  of  any such lease shall not be limited by any provision of any general,
  special or local law or charter applicable to  such  city  limiting  the
  period of time during which a lease or any renewal thereof may run.
    Nothing  in  this  section  shall  be  deemed to forbid or prevent the
  acquisition of any real or personal property by a redevelopment  company
  by  gift,  devise,  bequest, grant, or subject to the provisions of this
  article, by purchase at public or private sale.




   §  120.  Regulation of redevelopment companies. The supervising agency
  shall:
    Examine each redevelopment company and keep informed as to its general
  condition, its capitalization and the manner in which  its  property  is
  constructed,  leased, operated or managed with respect to its compliance
  with all provisions of law and orders of the supervising agency.
    The supervising agency may:
    1.  Either  itself  or  through  its  inspectors  or  employees   duly
  authorized  by it, enter in or upon and inspect the property, equipment,
  buildings, plants, offices, apparatus and devices of  any  redevelopment
  company;  examine all books, contracts, records, documents and papers of
  any redevelopment  company  and  by  subpoena  duces  tecum  compel  the
  production thereof.
    2.  In  its discretion, prescribe uniform methods and forms of keeping
  accounts, records and books to be observed by  redevelopment  companies,
  and  after  a hearing to prescribe by order accounts in which particular
  outlays and receipts shall be entered, charged or credited.
    3. Require specific answers to questions  upon  which  it  may  desire
  information  and  require  the  filing  of periodic reports in the form,
  covering the period, and at the time prescribed by it.
    4. In the event of a violation by a company of any  provision  of  its
  certificate  or of law or any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant
  to the provisions of  this  article,  the  supervising  agency  may,  by
  written  notice  to all of the directors, partners, members or trustees,
  as the case  may  be,  of  a  company,  at  their  last  known  address,
  specifying  the  reasons  therefor,  advise  such  directors,  partners,
  members or trustees, as the case may be, of its intention to remove  any
  or  all of the existing directors or to appoint a manager or managers of
  the  limited  liability  company,  partnership  or   trust   who   shall
  exclusively  exercise  all  of  the  powers of such partners, members or
  trustees, as the case may be, for the duration  of  the  appointment  of
  such manager or managers.  A copy of any such notices shall be mailed to
  the  mortgagee of record.  In the event that the company fails to comply
  with the requirements of the supervising agency within thirty days  from
  date of mailing of said written notice, the supervising agency may, with
  the  written approval of the mortgagee and without further notice to the
  company or to its directors, partners, members or trustees, as the  case
  may  be,  remove  such  directors in the case of a redevelopment company
  which is a corporation or any of  them  from  office  and  appoint  such
  person  or  persons  as  the supervising agency, in its sole discretion,
  deems advisable, including officers  or  employees  of  the  supervising
  agency,  as  new  directors  to serve in the places of those removed, or
  appoint such manager or managers in the case of a redevelopment  company
  which  is  a  partnership, limited liability company or trust, who shall
  exclusively exercise all of the powers  of  such  partners,  members  or
  trustees,  as  the case may be.  Directors or managers so appointed need
  not meet qualifications which may  be  prescribed  by  the  certificate,
  by-laws,  partnership  agreement,  articles of organization or operating
  agreement of the limited liability  companies  or  trust  agreement,  or
  other  rules  or regulations of the company.  In the absence of fraud or
  bad faith directors or managers so appointed  shall  not  be  personally
  liable  for  debts, obligations or liabilities of the company. Directors
  or managers so appointed shall serve only for a period  coexistent  with
  the  duration  of  such  violation  or  until  the supervising agency is
  assured, in a manner satisfactory to it, against violations of a similar
  nature.   Officers or  employees  of  the  supervising  agency  who  are
  appointed  as  such  directors  or managers shall serve in such capacity
  without compensation.




   §  120-a.  State  supervision  and  regulation.  A municipality with a
  population of less  than  one  million  may,  by  action  of  its  local
  legislative  body  concurred  in  by  the  commissioner, provide for the
  supervision and regulation of a project and  the  redevelopment  company
  carrying out such project by the commissioner in lieu of the supervising
  agency.  With  respect to any such project and company, the commissioner
  shall have, from and after the effective date of such action, all of the
  powers and duties of a supervising agency pursuant to this article.  The
  company shall pay  to  the  commissioner  fees,  as  prescribed  by  the
  commissioner,   to   cover  the  expenses  of  examination,  audit,  and
  supervision of the company and the project.




   §  121.  Sinking  fund. Unless other provision be made therefor in the
  contract with the municipality, the supervising agency, if it shall deem
  it feasible at any time, subject to the limitation contained in  section
  one  hundred  seven of this article, may require a redevelopment company
  to provide out  of  earnings,  after  provision  for  distributions  and
  interest,  a  sinking  fund in an amount to be fixed by such supervising
  agency for the gradual retirement of the capital  and  income  debenture
  certificates  of  such company. Such sinking fund may be used either for
  the purchase or retirement, from time to  time,  of  capital  or  income
  debenture certificates at a price approved by the supervising agency not
  exceeding  par  value  thereof  with accrued and unpaid distributions or
  interest, or if it be not practicable to purchase or retire such capital
  or such income debenture certificates at a price so approved, the moneys
  in such sinking fund may be added to the surplus of  such  company.  Any
  capital  evidenced  by shares or income debenture certificates purchased
  or retired out of such sinking fund shall be cancelled and shall not  be
  reissued.




   §  122.  Transfer  of  title  or  foreclosure of project. 1. Until the
  termination of the tax exemption, whether by expiration or by any  other
  cause, a redevelopment company, heretofore or hereafter organized, shall
  not have power to sell the real property constituting the project or any
  portion or portions thereof without the consent of the local legislative
  body.
    2.  If an action be brought to foreclose a mortgage or tax lien upon a
  redevelopment project, heretofore or hereafter  authorized  pursuant  to
  this  article,  and  the real property constituting the project shall be
  acquired at the foreclosure sale or from the mortgagee  or  lienor  that
  had  acquired  the  property of such sale, or by a conveyance in lieu of
  such sale,  by  a  redevelopment  company  organized  pursuant  to  this
  article,  or by the federal government or an instrumentality thereof, or
  by a corporation which is, or by agreement has  become  subject  to  the
  supervision  of the superintendent of financial services, such successor
  in interest shall acquire such project subject to all provisions of  the
  contract  regulating  such  project  and shall be entitled to all of the
  benefits contained in such contract. In  all  other  cases  of  sale  at
  foreclosure  or  forced sale, the real property constituting the project
  or  any  portion  or  portions  thereof  shall  be  sold  free  of   all
  restrictions,  except  such  covenants  running  with the land as may be
  contained in the contract regulating the project, or  in  the  deed,  if
  any,  given  by  the municipality to the redevelopment company affecting
  all or any portion of the  real  property  upon  which  the  project  is
  situated,  and  the  tax  exemption, if any, theretofore granted to such
  project pursuant to such contract shall immediately terminate.




   §  123. Dissolution. 1. After termination of any tax exemption granted
  pursuant to section one hundred twenty-five of this article, whether  by
  expiration or by any other cause, or in the event that prior thereto the
  redevelopment company elects to pay to the municipality the total of all
  accrued  taxes  for  which  such  exemption  was  granted  and received,
  together with interest at the rate of  five  per  centum  per  annum,  a
  redevelopment  company  which is a corporation or partnership or limited
  liability company  may  voluntarily  dissolve  or,  in  the  case  of  a
  redevelopment  company which is a trust, may terminate, and title to the
  project may be conveyed in fee to the owner or owners of its capital  or
  to  any  corporation,  partnership,  limited  liability company or trust
  designated by it or them for the purpose, or the  redevelopment  company
  may be dissolved or terminated and reconstituted pursuant to appropriate
  laws   relating   to   the   formation   and  conduct  of  corporations,
  partnerships, limited liability companies or trusts, after providing, in
  any case, for the payment of  all  current  operating  expenses,  taxes,
  indebtedness  and  all  accrued  interest  thereon, and the par value or
  amount  of  the  capital  of  the  redevelopment  company  and   accrued
  distributions  in  respect  thereof. If, after making such provision and
  after the conveyance of the project,  a  cash  surplus  remains  in  the
  treasury  of  the  redevelopment  company, such cash surplus shall, upon
  dissolution or termination,  be  paid  into  the  general  fund  of  the
  municipality.  After  such  dissolution or termination and conveyance or
  such reconstitution, the provisions of this article shall become and  be
  inapplicable  to  any  such project and its owner or owners, and any tax
  exemption granted to such redevelopment company pursuant to section  one
  hundred twenty-five of this article shall cease and terminate.
    2.  If  prior  to  the termination of any tax exemption the project is
  sold for  any  reason,  the  redevelopment  company  shall  dissolve  or
  terminate,  and  any tax exemption granted to such redevelopment company
  pursuant to section one hundred twenty-five of this article shall  cease
  and  terminate,  except  as  otherwise  provided  in section one hundred
  twenty-two of this article. In such  case  the  shareholders,  partners,
  members  or  beneficiaries,  as  the  case  may be, and income debenture
  certificate holders shall in no event receive more than the par value of
  their shares or amount of their capital and  the  face  value  of  their
  income  debenture  certificates with accrued and unpaid distributions or
  interest in respect of such capital and income  debenture  certificates,
  and  any  remaining  surplus  shall be paid into the general fund of the
  municipality.
    3. In no event shall a redevelopment company be voluntarily  dissolved
  or  terminated  unless  provision is made for the payment in full of the
  remaining balance of principal and  interest  due  or  unpaid  upon  any
  mortgage  on its property or any part thereof, but any project may, with
  the consent of the  local  legislative  body  of  the  municipality,  be
  conveyed  and  transferred  to the municipality subject to such mortgage
  and accrued interest.
    4. Unless the local legislative body of the municipality shall consent
  to the voluntary dissolution or termination of a redevelopment  company,
  such a company shall not dissolve or terminate except in accordance with
  subdivisions  one  and two of this section or upon the expiration of its
  term as stated in the certificate creating the redevelopment company.
    5.  With  the  consent  of  the  local  legislative   body   and   the
  superintendent of financial services, a redevelopment company heretofore
  or  hereafter  organized  may voluntarily dissolve or terminate prior to
  the termination of any tax exemption granted  pursuant  to  section  one
  hundred  twenty-five  of  this  article  and title to the project may be
  conveyed, and all other assets of  such  redevelopment  company  may  be


 transferred,  to an insurance company, whether or not such project shall
  have been theretofore completed. After such dissolution  or  termination
  and conveyance such tax exemption shall continue for the period of years
  originally  provided  for  in the contract, or for the unexpired portion
  thereof if such period shall  have  theretofore  commenced,  subject  to
  prior termination pursuant to section one hundred twenty-four or section
  one  hundred  twenty-five  of  this  article, and the provisions of this
  article shall thereafter be applicable  to  such  project  and  to  such
  insurance  company to the same extent and with the same force and effect
  as though such project had been initially undertaken by  such  insurance
  company  pursuant  to  section  one hundred twenty-four of this article;
  provided, however, that nothing herein  contained  shall  be  deemed  to
  require  the  resubmission  of  the plan of the project and the contract
  relating thereto for approval pursuant to section one  hundred  fourteen
  of this article.
    6.   The  contract  with  the  municipality  may  contain  such  other
  provisions for the  dissolution  or  termination  of  the  redevelopment
  company as may be deemed advisable, not inconsistent with the provisions
  of  this article. In case of a dissolution or termination and conveyance
  in accordance with subdivision five of this section, the contract may be
  modified consistently with the provisions of said subdivision  five  and
  section  one hundred twenty-four of this article, any such modifications
  to be approved by the superintendent of financial services and the local
  legislative body.
    7. Upon dissolution or termination as provided in this  section,  this
  article shall become and be inapplicable to the project and its owner or
  owners  except  as  otherwise  contemplated  by subdivision five of this
  section.




   §  124.  Participation  by certain corporations. One or more insurance
  companies shall have the power to organize, or cause to be organized,  a
  redevelopment company formed pursuant to the provisions of this article,
  and  to  purchase  for  cash  or  to  receive  and  hold in exchange for
  property, and to own and control, the  stock  or  the  income  debenture
  certificates  or  both  of any redevelopment company and shall also have
  power to invest, singly or jointly, in a bond and first mortgage  or  in
  an  issue of bonds secured by mortgage or trust indenture constituting a
  first lien upon any project as provided in this  article.  An  insurance
  company, however, which owns stock or income debenture certificates of a
  redevelopment  company  and also owns bonds or a bond and mortgage or an
  interest in a bond and mortgage of the same redevelopment company  shall
  not, without the consent of the supervising agency, sell all or any part
  of  such bonds or such bond and mortgage or of its interest in such bond
  and mortgage unless it shall simultaneously sell  such  stock  and  such
  income debenture certificates owned by it.
    Notwithstanding  any  other  provision of law, an insurance company or
  companies operating a redevelopment project or owning all of  the  stock
  of a redevelopment company are hereby expressly authorized to enter into
  contracts contemplated by this article and to agree by contract with the
  municipality  not to sell, assign, or otherwise transfer such project or
  the stock, income debentures or mortgage  bonds  of  such  redevelopment
  company  during the period of tax exemption provided for by the contract
  pursuant to this article without the consent of  the  local  legislative
  body  of  the municipality. An insurance company or companies owning all
  of the stock of a redevelopment company are hereby expressly  authorized
  to make such capital contributions to any such redevelopment company, in
  cash  or by cancellation of securities or otherwise, as may be necessary
  to enable such redevelopment  company  to  comply  with  all  conditions
  precedent   to  its  dissolution  and  conveyance  of  its  property  in
  accordance with section one hundred twenty-three of  this  article,  and
  upon  dissolution  of  such  a  redevelopment  company,  to  acquire the
  project, complete the same if not theretofore  completed,  and  own  and
  operate the same as a permanent investment for such period as it or they
  may  deem desirable either directly or through acquisition and ownership
  of the capital stock of any corporation which may acquire title  to  the
  project pursuant to subdivision one of section one hundred twenty-three.
    An  insurance company, instead of investing its funds in the stock and
  debentures or other obligations of a redevelopment company, may  through
  direct ownership and/or lease acquire, own, construct, manage or operate
  as  an  investment for such period as it may deem desirable, one or more
  projects, in which event the provisions of subsection one of section one
  hundred twelve of this article  applicable  to  redevelopment  companies
  shall  be  applicable  to  such insurance company in its operations with
  respect to any such project but not otherwise. Said provisions  and  the
  ensuing  provision  of  this section shall cease to be applicable to any
  such project and to  such  insurance  company  in  its  operations  with
  respect  to  such project after termination of any tax exemption granted
  pursuant to section one hundred twenty-five of this article with respect
  to such project, whether such termination shall be by expiration  or  by
  any  other  cause,  or  in  the  event  that prior thereto the insurance
  company elects to pay the municipality the total of  all  accrued  taxes
  for  which  such  exemption  was  granted  and  received,  together with
  interest at the rate of five per centum per annum. If any  such  project
  shall be sold by an insurance company, the tax exemption with respect to
  such  project  shall  thereupon  cease  and  terminate  unless the local
  legislative body shall otherwise provide.


   Until the termination of any tax exemption granted pursuant to section
  one hundred twenty-five of this article or until the provisions of  this
  article shall otherwise cease to be applicable:
    1.  An insurance company shall be entitled to earn and retain annually
  on a cumulative  basis  in  respect  of  each  project  operated  by  it
  hereunder,  before  depreciation  but  after providing for all expenses,
  taxes and assessments attributable to such  project  or  to  the  income
  therefrom,  a sum equal to but not exceeding six per centum of the total
  actual final cost of the  project  as  defined  by  subdivision  two  of
  section one hundred twelve of this article.
    2.  Separate  accounts  shall  be kept for each project operated by an
  insurance company.
    3. If the income from  any  such  project  for  any  year,  after  all
  expenses,  taxes  and  assessments attributable thereto or to the income
  therefrom, shall be in excess of six per  centum  of  the  total  actual
  final  cost of such project as defined by subdivision two of section one
  hundred twelve of this article, such  excess  shall  be  credited  to  a
  special reserve account.
    4.  If  the  income  from  any  such  project  for any year, after all
  expenses, taxes and assessments attributable thereto or  to  the  income
  therefrom  shall  be less than six per centum of such total actual final
  cost, such deficiency shall be  charged  against  such  special  reserve
  account.
    The  amount  of  any  accrued  taxes  and  interest thereon paid by an
  insurance company pursuant  to  the  second  paragraph  of  section  one
  hundred  twenty-five of this article may be charged against such special
  reserve account. An amount equal to any balance remaining to the  credit
  of  such special reserve account on the termination of the period of tax
  exemption shall be paid into the general fund of the municipality.    If
  any project shall be conveyed to an insurance company in accordance with
  subdivision five of section one hundred twenty-three of this article, an
  amount  equal  to  all  accrued  and  unpaid  interest, amortization and
  dividends  on  the  stock  and  evidences   of   indebtedness   of   the
  redevelopment company theretofore accumulated in accordance with section
  one  hundred  seven of this article shall be charged against the special
  reserve account except to the extent  included  in  total  actual  final
  cost,  and any remaining cash surplus derived from earnings remaining in
  the treasury of the redevelopment company shall be transferred  to  such
  insurance  company  and  shall  be credited by it to the special reserve
  account provided for in this section applicable to such project.
    Except as specifically provided  herein  this  article  shall  not  be
  deemed  to limit or restrict any power or authority granted to insurance
  companies or to any other corporation or to any fiduciary by  any  other
  provision of law heretofore or hereafter enacted.




   §  125.  Tax  exemptions.  1.  (a)  The  local legislative body of any
  municipality in which a project of such company is or is to  be  located
  may  by  contract  agree  with  any redevelopment company to exempt from
  local  and  municipal  taxes,   other   than   assessments   for   local
  improvements,  all or part of the value of the property included in such
  project which represents an increase over the assessed valuation of  the
  real  property,  both land and improvements, acquired for the project at
  the  time  of  its  acquisition  by  the  redevelopment  company   which
  originally  undertook  the project and for such definite period of years
  as such contract may provide, except that where the real property  in  a
  project   was   acquired  for  purposes  of  rehabilitation,  the  local
  legislative body either may utilize the foregoing formula or  may  agree
  to  exempt  from  such  taxes  all  or part of the value of the property
  included in such project on condition that the amount of such  taxes  to
  be paid shall not be less than ten per centum of the annual shelter rent
  or  carrying  charges  of such rehabilitation project. The tax exemption
  shall  not  operate  for  a  period  of  more  than  twenty-five  years,
  commencing  in each instance from the date on which the benefits of such
  exemption first become available and effective; provided, however,  that
  with  respect  to  a  project  either acquired by a mutual redevelopment
  company  pursuant  to  section  one  hundred  twenty-six  or  owned  and
  continuing  to  be  owned  by a mutual redevelopment company which would
  require substantial increases in carrying charges after  the  period  of
  tax  exemption is ended unless relief is provided, the local legislative
  body may contract with such mutual redevelopment company to extend  such
  tax  exemption  for not more than twenty-five additional years at a rate
  of tax exemption not to exceed an average of  fifty  per  centum  during
  such additional period, provided that the tax exemption during the first
  two  years  of  such additional period shall continue at the rate of the
  tax exemption of such project immediately preceding the  termination  of
  the   initial  twenty-five  year  period  and  that  the  tax  exemption
  thereafter shall be decreased in equal biennial decrements, the first of
  which shall occur  immediately  following  such  two  year  period,  and
  provided  that  such  contract  shall  contain  provisions  as to income
  limitations relating to admission and continued occupancy of the project
  and provisions as to  rental  surcharges  to  the  same  effect  as  are
  contained   in  subdivisions  two,  three,  four  and  five  of  section
  thirty-one, except that in the case of projects owned and continuing  to
  be  owned  by  mutual redevelopment companies, persons or families whose
  probable aggregate annual income does not exceed the median  income  for
  families  of  the  same size in the same metropolitan area shall also be
  eligible for admission to the project  on  the  understanding  that  any
  person  or  family  becoming  eligible  by  reason hereof whose probable
  aggregate annual income at the time of admission or during the period of
  occupancy exceeds, the greater of (i) the median income for such persons
  or families for the metropolitan statistical area in which  the  project
  is   located,  or  if  a  project  is  located  outside  a  metropolitan
  statistical area, the median income for such persons or families for the
  county in which the project is located, as most recently  determined  by
  the  United States department of housing and urban development, in which
  case any person or family becoming eligible for  admission  pursuant  to
  this  subparagraph  shall  pay,  from  the  time  of admission, a rental
  surcharge as provided for in subdivision three of section thirty-one  of
  this chapter, computed on the basis of the income limitations applicable
  to such persons or families in the absence of this subparagraph, or (ii)
  six  times  the  rental shall be liable for payment of rental surcharges
  hereunder computed on the basis of such ratio, except that in  the  case
  of  families  with three or more dependents such ratio shall be seven to


 one; and provided further that with respect to a project which is or  is
  to  be  permanently  financed  by  a  federally-aided  mortgage, the tax
  exemption shall operate for so long as such mortgage is outstanding, but
  in  no  event  for a period of more than forty years, commencing in each
  instance from the date on which the benefits  of  such  exemption  first
  become  available  and effective; and provided further that with respect
  to a project which is or is to be permanently financed by  a  loan  from
  the  New  York  city  housing development corporation, the tax exemption
  shall operate for so long as such loan is outstanding.
    (a-1) Where the redevelopment contract between a mutual  redevelopment
  company  and  the  local  legislative  body  under which the initial tax
  exemption was  granted  contains  provisions  different  from  those  in
  subdivisions  two,  three,  four  and five of section thirty-one of this
  chapter, then a contract to extend the tax exemption for  an  additional
  period  under  paragraph  (a) of this subdivision may provide that those
  provisions of the redevelopment contract shall continue to  apply  (with
  such   modifications   as   the   supervising   agency  of  such  mutual
  redevelopment company shall approve) during the additional period as  if
  such additional period were the initial period of tax exemption for such
  mutual   redevelopment   company,   notwithstanding  the  provisions  of
  paragraph (a) of this subdivision to the contrary.
    (a-2) Any inconsistent provision of law  notwithstanding,  in  a  city
  having  a  population  of one million or more, where a local legislative
  body has acted to extend the tax exemption  of  a  mutual  redevelopment
  company  for  an  additional  twenty-five  years  after  the initial tax
  exemption period has expired, the local legislative body  may  authorize
  tax   exemption  during  the  final  eleven  years  of  such  additional
  twenty-five year exemption period under this subdivision, provided  that
  the  amount  of  taxes  to  be  paid by the mutual redevelopment company
  during the final  eleven  years  of  such  additional  twenty-five  year
  exemption  period  shall not be less than an amount equal to the greater
  of (i) ten per centum of the annual rent  or  carrying  charges  of  the
  project  minus  utilities for the residential portion of the project, or
  (ii) the taxes payable by such company for the  residential  portion  of
  the  project  in the fourteenth year of such additional twenty-five year
  exemption period, and may further extend the period of  such  additional
  twenty-five year exemption for up to a total period of thirty-five years
  from  the date of expiration of the initial tax exemption, provided that
  the amount of taxes to be  paid  by  the  mutual  redevelopment  company
  during  any  such  extension  beyond  such  additional  twenty-five year
  exemption period shall not be less than an amount equal to  the  greater
  of  (i)  ten  per  centum  of the annual rent or carrying charges of the
  project minus utilities for the residential portion of the  project,  or
  (ii)  the  taxes  payable by such company for the residential portion of
  the project in the fourteenth year of such additional  twenty-five  year
  exemption period.
    (a-3)  Any  inconsistent  provision  of law notwithstanding, the local
  legislative body  of  any  municipality  may  grant  an  additional  tax
  exemption  period  for  any  project,  other  than a project by a mutual
  redevelopment company, that received a tax exemption under paragraph (a)
  of this subdivision, upon the expiration of the  tax  exemption  period.
  The additional tax exemption period may be for a term of forty years, or
  until  such  time  as  the  project  is  no  longer  operated  under the
  restrictions and for the purposes set forth in this  article,  whichever
  is  sooner. Unless otherwise approved by the local legislative body, the
  amount of taxes paid by the redevelopment company during such additional
  tax exemption period shall not be less than (i)  the  taxes  payable  by
  such  company  in  accordance with the resolution for such redevelopment


 company that was approved by the local legislative body and that was  in
  effect  immediately prior to the expiration of the initial tax exemption
  period, or (ii) if there is no such resolution,  the  taxes  payable  by
  such  company  in  accordance  with the exemption authorized pursuant to
  this article immediately prior to the  expiration  of  the  initial  tax
  exemption period.
    (a-4)  Any  inconsistent  provision  of law notwithstanding, in a city
  having a population of one million or more, where  a  local  legislative
  body  has  acted  to  extend the tax exemption of a mutual redevelopment
  company for the maximum period provided for in paragraph (a-2)  of  this
  subdivision,  the  local  legislative  body  may grant an additional tax
  exemption for a period of up to fifty years, provided that the amount of
  taxes to be paid during any such period of tax exemption  shall  be  not
  less  than  an  amount equal to the greater of (i) ten per centum of the
  annual rent or carrying charges of the project minus utilities  for  the
  residential  portion  of  the project, or (ii) the taxes payable by such
  company for the residential portion of the project during the  tax  year
  commencing  July  first,  two thousand and ending on June thirtieth, two
  thousand one. Such grant of an additional  tax  exemption  period  shall
  take  effect  upon  the expiration of the maximum period provided for in
  paragraph (a-2) of this subdivision.
    (b) A redevelopment company which has been granted  and  has  received
  tax  exemption  pursuant to this section may at any time elect to pay to
  the municipality or other appropriate taxing jurisdiction the  total  of
  all accrued taxes for which exemption was granted and received, together
  with  interest  at  the  rate  of  five  per centum per annum. Upon such
  payment the tax exemption of  the  project  shall  thereupon  cease  and
  terminate.
    (c) Where a municipality acts on behalf of another taxing jurisdiction
  in  assessing  real  property for the purpose of taxation, or in levying
  taxes therefor, the said agreement by the local legislative body of such
  municipality shall have the effect of exempting the real property  in  a
  project from local and municipal taxes, other than assessments for local
  improvements, levied by or in behalf of both such taxing jurisdictions.
    (d)  As  used in this subdivision the term "taxing jurisdiction" means
  any municipal corporation or district corporation, including any  school
  district  or  any  special district, having the power to levy or collect
  taxes and benefit assessments upon real property,  or  in  whose  behalf
  such taxes or benefit assessments may be levied or collected.
    2. Any inconsistent provision of law notwithstanding, mortgages of any
  such  company  issued  to  the federal government or any instrumentality
  thereof, or to any municipal housing authority or other  public  housing
  agency or instrumentality thereof whose obligations are determined to be
  exempt  from  federal taxation by the federal government, or issued to a
  financial institution and insured or guaranteed by the  federal  housing
  administrator  or  any  other  instrumentality of the federal government
  shall be exempt from the mortgage recording  taxes  imposed  by  article
  eleven of the tax law.




   §  126.  Reduced  rentals  for  the  elderly.  (a)  For the purpose of
  enabling lower income elderly persons to continue in  occupancy  without
  paying  rentals  in  excess  of  a  fair proportion of their income, any
  municipality having a population of less than one million is  authorized
  to  make  and  to  contract to make periodic payments to a redevelopment
  company in an amount not exceeding the difference between  the  rent  or
  carrying charges for the dwellings occupied by such lower income persons
  and  one-third of their net probable aggregate annual income, where such
  rent or carrying charges exceed such one-third of income; provided  that
  the  aggregate amount of periodic payments to be made in accordance with
  contracts entered into  by  the  municipality  during  any  fiscal  year
  thereof   pursuant   to   this  section,  subdivision  nine  of  section
  thirty-one, subdivision seven of section eighty-five-a, and section five
  hundred seventy-seven-a of this chapter shall not exceed  the  aggregate
  amount  of  all  real  property taxes paid or payable during such fiscal
  year by all companies organized pursuant to this  article,  article  II,
  article  IV,  and article XI of this chapter and the aggregate estimated
  receipts  of  all  such  companies  in  such  fiscal  year  from  rental
  surcharges collected or to be collected pursuant to this chapter.
    (b)  Such  payments  shall be made only where the contract between the
  municipality and the company pursuant to section  one  hundred  fourteen
  imposes  income  limitations on admission and on continued occupancy and
  requires the payment of surcharges to the  municipality  by  over-income
  occupants.
    (c)  Such payments shall be made only on account of a person or family
  in occupancy where the head of the household is sixty-two years  of  age
  or  older  and  is  not a recipient of public assistance pursuant to the
  social services law, and where the net probable aggregate annual  income
  of  the  person or family in occupancy does not exceed six thousand five
  hundred dollars a year.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision twenty-nine  of  section
  two of this chapter, net probable aggregate annual income shall mean the
  annual  income  of  family  members from all sources after deductions of
  federal, state and city income taxes; provided that any municipality may
  provide that increases in benefits under the social security  act  which
  take  effect after such person or family has assumed occupancy shall not
  be taken into account.
    (d) A company having a contract with the municipality pursuant to this
  subdivision may not collect from persons or  families  in  occupancy  on
  whose  account  such  payments  are  made  any  rentals in excess of the
  amounts specified in such contract.




   § 127. Acquisition by mutual redevelopment companies. Anything in this
  article to the contrary notwithstanding:
    (a)  With  the approval of the supervising agency, any person owning a
  project may convey such project to a mutual redevelopment company and  a
  mutual  redevelopment  company  may  be organized to acquire an existing
  project prior to expiration of an initial tax exemption granted pursuant
  to section one hundred twenty-five,  and  may  own,  maintain,  operate,
  sell,  and convey such project pursuant to this article. In part payment
  of the purchase price therefor, such company may execute and  deliver  a
  bond  and  mortgage  or  an  issue of bonds under a trust indenture, the
  aggregate principal amount of which does not exceed ninety per centum of
  such purchase price, and which shall be secured by a first mortgage upon
  all the real property of which such project  consists.  Such  bonds  are
  hereby  declared  securities  in which all public officers and bodies of
  the state and of its municipal subdivisions, all insurance companies and
  associations, all savings  banks  and  savings  institutions,  including
  savings  and  loan  associations,  executors, administrators, guardians,
  trustees, and all other  fiduciaries  in  the  state  may  properly  and
  legally invest the funds within their control. The total capital created
  and  bonds  or  debentures  issued  by such mutual redevelopment company
  shall not exceed the total cost of the purchase of the  project  and  an
  allowance  for  working  capital  not  greater  in amount than three per
  centum of such cost.
    (b) With the consent of the local legislative body,  any  initial  tax
  exemption  granted  pursuant  to  section one hundred twenty-five, shall
  continue after conveyance of a project to a mutual redevelopment company
  for the period of years originally provided for in the contract, or  for
  the  unexpired  portion  thereof  if  such  period shall have commenced,
  subject to prior termination pursuant to section one hundred twenty-four
  or section one hundred twenty-five, and this article shall  continue  to
  be  applicable to such project as though such project had been initially
  undertaken by such mutual redevelopment company; provided, however, that
  nothing herein shall require the resubmission of the plan of the project
  and the contract relating thereto for approval pursuant to  section  one
  hundred  fourteen.  The  contract  may,  with  the approval of the local
  legislative body and of the holder of the mortgage on  the  project,  be
  modified in a manner consistent with this section.




   §  128. Resale price of shares. Notwithstanding any other provision of
  this article and subject to any regulation not  inconsistent  with  this
  section which may be promulgated by the supervising agency:
    (a)  The  resale price of shares in a mutual company shall be fixed by
  the mutual company, subject to the approval of the  supervising  agency,
  and   shall   be   equal   to   (1)   the   consideration   the  selling
  tenant-cooperator paid for such shares and (2) any  capital  assessments
  and  voluntary  capital contributions approved by the supervising agency
  and paid by the selling tenant-cooperator to the mutual company, to  the
  extent  not  already included in the consideration paid for such shares,
  and, if established by the mutual company, (3) a proportionate share  of
  the  actual  aggregate  amortization  paid  on  all  existing  and prior
  mortgages on the project in reduction  of  total  outstanding  principal
  indebtedness  during  such  period  as  shall  be  fixed by the board of
  directors of the mutual company, to the extent not already  included  in
  the   consideration   paid   for   such   shares,   and  (4)  reasonable
  administrative charges.
    (b) The aggregate amount to be paid to the  selling  tenant-cooperator
  with respect to the sale of the selling tenant-cooperator's shares shall
  be fixed by the board of directors of the mutual company, subject to the
  approval  of  the  supervising  agency,  and  shall  be equal to (1) the
  consideration the selling tenant-cooperator paid for  such  shares,  (2)
  any  capital assessments and voluntary capital contributions approved by
  the supervising agency and paid by the selling tenant-cooperator to  the
  mutual  company, to the extent not already included in the consideration
  paid for such shares, and  (3)  a  proportionate  share  of  the  actual
  aggregate  amortization  paid  by  the  selling tenant-cooperator on all
  existing and prior mortgages  on  the  project  in  reduction  of  total
  outstanding  principal indebtedness during such period as shall be fixed
  by the board of directors pursuant to subdivision (a) of  this  section,
  to  the  extent  not already included in the consideration paid for such
  shares. To the extent that a selling tenant-cooperator may  be  entitled
  to  an  amount  less than the resale price of his shares, the difference
  shall be retained by the mutual company.
    (c) The board of  directors  may,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the
  supervising  agency,  establish  a  general  policy  pursuant to which a
  selling tenant-cooperator who had occupied more than one  dwelling  unit
  is  paid  an  amount  measured  by his proportionate share of the actual
  aggregate amortization paid  during  his  period  of  occupancy  on  all
  existing or prior mortgages on the project. To the extent that a selling
  tenant-cooperator  may  be entitled to an amount greater than the resale
  price  of  shares,  the  difference  may  be   paid   to   the   selling
  tenant-cooperator by the mutual company.
    (d) The "proportionate share of the actual aggregate amortization paid
  on  all  existing  and  prior  mortgages  on the project" referred to in
  subdivision (a) of this section shall be  in  the  same  ratio  to  such
  actual  aggregate  amortization  as  the  number  of  shares held by the
  selling tenant-cooperator at the time of sale bears to the total  number
  of  shares of issued and outstanding capital stock of the mutual company
  during such period.
    (e) Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the continued use
  of any method of calculating resale price adopted by  a  mutual  company
  and  approved  by  the supervising agency prior to the effective date of
  this section.




   §  200.  Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited and
  referred to as the "Urban Redevelopment Corporations Law."




   §  201.  Legislative finding, policy of state, and purpose of article.
  It is hereby declared that in the cities of the  state  substandard  and
  insanitary  areas  exist  which  have resulted from inadequate planning,
  excessive land coverage, lack of  proper  light,  air  and  open  space,
  defective  design  and arrangement of buildings, lack of proper sanitary
  facilities, and the existence of buildings, which,  by  reason  of  age,
  obsolescence,  inadequate  or outmoded design, or physical deterioration
  have  become  economic  or  social  liabilities,  or  both;  that   such
  conditions are prevalent in areas where substandard, insanitary, outworn
  or  outmoded  industrial,  commercial  or residential buildings prevail;
  that such conditions impair the economic value of large areas, infecting
  them with economic blight, and that  such  areas  are  characterized  by
  depreciated  values,  impaired  investments, and reduced capacity to pay
  taxes; that such conditions are chiefly in areas which are so subdivided
  into small parcels in divided ownerships and frequently  with  defective
  titles,  that  their  assembly  for  purposes  of clearance, replanning,
  rehabilitation and reconstruction is  difficult  and  costly;  that  the
  existence   of  such  conditions  and  the  failure  to  clear,  replan,
  rehabilitate or reconstruct these areas results in a loss of  population
  by  the  areas  and further deterioration, accompanied by added costs to
  the communities for creation  of  new  public  facilities  and  services
  elsewhere;  that  it  is  difficult and uneconomic for individual owners
  independently to  undertake  to  remedy  such  conditions;  that  it  is
  desirable  to  encourage owners of property or holders of claims thereon
  in such areas to join together and with outsiders  in  corporate  groups
  for  the  purpose  of  the  clearance,  replanning,  rehabilitation  and
  reconstruction of such areas by joint action; that it  is  necessary  to
  create,  with  proper  safeguards, inducements and opportunities for the
  employment of private investment and equity capital  in  the  clearance,
  replanning,  rehabilitation  and reconstruction of such areas; that such
  conditions require the employment  of  such  capital  on  an  investment
  rather  than  a speculative basis, allowing however, the widest latitude
  in the amortization of  any  indebtedness  created  thereby;  that  such
  conditions  further  require  the acquisition at fair prices of adequate
  areas, the  gradual  clearance  of  such  areas  through  demolition  of
  existing  obsolete,  inadequate, unsafe and insanitary buildings and the
  redevelopment of such areas under proper  supervision  with  appropriate
  planning,  land  use  and  construction  policies;  that  the clearance,
  replanning, rehabilitation and reconstruction of such areas on  a  large
  scale  basis  are  necessary for the public welfare; that the clearance,
  replanning, reconstruction and rehabilitation of such areas  are  public
  uses  and purposes for which private property may be acquired; that such
  substandard and insanitary areas constitute  a  menace  to  the  health,
  safety,  morals,  welfare  and reasonable comfort of the citizens of the
  state; that such  conditions  require  the  creation  of  the  agencies,
  instrumentalities  and  corporations  hereinafter  described,  which are
  hereby declared to be agencies and instrumentalities of the  state,  for
  the  purpose  of  attaining the ends herein recited; that the protection
  and promotion of the health,  safety,  morals,  welfare  and  reasonable
  comfort  of the citizens of the state are matters of public concern; and
  the necessity in the public  interest  for  the  provisions  hereinafter
  enacted is hereby declared as a matter of legislative determination.






	   §  202. Definitions. The following terms, whenever used or referred to
  in this article, shall, unless a different intent clearly  appears  from
  the context, be construed as follows:
    The  term  "development  area"  shall  mean that portion of an area to
  which a development plan is applicable.
    The term "development cost" shall mean the amount  determined  by  the
  supervising  agency  to be the actual cost of the development, or of the
  part thereof for which such determination is made,  and  shall  include,
  among  other  costs,  the  reasonable costs of planning the development,
  including preliminary studies and surveys,  neighborhood  planning,  and
  architectural and engineering services, legal and incorporation expense,
  the  actual  cost, if any, of alleviating hardship to families occupying
  dwelling accommodations in the  development  area  where  such  hardship
  results from the execution of the development plan, the reasonable costs
  of   financing   the  development,  including  carrying  charges  during
  construction, working capital in an amount not exceeding five per centum
  of development cost, the actual cost of the real  property  included  in
  the  development,  or  if  such  real  property or any part thereof were
  acquired partly or wholly in exchange for securities,  then,  an  amount
  which  shall be approved by the supervising agency as being equal to the
  reasonable value of the real property acquired therefor, the actual cost
  of demolition of existing structures,  the  actual  cost  of  utilities,
  landscaping and roadways, the amount of special assessments subsequently
  paid,  the  actual  cost  of  construction,  equipment and furnishing of
  buildings and improvements,  including  architectural,  engineering  and
  builder's  fees,  the  actual  cost  of  reconstruction, rehabilitation,
  remodeling or initial repair of  existing  buildings  and  improvements,
  reasonable  management costs until the development is ready for use, and
  the actual cost of improving that portion of the development area  which
  is  to remain as open space, together with such additions to development
  cost as shall equal the actual cost of additions to or  changes  in  the
  development  in  accordance  with the original development plan or after
  approved changes in or amendments thereto.
    The term "development plan" shall mean a plan for the redevelopment of
  all or any part of an area, and shall  include  any  amendments  thereto
  approved  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  paragraph five of
  section two hundred three of this article.
    The term "dividend year" shall mean, whether or  not  there  exists  a
  maximum exemption period with respect to any one or more parcels of real
  property,  any  of  the recurrent periods of one year each ending on the
  last day of the calendar month immediately preceding the calendar  month
  in  which  the  assessment-rolls  for  the purpose of city taxes on real
  property  are  finally  warranted  to  the  official,   bureau,   board,
  commission  or  agency  charged  with  collecting  such taxes. The first
  dividend year may be a period of less than one year commencing with  the
  beginning  of  the  execution of the development plan and ending on such
  last day of such calendar month.
    The terms "local  taxation"  and  "local  tax"  shall  include  state,
  county,  city,  and  school  taxes,  any special district taxes, and any
  other tax on real  property,  but  shall  not  include  assessments  for
  benefit improvements.
    The  term "maximum assessed valuation" shall mean, with respect to any
  local tax on any parcel of real property, the assessed valuation of such
  parcel appearing on the last assessment-roll warranted to the  official,
  bureau,   board,  commission  or  agency  charged  with  collecting  the
  particular local tax involved, before the commencement  of  the  maximum
  exemption period for such parcel.


   The  term  "maximum  exemption period" shall mean, with respect to any
  parcel of real property, the period commencing with the  acquisition  of
  such  parcel  by  the  redevelopment corporation, or the issuance of the
  certificate of approval  required  by  paragraph  four  of  section  two
  hundred  three  of this article, whichever is later in time, and lasting
  for such period, not exceeding ten years from the date of completion, as
  certified to by the city department or  body  having  jurisdiction  over
  buildings and improvements, of the buildings or improvements required to
  be  built  on  or made to such parcel by the development plan, as may be
  designated in the ordinance or local law, if any, adopted or enacted  by
  the  local  legislative  body  pursuant  to paragraph one of section two
  hundred eleven of this article, but not in excess of the period of  time
  during  which such parcel of real property is owned by the redevelopment
  corporation.
    The term "maximum dividend" shall mean, with respect to  any  dividend
  year,  an  amount  equal to five per centum of development cost less all
  amounts payable during the dividend year as  interest  on,  but  not  as
  amortization of, any indebtedness of the redevelopment corporation.  The
  maximum  dividend,  however,  may  be apportioned in accordance with the
  provisions of section two hundred seventeen of this article. The maximum
  dividend may change from time to time  in  accordance  with  changes  in
  development  cost,  in outstanding indebtedness and in capital structure
  due to refunding operations.
    The term "maximum local tax" shall mean,  with  respect  to  each  and
  every local tax on any parcel of real property the local tax which would
  have  been  payable  on  such  parcel  if the assessed valuation for the
  purpose of such local tax had been, contrary to fact if need  be,  equal
  to the maximum assessed valuation thereof.
    The  term  "minimum  condemnation  requirement"  shall  mean  land and
  buildings or improvements constituting fifty-one per centum or  more  of
  the land area and fifty-one per centum or more by assessed valuation for
  the  purpose of city taxes of the land and buildings or improvements, as
  of the date of the issuance of the certificate of approval  required  by
  paragraph four of section two hundred three of this article, of all land
  and  buildings  or  improvements fee title to which is to be acquired by
  the redevelopment corporation pursuant to the  development  plan,  which
  are  not  exempt otherwise than by this article in whole or in part from
  local taxation, which are included in that stage of the development plan
  in which is located the real property sought to be condemned.
    The term "planning commission" shall mean the official bureau,  board,
  commission  or agency of the city established under the general city law
  or under a home rule charter and authorized to prepare, adopt and  amend
  or modify a master plan for the development of the city.
    The   term  "redevelopment"  shall  mean  the  clearance,  replanning,
  reconstruction or rehabilitation of an area or  part  thereof,  and  the
  provision   of   such  industrial,  commercial,  residential  or  public
  structures or spaces as may be appropriate, including  recreational  and
  other facilities incidental or appurtenant thereto.
    The   term   "redevelopment  corporation"  shall  mean  a  corporation
  heretofore or hereafter  organized  pursuant  to  article  four  of  the
  business corporation law whose certificate of incorporation shall comply
  with the requirements of section two hundred five of this article.
    The  term  "supervising  agency"  shall  mean  the  official,  bureau,
  commission or agency appointed, established or designated by  the  local
  legislative  body  pursuant to section two hundred four of this article,
  except that if there is a board of estimate in the city, it  shall  mean
  such board of estimate.




   §  203.  Development plans and approval thereof. 1. A development plan
  shall contain such  information  as  the  planning  commission  and  the
  supervising agency shall, by rule or regulation require, including:
    (a) A metes and bounds description of the development area;
    (b) A statement of the real property in the development area fee title
  to  which  the  redevelopment  corporation  proposes  to  acquire  and a
  statement of the interests to be acquired in any other real property  by
  the redevelopment corporation;
    (c)  A  statement of the various stages, if more than one is intended,
  by which the development is proposed to be  constructed  or  undertaken,
  and  the  time  limit  for the completion of each stage, together with a
  metes and bounds description of the real property to be included in each
  stage;
    (d) A statement of the  existing  buildings  or  improvements  in  the
  development area, to be demolished immediately, if any;
    (e)  A  statement  of  the  existing buildings or improvements, in the
  development area not to be  demolished  immediately,  if  any,  and  the
  approximate  period of time during which the demolition, if any, of each
  such building or improvement is to take place;
    (f) A statement of the proposed improvements, if any, to each building
  not to be demolished immediately, any proposed repairs or alterations to
  such building, and the approximate period  of  time  during  which  such
  improvements, repairs or alterations are to be made;
    (g)  A  statement  of  the  type,  number  and  character  of each new
  industrial, commercial, residential or other building or improvement  to
  be  erected or made; and a statement of the maximum limitations upon the
  bulk of such buildings or improvements to be permitted at various stages
  of the development plan;
    (h) A statement of those portions, if any,  of  the  development  area
  which may be permitted or will be required to be left as open space, the
  use  to which each such open space is to be put, the period of time each
  such open space will be required to remain an open space and the  manner
  in which it will be improved and maintained, if at all;
    (i)  A  statement  of  those portions, if any, of the development area
  which the redevelopment corporation proposes to sell,  donate,  exchange
  or  lease  to, with or from the city and an outline of the terms of such
  proposed sale, donation, exchange or lease;
    (j) A statement of the proposed changes, if any, in zoning  ordinances
  or  maps,  necessary or desirable for the development and its protection
  against blighting influences;
    (k) A statement of the proposed changes, if any, in streets or  street
  levels and any proposed street closings;
    (l)   A   statement   of   the  character  of  the  existing  dwelling
  accommodations, if any, in the development area, the approximate  number
  of  families  residing  therein, together with a schedule of the rentals
  being  paid  by  them,  and  a  schedule  of  the  vacancies   in   such
  accommodations, together with the rental demanded therefor;
    (m)  A  statement  of  the  character,  approximate  number  of units,
  approximate rentals and approximate date of availability of the proposed
  dwelling accommodations, if any, to be furnished during construction and
  upon completion of the development;
    (n) A statement of the proposed method of financing  the  development,
  in  sufficient detail to evidence the probability that the redevelopment
  corporation  will  be  able  to  finance  or  arrange  to  finance   the
  development;
    (o)  A  statement  of  persons who it is proposed will be active in or
  associated with the management of the redevelopment corporation during a


 period of at least one year  from  the  date  of  the  approval  of  the
  development plan.
    The  development  plan, and any application to the planning commission
  or supervising agency for approval thereof, may contain in addition such
  other statements or material as may be deemed relevant by  the  proposer
  thereof,   including  limits  on  the  amounts  which  may  be  paid  as
  compensation  for  services  to  the  officers  and  employees  of   the
  redevelopment  corporation,  suggestions  for the clearance, replanning,
  reconstruction or rehabilitation of one  or  more  areas  which  may  be
  larger  than  the  development  area but which include it, and any other
  provisions for the redevelopment of such area or areas.
    2. No development shall be initiated until certificates of approval of
  the development plan  therefor  shall  have  been  issued  by  both  the
  planning commission and the supervising agency.
    3. A planning commission may approve a development plan after a public
  hearing,  but  no  certificate of approval thereof shall be issued by it
  unless and until an application for approval has  been  filed  with  it,
  together  with  the  development plan, and unless and until the planning
  commission shall determine:
    (a) That the area within which the development  area  is  included  is
  substandard  or insanitary and that the redevelopment of the development
  area in accordance with the development plan is necessary  or  advisable
  to effectuate the public purposes declared in section two hundred one of
  this article;
    (b)  That  the  development plan is in accord with the master plan, if
  any, of the city;
    (c) That the development area is not less than  one  hundred  thousand
  square  feet  in  area,  except  that  it  may  be  smaller in area when
  undertaken in connection with a public improvement, but in any event  of
  sufficient   size  to  allow  its  redevelopment  in  an  efficient  and
  economically satisfactory manner and to contribute substantially to  the
  improvement of the area in which the development is located;
    (d)  That  the  various  stages,  if  any, by which the development is
  proposed to be constructed or undertaken, as stated in  the  development
  plan, are practicable and in the public interest;
    (e)  That  public  facilities,  including, but not limited to, school,
  fire, police,  transportation,  park,  playground  and  recreation,  are
  presently   adequate,  or  will  be  adequate,  at  the  time  that  the
  development is ready for use, to service the development area;
    (f) That the proposed changes, if any, in  the  city  map,  in  zoning
  ordinances  or  maps  and  in streets and street levels, or any proposed
  street closings, are necessary or desirable for the development and  its
  protection against blighting influences and for the city as a whole;
    (g)  Upon  data  submitted  by  or  on  behalf  of  the  redevelopment
  corporation,  or  upon  data  otherwise  available   to   the   planning
  commission,  that there will be available for occupation by families, if
  any, then occupying dwelling  accommodations  in  the  development  area
  legal accommodations at substantially similar rentals in the development
  area  or  elsewhere  in  a  suitable  location in the city, and that the
  carrying into effect of  the  development  plan  will  not  cause  undue
  hardship  to  such families. The notice of the public hearing to be held
  by the planning commission prior to approval by it  of  the  development
  plan  shall  contain  separate  statements to the effect that before the
  development plan is approved, the  planning  commission  must  make  the
  determination  required in subparagraph (g) of this paragraph three, and
  that  if  the  development  plan  is  approved,  real  property  in  the
  development  area  is,  upon  the  conditions  stated  elsewhere in this
  article, subject to condemnation.


   Any such determination shall be conclusive evidence of  the  facts  so
  determined except upon proof of fraud or wilful misfeasance. In arriving
  at such determination, the planning commission shall consider only those
  elements  of  the  development plan relevant to such determination under
  subparagraphs  (a)  through  (g)  of this paragraph three of section two
  hundred three of this article and to the type of  development  which  is
  physically  desirable  for  the  development  area concerned from a city
  planning viewpoint  and  from  a  neighborhood  unit  viewpoint  if  the
  development  plan  provides that the development area is to be primarily
  residential. Upon  approval  of  a  development  plan  by  the  planning
  commission,  it shall forthwith issue a certificate of approval thereof,
  which may be made subject to subsequent approval of the changes, if any,
  mentioned in subparagraph (f) of this paragraph  three  by  the  person,
  commission or body having jurisdiction thereof.
    4.  A  supervising  agency  may  approve  a  development  plan, but no
  certificate of approval thereof shall be issued by it unless  and  until
  the  planning commission shall first have approved thereof and there has
  been filed  with  the  supervising  agency  the  development  plan,  the
  certificate  of  approval  by the planning commission and an application
  for approval by  the  supervising  agency,  and  unless  and  until  the
  supervising agency shall determine:
    (a)  That the proposed method of financing the development is feasible
  and that it is probable that the redevelopment corporation will be  able
  to finance or arrange to finance the development;
    (b)  That  the  persons  who  it  is  proposed  will  be  active in or
  associated with the management of the redevelopment corporation during a
  period of at least one year  from  the  date  of  the  approval  of  the
  development  plan  have  sufficient  ability and experience to cause the
  development to be undertaken, consummated and managed in a  satisfactory
  manner.
    Any  such  determination  shall be conclusive evidence of the facts so
  determined  except  upon  proof  of  fraud  or  wilful  misfeasance.  In
  considering  whether or not a certificate of approval of the development
  plan shall be issued, the supervising agency shall consider  only  those
  elements  of  the  development plan relevant to such determination under
  subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this paragraph four of section two  hundred
  three  of  this  article.  Upon  approval  of  a development plan by the
  supervising agency, it shall forthwith issue a certificate  of  approval
  thereof.
    5.  The  planning commission and the supervising agency may approve an
  amendment or amendments to a development plan, but no such amendment  to
  a  development  plan which has theretofore been approved by the planning
  commission and the supervising agency shall be approved unless and until
  an application therefor has been filed with the planning  commission  or
  the  supervising agency by the redevelopment corporation containing that
  part of the material required by  paragraph  one  of  this  section  two
  hundred  three  which  shall  be relevant to the proposed amendment, and
  unless and until the planning commission or the supervising  agency,  as
  the  case  may  be, shall make the determinations required by paragraphs
  three or four of this section two hundred three which shall be  relevant
  to the proposed amendment.
    6. The planning commission and the supervising agency may each adopt a
  reasonable  schedule  of  fees  to  be  paid  upon  the  filing  of  the
  development plan, amendments thereto and other instruments in connection
  therewith.
    7. The planning commission and the supervising  agency  may,  for  the
  guidance  of  prospective  proponents  of development plans, fix general
  standards to which a development plan  shall  conform.  Variations  from


 such  standards may be allowed for the accomplishment of the purposes of
  this article. Such standards may  contain  provisions  more  restrictive
  than those imposed by applicable planning, zoning, sanitary and building
  laws, ordinances and regulations.
    8.  The  state division of housing, or a local housing authority where
  such exists, is hereby authorized to render such  advisory  services  in
  connection  with  the  preliminary surveys, studies and preparation of a
  development plan as may be requested by a redevelopment corporation or a
  city planning commission and charge fees for such services on the  basis
  of actual cost.




   §  204.  Appointment of supervising agency. The local legislative body
  of a city is hereby authorized by general  ordinance  or  local  law  to
  appoint,  establish or designate the chief financial officer of the city
  or some other official or bureau, commission or agency as the person  or
  body  to exercise the powers and perform the duties held by or incumbent
  upon a supervising agency pursuant to this article, except that if there
  is a board of estimate in the city no such appointment, establishment or
  designation shall be made and the board of estimate shall exercise  such
  powers  and  perform  such duties or may delegate one or more of them to
  the chief financial officer of the  city  or  to  some  other  official,
  bureau, commission or agency.


   § 205. Redevelopment corporations. 1. Three or more persons may become
  a  redevelopment  corporation  on making, subscribing, acknowledging and
  filing in the department of state a certificate pursuant to article four
  of the business corporation law, which shall be  entitled  and  endorsed
  "Certificate   of   incorporation  of  ....  Redevelopment  Corporation,
  pursuant to article four of the business  corporation  law,"  the  blank
  space being filled in with the remainder of the name of the corporation.
  Such  certificate  shall  contain  the  provisions  required in, and may
  contain any provisions consistent with the provisions  of  this  article
  permitted  in,  a certificate of incorporation filed pursuant to article
  four of the business corporation law, except that:
    (a) Included among the purposes for which the  corporation  is  formed
  shall  be  the  formulation, obtaining the approval of, and putting into
  effect of a development plan, the acquisition  of  real  property  in  a
  development  area,  and the construction, maintenance and operation of a
  development pursuant to this article;
    (b) The duration of the corporation shall be perpetual;
    (c) The certificate may provide for the issuance of income debentures,
  in which case the holders of such debentures may be allowed such  voting
  rights as shall be specified therein;
    (d) The certificate shall contain a declaration that the redevelopment
  corporation  has  been  organized to serve a public purpose, and that it
  shall be subject to supervision and control as provided in this article.
  A copy of such certificate shall be filed with the  planning  commission
  and  the  supervising  agency having jurisdiction within ten days of its
  being filed in the department of state.
    2.  If  a  redevelopment  corporation  shall  not  have  obtained  the
  certificates of approval of its development plan required by section two
  hundred  three  of  this  article  within twelve months of the date upon
  which it became a redevelopment corporation, or shall not  substantially
  comply  with  the  development  plan  within  the  time  limit  for  the
  completion of each stage thereof as therein  stated,  reasonable  delays
  caused  by  unforseen difficulties excepted, then upon the filing in the
  department of state of a certified  copy  of  the  order  of  the  court
  establishing such failure to obtain such certificate or substantially so
  to  comply,  obtained  pursuant  to section two hundred thirteen of this
  article, such redevelopment corporation shall cease to have the  special
  rights,  powers  and privileges granted to, or be subject to the special
  duties,  liabilities  and  restrictions  imposed  upon  a  redevelopment
  corporation  by  this  article,  and shall thereafter change its name to
  remove the word "Redevelopment" therefrom. In such event, however,  such
  corporation   may   thereafter  continue  in  existence  as  a  business
  corporation, subject to the business corporation law. In the event  that
  a  certified  copy  of  such  order shall be so filed, all real property
  acquired by or for such redevelopment corporation by condemnation  shall
  be  disposed  of,  either  alone  or in conjunction with additional real
  property not so acquired, within a reasonable time by  bona  fide  sale.
  All  amounts  received  by  the  redevelopment corporation for such real
  property in excess of an amount equal to that portion of the development
  cost allocable to the real property being disposed of, shall be paid  to
  the city.
    3.  No  corporation  now  organized  under the laws of the state shall
  change its name to a name, and no such corporation  hereafter  organized
  shall  have  a  name,  containing  the  word  "redevelopment"  as a part
  thereof, unless and until such corporation is or becomes a redevelopment
  corporation. No foreign corporation now authorized to do business in the
  state shall change its name to a name, and  no  such  corporation  shall


 hereafter  be  authorized  to  do  business  in  the  state with a name,
  containing the word "redevelopment" as a part thereof.




   §  206.  Limitations  of  redevelopment corporations. No redevelopment
  corporation shall:
    1. Undertake any clearance, reconstruction, improvement, alteration or
  construction in connection with any development until  the  certificates
  of  approval  required by section two hundred three of this article have
  been issued;
    2. Change, alter, amend, add to or depart from  the  development  plan
  until the planning commission or the supervising agency, as the case may
  be, has issued a certificate of approval of that portion of such change,
  alteration,   amendment,   addition   or   departure   relevant  to  the
  determination required to be made by it as  set  forth  in  section  two
  hundred three of this article;
    3.  After  a  development has been commenced, sell, transfer or assign
  any real property in the development area without  first  obtaining  the
  consent of the supervising agency;
    4. Undertake more than one development;
    5.  Pay  interest  on its income debentures, if any, except out of net
  earnings which would have been applicable to the payment of dividends on
  its capital stock if there were no such income debentures;
    6. Pay as compensation for services to, or enter  into  contracts  for
  the  payment  of compensation for services to, its officers or employees
  in an amount greater than the limit thereon contained in the development
  plan, or in  default  thereof,  then  in  an  amount  greater  than  the
  reasonable  value  of  the services performed or to be performed by such
  officers or employees;
    7. Lease an entire building or improvement in the development area  to
  any  person  or  corporation  without  obtaining  the  approval  of  the
  supervising agency, which may be withheld only if  the  lease  is  being
  made for the purpose of evading the provisions of this article;
    8. Mortgage any of its real property without obtaining the approval of
  the supervising agency;
    9.   Make   any  guarantee  without  obtaining  the  approval  of  the
  supervising agency;
    10. Dissolve without obtaining the approval of the supervising agency,
  which may be given upon such conditions as the  supervising  agency  may
  deem  necessary  or appropriate to the protection of the interest of the
  city in the proceeds of the  sale  of  the  real  property  acquired  by
  condemnation  as provided in subdivision two of section two hundred five
  of this article, such approval to be  endorsed  on  the  certificate  of
  dissolution  and  such  certificate not to be filed in the department of
  state in the absence of such endorsement;
    11. Reorganize without  obtaining  the  approval  of  the  supervising
  agency.




   §   207.  Application  of  other  corporation  laws  to  redevelopment
  corporations.  The  provisions  of  the  business  corporation  law   as
  presently  in  effect  and as hereafter from time to time amended, shall
  apply to redevelopment  corporations  heretofore  or  hereafter,  except
  where  such  provisions  are  in  conflict  with  the provisions of this
  article. In the event that any action with respect to which the  holders
  of  income  debentures  shall  have  the right to vote is proposed to be
  taken, then notice of any meeting at which such action is proposed to be
  taken shall be given to such holders in the same manner and to the  same
  extent as if they were stockholders entitled to notice of and to vote at
  such  meeting,  and  any  certificate  filed  pursuant  to  law  in  the
  department of state with respect to any such action, whether taken  with
  or  without  meeting, and any affidavit required by law to be annexed to
  such certificate, shall contain the same statements or recitals and such
  certificate shall be subscribed and  acknowledged,  and  such  affidavit
  shall  be  made, in the same manner as if such holders were stockholders
  holding shares of an additional class of stock entitled to vote on  such
  action,  or  with  respect  to  the  proceedings  provided  for  in such
  certificate.






   §   208.   Consideration  for  issuance  of  stock,  bonds  or  income
  debentures. No redevelopment corporation shall  issue  stock,  bonds  or
  income  debentures,  except  for money or property actually received for
  the use and lawful purposes of  the  corporation  or  services  actually
  performed for the corporation.




   §  209. Determination of development cost. 1. Upon the completion of a
  development a redevelopment corporation shall, or upon the completion of
  a principal part of a development a redevelopment corporation may,  file
  with the supervising agency an audited statement of the development cost
  thereof.  Within  a  reasonable time after the filing of such statement,
  the supervising agency shall determine the development  cost  applicable
  to  the  development  or  such  portion  thereof  and shall issue to the
  redevelopment corporation a certificate stating the amount thereof as so
  determined.
    2. A redevelopment corporation may, at  any  time,  whether  prior  or
  subsequent  to  the undertaking of any contract or expense, apply to the
  supervising agency for a ruling as to whether  any  particular  item  of
  cost therein may be included in development cost when finally determined
  by  the  supervising  agency,  and  the  amount thereof. The supervising
  agency shall, within a reasonable time after such application, render  a
  ruling thereon, and in the event that it shall be ruled that any item of
  cost  may  be  included  in  development  cost, the amount thereof as so
  determined shall  be  so  included  in  development  cost  when  finally
  determined.




   § 210. Regulation of redevelopment corporations by supervising agency.
  A redevelopment corporation shall:
    1. Furnish to the supervising agency from time to time, as required by
  it,  but  with respect to regular reports not more often than once every
  six months, such financial information, statements, audited  reports  or
  other  material  as such supervising agency shall require, each of which
  shall conform to such standards of accounting and financial procedure as
  the supervising agency may by general regulation prescribe.
    2. Establish  and  maintain  such  depreciation  and  other  reserves,
  surplus  and  other  accounts  as  the supervising agency may reasonably
  require, including a yearly reserve with respect to each parcel of  real
  property  held  by the redevelopment corporation against the increase in
  local taxes after the expiration of the maximum exemption period,  which
  shall  be  equal  to  twenty  per  centum  of the difference between the
  maximum local tax on the real property of the redevelopment  corporation
  and  the  local  tax  which  would  have been payable except for the tax
  exemption period provided for in section  two  hundred  eleven  of  this
  article.
    Any  provision of the general corporation law or the stock corporation
  law to  the  contrary  notwithstanding,  one  member  of  the  board  of
  directors  of  a  redevelopment  corporation  may  be  a designee of the
  supervising agency,  as  long  as  any  of  the  real  property  of  the
  redevelopment  corporation is entitled to the tax exemption provided for
  in section two hundred eleven of this article.




   §  211.  Exemption  from  increase  in  local  taxation.  1.  A  local
  legislative body is  hereby  authorized,  by  adopting  or  enacting  an
  ordinance  or local law, to exempt all or part of the real property held
  by redevelopment corporations during a maximum exemption  period,  which
  shall  not  exceed  ten years, which represents an increase in any local
  tax over the maximum local tax. After the adoption or enactment of  such
  an  ordinance  or  local  law, every parcel of real property held by any
  redevelopment corporation in the city shall be exempt during the maximum
  exemption period, from that portion of each and every local tax  to  the
  extent  that  such exemption has been granted by such ordinance or local
  law. If, during the last year of  the  maximum  exemption  period,  such
  exemption  is  in  existence  on  the day such local tax, or installment
  thereof, becomes a lien on such parcel of real property, such  exemption
  shall  extend  for the full tax year for such local tax and shall not be
  apportioned because of the expiration of the  maximum  exemption  period
  during such tax year.
    2.  For  the purpose of fixing the date of commencement of the maximum
  exemption  period  for  a  group  of  parcels  of  real  property  in  a
  development  area, a city is hereby authorized, with the approval of its
  local legislative body, except that if there is a board of  estimate  in
  the  city,  then with the approval of the board of estimate, to contract
  with a redevelopment corporation to place in  one  or  more  groups  the
  various  parcels  of  real property therein. Such a contract may provide
  that all of the parcels in each group may be deemed to have had a common
  stated date of acquisition by the redevelopment corporation,  regardless
  of the actual date of acquisition of each parcel contained therein. Such
  agreed  date  of  acquisition  shall  thereupon  serve  as  a  basis for
  computing the maximum exemption period for each parcel of real  property
  in  the  group.  Such agreed date of acquisition shall not be later than
  the date of the actual acquisition  of  one  or  more  parcels  of  real
  property in the group. After the making of any such contract, all of the
  parcels  of  real  property in any such group shall be treated as a unit
  for the purposes of the assessment and collection of each local tax, and
  the maximum exemption period so computed shall be binding  with  respect
  to each local tax.




   §   212.  Limited  return  on  income  debentures  and  stock.  1.  No
  redevelopment  corporation  shall  pay  any  interest  on   its   income
  debentures  or  dividends  on its stock during any dividend year, unless
  there shall exist at the time of any such payment no default  under  any
  amortization requirements with respect to its indebtedness.
    2.  No  redevelopment  corporation shall pay or declare as interest on
  its income debentures and as dividends on its stock during any  dividend
  year  during  any portion of which there shall exist pursuant to section
  two hundred eleven of this article any exemption from local taxation  on
  any  of its real property, an amount which in the aggregate is in excess
  of the maximum dividend, except as provided in paragraphs three and four
  of this section two hundred twelve.
    3. In the event that in any dividend year the maximum exemption period
  with respect to  some  of  the  parcels  of  real  property  held  by  a
  redevelopment  corporation  shall have expired, and with respect to some
  such parcels shall not have  expired,  then  that  portion  of  its  net
  earnings  which  may  be  paid  or  declared  as  interest on its income
  debentures and as dividends on its stock during such dividend year shall
  be determined as follows: multiply the net earnings of  the  corporation
  subject  to  payment  or declaration as such interest or dividends, by a
  fraction the numerator of which is the total  of  the  maximum  assessed
  valuation  of  all  real property for which the maximum exemption period
  has not expired and the denominator of which is the total of the maximum
  assessed valuation of all the real property of the corporation; and  the
  result  will be the apportioned net earnings restricted as to payment as
  such interest or dividends; compute the amount of the  maximum  dividend
  as  though no apportionment of the same were to be affected and multiply
  the amount so arrived at by the same fraction; and the  result  will  be
  the  apportioned maximum dividend; only that portion of such apportioned
  net earnings which does not exceed such apportioned maximum dividend may
  be paid or declared as such interest or dividends; and that  portion  of
  the  net  earnings  obtained by subtracting from total net earnings such
  apportioned net earnings restricted as to payment as such  interest  and
  dividends  may  be paid or declared without restriction as such interest
  or dividends.
    4. In the event that in any one or more prior dividend years the total
  amount  paid  or  declared  as  interest  on  the  corporation's  income
  debentures  or  as  dividends on its stock shall have been less than the
  amounts allowable pursuant to paragraphs two and three of  this  section
  two  hundred twelve, then cumulative interest and dividends equal to the
  difference may be paid out of any net income applicable thereto  in  any
  subsequent dividend year despite the limitation imposed by paragraph two
  of this section two hundred twelve.




   §  213.  Enforcement  proceedings  against redevelopment corporations.
  Whenever  a  redevelopment  corporation  shall  not  have  obtained  the
  certificates of approval of its development plan required by section two
  hundred  three  of  this  article  within twelve months of the date upon
  which  it  became  a  redevelopment  corporation,  or  shall  not   have
  substantially  complied with its development plan within the time limits
  for the completion of each stage thereof as therein  stated,  reasonable
  delays  caused  by unforeseen difficulties excepted, or shall do, permit
  to be done or fail or omit to do anything contrary to or required of it,
  as the case may be, by this article, or shall be about so to do,  permit
  to  be  done  or fail or omit to have done, as the case may be, then any
  such fact may be certified by the planning commission or the supervising
  agency, whichever shall have supervision thereof,  to  the  chief  legal
  officer  of  the  city,  who  may thereupon commence a proceeding in the
  supreme court of the state of New York in its name for  the  purpose  of
  having  such  action, failure or omission, or threatened action, failure
  or omission, established by order of the court for the purpose stated in
  subdivision two of section two hundred five of this article, or stopped,
  prevented or otherwise rectified by order, injunction or otherwise. Such
  proceeding shall be  commenced  by  a  petition  to  the  supreme  court
  alleging the violation complained of and praying for appropriate relief.
  It  shall  thereupon  be  the duty of the court to specify the time, not
  exceeding twenty days after service of a copy of  the  petition,  within
  which  the  redevelopment  corporation  complained  of  must  answer the
  petition. The court shall, immediately after a default in  answering  or
  after   answer,  as  the  case  may  be,  inquire  into  the  facts  and
  circumstances in such manner as the court shall direct without other  or
  formal  proceedings,  and without respect to any technical requirements.
  Such other persons or  corporations  as  it  shall  seem  to  the  court
  necessary  or  proper  to  join as parties in order to make its order or
  judgment effective may be joined as parties. The final judgment or order
  in any such action or proceeding shall dismiss the action or  proceeding
  or  establish  the  failure complained of or direct that an order, or an
  injunction, or both, issue, or grant such other relief as the court  may
  deem appropriate.




   §  214.  Transfer  of  real  property  to  redevelopment  corporation.
  Notwithstanding any requirement of law to the contrary or the absence of
  direct provision therefor in the instrument under which a  fiduciary  is
  acting,  every  executor,  administrator,  trustee,  guardian  or  other
  person, holding trust funds or acting in a  fiduciary  capacity,  unless
  the  instrument  under which such fiduciary is acting expressly forbids,
  the state, its subdivisions, cities, all other public bodies, all public
  officers, corporations organized under or subject to the  provisions  of
  the banking law (including savings banks, savings and loan associations,
  trust  companies, private bankers and private banking corporations), the
  superintendent of  financial  services  as  conservator,  liquidator  or
  rehabilitator  of  any such person, partnership or corporation, persons,
  partnerships  and  corporations  organized  under  or  subject  to   the
  provisions  of  the  insurance  law,  the  superintendent  of  financial
  services as conservator, liquidator or rehabilitator of any such person,
  partnership or corporation, any of which owns or holds any real property
  within a development area, may grant, sell, lease or otherwise  transfer
  any  such  real property to a redevelopment corporation, and receive and
  hold any cash, stocks, income debentures, mortgages, or other securities
  or  obligations,  secured  or  unsecured,  exchanged  therefor  by  such
  redevelopment  corporation, and may execute such instruments and do such
  acts as may be deemed necessary or desirable by them or it  and  by  the
  redevelopment  corporation  in  connection  with the development and the
  development plan.




   §  215.  Methods  of  acquisition of real property. 1. A redevelopment
  corporation may:
    (a) Whether before or  after  the  certificates  of  approval  of  its
  development  plan  required by section two hundred three of this article
  have been issued, acquire real property or secure  options  in  its  own
  name  or  in  the  name  of  nominees to acquire real property, by gift,
  grant, lease, purchase or otherwise, or awards in condemnation  made  or
  to be made therefor;
    (b)  After  a  certificate of approval of condemnation with respect to
  the real property in question has been issued pursuant  to  section  two
  hundred  sixteen of this article, acquire all or any portion of the real
  property included in such certificate of approval  of  condemnation  not
  already  under contracts of sale or option to it, by condemnation in the
  manner provided by the condemnation law, with such departures  therefrom
  as are provided in this article.
    2.  A city may, upon request by a redevelopment corporation, and after
  a certificate of approval of  condemnation  with  respect  to  the  real
  property  in  question  has  been issued pursuant to section two hundred
  sixteen of this article, acquire, or obligate  itself  to  acquire,  for
  such  redevelopment  corporation  any  real  property  included  in such
  certificate  of  approval  of  condemnation,  by  gift,  grant,   lease,
  purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, according to the provisions of any
  appropriate  general, special or local law applicable to the acquisition
  of real property by the city. Real property acquired by  a  city  for  a
  redevelopment  corporation  shall  be  conveyed  by  such  city  to  the
  redevelopment corporation upon payment to the city of all sums  expended
  or  required  to be expended by the city in the acquisition of such real
  property.
    3. The provisions of this article with respect to the condemnation  of
  real  property  by or for a redevelopment corporation or by a city for a
  redevelopment corporation shall prevail over the provisions of any other
  general, special or local law.




   §  216.  Proceedings  to  acquire. 1. When it is desired that any real
  property in a development area be acquired by condemnation, there  shall
  be  presented to the supervising agency by the redevelopment corporation
  a verified petition requesting the issuance of a certificate of approval
  of condemnation of such real property which shall contain,  among  other
  things:
    (a) A metes and bounds description of the real property involved and a
  statement  of  the  estate,  interest,  privileges,  franchise  or right
  therein or appurtenant thereto to be condemned;
    (b) Proof that such real property is within the development area;
    (c) Proof that the redevelopment  corporation  has  acquired  the  fee
  title, or valid and enforceable options or contracts for the acquisition
  of such title to or in real property satisfying the minimum condemnation
  requirement; and
    (d)  Proof  that  certificates  of  approval  of  the development plan
  required by section two hundred three of this article have been issued.
    The supervising  agency  shall  determine  within  a  reasonable  time
  thereafter  the  truth  or  sufficiency  of  the  statements  and  proof
  contained in such petition, and, if such determination shall be  in  the
  affirmative,  the  supervising  agency  shall  issue to the petitioner a
  certificate of approval of condemnation. Such certificate shall  contain
  a  description  of the real property proposed to be condemned, the facts
  so determined with respect  thereto,  and  a  statement  that  the  real
  property  proposed to be condemned is required for a public use and that
  its acquisition for such use is necessary.  A  certified  copy  of  such
  certificate  of approval of condemnation shall be conclusive evidence of
  the facts stated therein in any condemnation proceeding to  acquire  the
  real  property,  or any part thereof, described in such certificate.  No
  condemnation proceeding to acquire real property in a development  area,
  whether  by a redevelopment corporation or by a city for a redevelopment
  corporation, shall be commenced until such a certificate of approval  of
  condemnation shall have been issued.
    2.  Acquisition  proceedings  by  a redevelopment corporation shall be
  instituted pursuant to the provisions of the  eminent  domain  procedure
  law.
    3.  Condemnation  proceedings for a redevelopment corporation shall be
  initiated by a petition to the city to institute proceedings to  acquire
  for  the  redevelopment corporation any real property in the development
  area.  Such  petition  shall  be  granted  or  rejected  by  the   local
  legislative body, or if there is a board of estimate in the city then by
  the  board  of estimate, and the resolution or resolutions granting such
  petition shall contain a requirement that the redevelopment  corporation
  shall  pay  to  the city all sums expended or required to be expended by
  the city in the acquisition of such  real  property,  and  the  time  of
  payment and manner of securing payment thereof, and may require that the
  city  shall receive, before proceeding with the acquisition of such real
  property,  such  assurances  as  to  payment  or  reimbursement  by  the
  redevelopment corporation, or otherwise, as the city may deem advisable.
  Upon the passage of a resolution or resolutions by the local legislative
  body  or  the  board  of  estimate,  as  the  case  may be, granting the
  petition, the redevelopment corporation shall cause  to  be  made  three
  copies  of  surveys  or  maps  of  the  real  property  described in the
  petition, one of which shall be filed in the office of the redevelopment
  corporation, one in the office of the corporation counsel or  chief  law
  officer  of  the  city,  and  one  in  the  office  in which instruments
  affecting real property in the county are recorded. The filing  of  such
  copies  of  surveys  or  maps  shall  constitute  the  acceptance by the
  redevelopment corporation of the terms and conditions contained in  such


 resolution or resolutions. The city shall proceed under any provision of
  any general, special or local law applicable to the condemnation of real
  property  for public improvements. When title to the real property shall
  have  vested  in the city, it shall convey the same to the redevelopment
  corporation upon payment by the redevelopment corporation  of  the  sums
  and  the  giving of the security required by the resolution granting the
  petition.  As  soon  as  title  shall  have  vested  in  the  city,  the
  redevelopment  corporation  may,  upon  the  authorization  of the chief
  executive officer of the city, enter upon the real property taken,  take
  over  and  dispose  of existing improvements, and carry out the terms of
  the development plan with respect thereto.
    4. The following provisions shall apply to  any  proceedings  for  the
  assessment   of   compensation  and  damages  for  real  property  in  a
  development area taken or to be  taken  by  condemnation  by  or  for  a
  redevelopment corporation:
    (a)  At  any stage of the proceeding, the court may require such prior
  notice to be given of an intention to introduce evidence as to the sale,
  option, leasing or tenancy of real property other than the real property
  directly involved in the proceeding and of particulars relating  thereto
  as it may deem necessary to prevent surprise.
    (b) The deposition of any person, whether or not a party, may be taken
  in  the  manner provided by article thirty-one of the civil practice law
  and rules, and the provisions of this section. Such  deposition  may  be
  taken  upon any question or issue in the proceeding, including the facts
  as to any sale, option, lease or tenancy admissible in evidence pursuant
  to subdivision four hereof. The deposition may be taken at the  instance
  of  the  redevelopment corporation, the city, or of any owner, or at the
  direction of the court, at any time during the pendency of the action or
  proceeding. At least five days' notice, or if  service  is  through  the
  mails,  at least eight days' notice, shall be given of the taking of the
  testimony, if on the part of an owner, to the redevelopment  corporation
  or  city,  as the case may be, and to all other owners who have appeared
  in the proceeding; if by the redevelopment corporation or a city, to all
  owners who have appeared in the proceeding.
    (c) For the purposes of this article, the award of compensation  shall
  not  be  increased  by  reason  of any increase in the value of the real
  property  caused  by  the  assembly,  clearance  or  reconstruction,  or
  proposed  assembly, clearance or reconstruction for the purposes of this
  article of the real property in the development area. No allowance shall
  be made for improvements begun on real  property  after  notice  to  the
  owner  of such property of the institution of the proceedings to condemn
  such property.
    (d) Evidence shall be admissible bearing upon the  insanitary,  unsafe
  or substandard condition of the premises, or the illegal use thereof, or
  the  enhancement of rentals from such illegal use, and such evidence may
  be considered in fixing the compensation  to  be  paid,  notwithstanding
  that  no steps to remedy or abate such conditions have been taken by the
  department or officers having jurisdiction. If a violation order  is  on
  file  against  the  premises in any such department, it shall constitute
  prima facie evidence of the existence of the condition specified in such
  order.
    (e) If any of the real property in the development area which is to be
  acquired by condemnation has, prior to such acquisition, been devoted to
  another public use, it may nevertheless be  acquired  provided  that  no
  real  property  belonging to the city or to any other governmental body,
  or agency or instrumentality thereof, corporate  or  otherwise,  may  be
  acquired  without  its  consent.  No real property belonging to a public
  utility  corporation  may  be  acquired  without  the  approval  of  the


 commission  or  other  officer  or tribunal having regulatory power over
  such corporation.
    (f)  Upon the trial, evidence of the price and other terms upon a sale
  or assignment or of a contract for the sale or assignment of a mortgage,
  award, proposed award, transfer of a tax lien  or  lien  of  a  judgment
  relating  to  property taken, shall be relevant, material and competent,
  upon the issue of value or damage and  shall  be  admissible  on  direct
  examination.
    (g)  Upon  the  trial  a  statement,  affidavit,  deposition,  report,
  transcript of testimony in an action or proceeding, or appraisal made or
  given by any owner or prior owner of  the  premises  taken,  or  by  any
  person  on  his behalf, to any court, governmental bureau, department or
  agency respecting the value of the real property for tax purposes, shall
  be relevant, material and competent upon the issue of  value  of  damage
  and shall be admissible on direct examination.
    (h)  The  term  "owner,"  as used in this section two hundred sixteen,
  shall include a person having an estate, interest  or  easement  in  the
  real property to be acquired or a lien, charge or encumbrance thereon.




   §  217.  Temporary  use  or  occupation  of  real  property  taken  by
  acquisition. When title to real property has vested in  a  redevelopment
  corporation  or  city by gift, grant, devise, purchase or in acquisition
  proceedings or otherwise, the redevelopment corporation or city, as  the
  case may be, may in accordance with the provisions of the eminent domain
  procedure  law  agree  with the previous owners of such property, or any
  tenants continuing to occupy or use it, or any  other  persons  who  may
  occupy  or  use or seek to occupy or use such property, that such former
  owner, tenant or other persons may occupy or use such property upon  the
  payment  of a fixed sum of money for a definite term or upon the payment
  periodically of an agreed sum of money.
    In  the  event  that  a  city  has  acquired  real  property   for   a
  redevelopment  corporation, the city shall, in transferring title to the
  redevelopment corporation, deduct from the consideration or other moneys
  which the redevelopment corporation has become obligated to pay  to  the
  city  for  such  purpose, and credit the redevelopment corporation with,
  the amounts received by the city as payment for temporary occupation and
  use of the real property by a former owner, tenant, or other person,  as
  in  this  section  two  hundred  seventeen  provided,  less the cost and
  expense incurred by the city for the maintenance and operation  of  such
  real property.




   §  218.  Mortgages.  1. Any redevelopment corporation may borrow funds
  and secure the repayment thereof by mortgage. Every such mortgage  shall
  contain  reasonable  amortization provisions and shall be a lien upon no
  other real property except that forming the whole or a part of a  single
  development area.
    2.  Certificates,  bonds  and notes, or part interests therein, or any
  part  of  an  issue  thereof,  which  are  issued  by  a   redevelopment
  corporation  and secured by a first mortgage on the real property of the
  redevelopment corporation, or any part thereof, shall be  securities  in
  which all the following persons, partnerships or corporations and public
  bodies  or  public  officers  may  legally invest the funds within their
  control, provided that the principal amount thereof shall not exceed the
  limits, if any, imposed by law  for  such  investments  by  the  person,
  partnership, corporation, public body or public officer making the same:
  every executor, administrator, trustee, guardian, committee, conservator
  or  other  person  or  corporation  holding  trust  funds or acting in a
  fiduciary capacity; the  state,  its  subdivisions,  cities,  all  other
  public   bodies,   all   public   officers;  persons,  partnerships  and
  corporations organized under or subject to the provisions of the banking
  law (including savings  banks,  savings  and  loan  associations,  trust
  companies, bankers and private banking corporations); the superintendent
  of financial services as conservator, liquidator or rehabilitator of any
  such  person,  partnership  or  corporation;  persons,  partnerships  or
  corporations organized  under  or  subject  to  the  provisions  of  the
  insurance   law;   and  the  superintendent  of  financial  services  as
  conservator, liquidator or rehabilitator of any such person, partnership
  or corporation.
    3. Any mortgage on the real property in a  development  area,  or  any
  part thereof, may create a first lien, or a second or other junior lien,
  upon such real property.
    4.  The  limits as to principal amount secured by mortgage referred to
  in paragraph two of this section two hundred eighteen shall not apply to
  certificates, bonds and notes, or part interests therein, or any part of
  an issue thereof, which are secured by first mortgage on  real  property
  in  a  development  area, or any part thereof, which the federal housing
  administrator has insured or has made a commitment to insure  under  the
  national  housing act. Any such person, partnership, corporation, public
  body or public officer may receive and hold any debentures, certificates
  or  other  instruments  issued  or  delivered  by  the  federal  housing
  administrator,  pursuant to the national housing act, in compliance with
  the contract of  insurance  of  a  mortgage  on  real  property  in  the
  development area, or any part thereof.




   §  219.  Sale  or  lease of real property by a city to a redevelopment
  corporation. 1. The local legislative body, or if there is  a  board  of
  estimate  in  the  city,  then  the board of estimate, may by resolution
  determine that real property, title  to  which  is  held  by  the  city,
  specified  and  described in such resolution, is not required for use by
  the city and may authorize the city to sell or lease such real  property
  to a redevelopment corporation; provided, however, that the title of the
  city to such real property be not declared inalienable by charter of the
  city, or other similar law or instrument.
    2. Notwithstanding the provisions of any general, special or local law
  or  ordinance,  such sale or lease may be made without appraisal, public
  notice or public bidding for such price or rental and  upon  such  terms
  (and, in case of a lease, for such term not exceeding fifty years with a
  right to one renewal term of thirty years) as may be agreed upon between
  the city and the redevelopment corporation.
    3.  Before  any  sale or lease to a redevelopment corporation shall be
  authorized, a public hearing shall be  held  by  the  local  legislative
  body,  or  by the board of estimate, as the case may be, to consider the
  proposed sale or lease.
    4. Notice of such hearing shall be published at least ten days  before
  the  date  set for the hearing in such publication and in such manner as
  may be designated by  the  local  legislative  body,  or  the  board  of
  estimate, as the case may be.
    5.  The  deed  or lease of such real property shall be executed in the
  same manner as a deed or lease by the city of other real property  owned
  by  it  and  may contain appropriate conditions and provisions to enable
  the city to reenter the real property in the event of a violation by the
  redevelopment corporation of any  of  the  provisions  of  this  article
  relating  to  such  redevelopment  corporation  or  of the conditions or
  provisions of such deed or lease.
    6. A redevelopment corporation purchasing  or  leasing  real  property
  from  a  city  shall  not, without the written approval of the city, use
  such real property  for  any  purpose  except  in  connection  with  its
  development.  The  deed shall contain a condition that the redevelopment
  corporation will devote the real property granted only for the  purposes
  of  its  development  subject  to  the restrictions of this article, for
  breach of which the city shall have the right to reenter  and  repossess
  itself of the real property.




   §  220. Provisions of lease. If real property of a city be leased to a
  redevelopment corporation:
    1. The lease may provide that all improvements shall be  the  property
  of the lessor;
    2.  The lessor may grant to the redevelopment corporation the right to
  mortgage the fee of such property  and  thus  enable  the  redevelopment
  corporation to give as security for its notes or bonds a first lien upon
  the land and improvements;
    3.  The  execution  of  a  lease  shall not impose upon the lessor any
  liability or obligation  in  connection  with  or  arising  out  of  the
  financing,  construction,  management  or  operation  of  a  development
  involving the land so leased. The lessor shall not,  by  executing  such
  lease,  incur  any  obligation  or liability with respect to such leased
  premises other than may devolve upon the lessor with respect to premises
  not owned by it. The  lessor,  by  consenting  to  the  execution  by  a
  redevelopment  corporation of a mortgage upon the leased land, shall not
  thereby assume, and such consent shall not be construed as imposing upon
  the lessor, any liability upon the note or bond secured by the mortgage;
    4. The lease may reserve such easements or other rights in  connection
  with  the  real property as may be deemed necessary or desirable for the
  future planning and development of the city and the extension of  public
  facilities  therein (including the construction of subways and conduits,
  the widening and change of grade of streets); and it  may  contain  such
  other   provisions  for  the  protection  of  the  parties  as  are  not
  inconsistent with the provisions of this article.




   §  221.  Construction.  This  article  shall be construed liberally to
  effectuate the purposes hereof, and the enumeration of  specific  powers
  in this article shall not operate to restrict the meaning of any general
  grant  of  power  contained  in  this article or to exclude other powers
  comprehended in such general grant.




   §  250.  Short  title. This article shall be known and may be cited as
  the "Community Development Corporations Act".




   §  251.  Policy and purposes of article. It is the policy of the state
  to promote the  reconstruction  and  redevelopment  of  municipal  urban
  renewal  areas  in  a  manner  that  will  serve the civic, cultural and
  recreational needs of the community as a whole.  There is need for local
  non-profit corporations to construct, with mortgage  loan  participation
  by  the  New  York state housing finance agency and in furtherance of an
  urban renewal plan, civic,  cultural  and  recreational  structures  and
  facilities and other capital development projects invested with a public
  interest,  for the accomplishment of the purposes of article eighteen of
  the constitution and articles  fifteen  and  fifteen-A  of  the  general
  municipal law.




   §  252.  Definitions.  As  used  in  this  article, unless a different
  meaning clearly appears from the context: 1. "Agency", "area" and "plan"
  shall  mean  agency,  urban  renewal  area  and  urban   renewal   plan,
  respectively,  as  defined  in  article fifteen of the general municipal
  law.
    2. "Municipality" shall mean the city, town  or  village  in  which  a
  community  development  corporation  conducts or proposes to conduct its
  activities.
    3. "Project" shall  mean  a  non-profit  capital  development  project
  invested  with  a  public  interest,  including facilities incidental or
  appurtenant thereto and all lands, buildings and improvements  acquired,
  owned,  constructed, maintained or operated pursuant to this article, or
  any combination thereof. It shall include but not be  limited  to  civic
  auditoriums, libraries, museums and recreational centers.




   §   253.   Incorporation   and   organization.  Community  development
  corporations shall be incorporated and organized in the manner  provided
  in  the  not-for-profit corporation law for not-for-profit corporations,
  except that the certificate of incorporation shall be  approved  by  the
  commissioner instead of such approval or approvals as may be required by
  the  not-for-profit  corporation  law.    In  addition  to those matters
  required to be set forth in the  certificate  of  incorporation  by  the
  not-for-profit corporation law, the certificate shall state:
    1.  That  the  real  property  of  the  corporation shall not be sold,
  transferred,  encumbered  or  assigned  except  as  permitted   by   the
  provisions of this article.
    2.  That  the  corporation  has  been organized exclusively to serve a
  civic, cultural or recreational purpose, or any combination thereof, and
  that it shall be and remain subject to the supervision  and  control  of
  the commissioner.
    3.  That  all  income  and  earnings  of the corporation shall be used
  exclusively for its corporate purposes.
    4. That no part of the net income or net earnings of  the  corporation
  shall  inure to the benefit or profit of any private individual, firm or
  corporation.




   §  254.  Powers and limitations. 1. Except as is inconsistent with the
  provisions of this article, a community  development  corporation  shall
  have, in carrying out the purposes of this article, the powers conferred
  on  corporations  by  the  general  corporation  law  and  the  business
  corporation law, and shall  be  subject  to  the  limitations  contained
  therein.
    2.   Community  development  corporations  shall  have  the  following
  additional powers:
    (a) To construct, reconstruct, improve, alter, repair, lease,  manage,
  operate and otherwise provide projects;
    (b)  To  enter  into contracts with the New York state housing finance
  agency for mortgage loans;
    (c) To receive assistance from  the  state,  the  federal  government,
  municipalities  and  any  person,  firm  or  corporation, by contract or
  otherwise; and to comply, subject to the  provisions  of  this  article,
  with the terms and conditions of such assistance;
    (d)  Subject  to  the  approval of the commissioner, to sell, lease or
  otherwise dispose of any of its  real  property,  or  any  appurtenances
  thereto  or  any interest therein, to the municipality or to any person,
  firm or public or private corporation approved by  the  municipality  by
  resolution  of  its  local  legislative  body. In the case of a lease or
  other disposition not divesting such corporation of title, such approval
  of the municipality may be conditioned  upon  the  making  of  pro  rata
  payments in lieu of taxes to the municipality;
    (e) To borrow money and give mortgages and other liens on its real and
  personal  property  to  secure  the  repayment thereof, and to issue its
  notes, bonds or other obligations and to provide for the rights  of  the
  holders thereof;
    (f)  Subject  to  the  approval  of  the  commissioner,  to enter into
  agreements to pay  annual  sums  in  lieu  of  taxes  to  any  political
  subdivision  of  the  state  with  respect  to any of its real property;
  provided, however, that the amount so paid for any year  upon  any  such
  property  shall  not  exceed the sum last paid as taxes on such property
  prior to the time of its acquisition  by  the  corporation,  or  by  the
  municipality  if  such property has been conveyed by the municipality to
  the corporation, plus any sum or sums  attributable  as  taxes  to  such
  parts  or  portions of such real property as may be operated for profit,
  under lease or otherwise by or for the benefit of  any  private  person,
  firm or corporation.
    3. No community development corporation shall:
    (a)  Acquire  any  real  property  or  interest  therein  unless  such
  corporation  shall  first  have  obtained  from   the   commissioner   a
  certificate  that  such  acquisition  is consistent with the purposes of
  this article.
    (b) Pay interest on its mortgage indebtedness at a  rate  higher  than
  six per centum per annum or upon its notes, bonds or other obligations.
    (c) Issue notes, bonds or other obligations relating to any project in
  an aggregate amount greater than the project cost.
    (d)   Without  first  having  obtained  the  written  consent  of  the
  commissioner:
    (i) Construct, reconstruct, improve or alter  any  project,  or  enter
  into any contract therefor.
    (ii)  Sell,  transfer or assign any real property, except that no such
  consent shall be necessary in any sale in foreclosure.
    (iii) Except as otherwise provided in this article, encumber or  lease
  all or any part of its real property to any other person or corporation.
    (iv) Enter into contracts for the operation of the project.


   (v)  Enter  into  contracts for the payment of salaries to officers or
  employees.
    (vi)  Make  a  guaranty of payment or pledge any or all of its assets,
  income or revenues to secure payment of its obligations.
    (vii) Voluntarily dissolve.




   §  255. Members, officers and directors. 1. No member or director of a
  community development corporation shall  receive  any  salary  or  other
  compensation  for  services,  other  than  reimbursement  of  actual and
  necessary expenses incurred in the performance of his duties. No member,
  officer or employee of a community development corporation shall acquire
  any interest, direct or indirect, in any  property  then  or  thereafter
  included or planned to be included in a project, nor retain any interest
  direct   or   indirect  in  any  property  acquired  subsequent  to  his
  appointment or employment which is later included or  to  his  knowledge
  planned  to be included in a project. If any member, officer or employee
  of any community development corporation owns or  controls  an  interest
  direct  or  indirect  in  any  property included in a project, which was
  acquired prior to his appointment or employment, he shall disclose  such
  interest and the date of acquisition thereof in writing to the community
  development  corporation  and  such disclosure shall be entered upon the
  minutes of the community development corporation.
    2. The provisions of the not-for-profit corporation law  shall  govern
  membership  in  community  development  corporations,  qualification  of
  voters, meetings and notices thereof,  and  selection  of  officers  and
  directors.




   §  256.  Mortgage loans. The New York state housing finance agency may
  enter into contracts for loans to community development corporations for
  one or more projects.  No loan shall be made in an amount  greater  than
  ninety-five  per  centum of the project cost, plus working capital in an
  amount not to exceed two per centum of the project cost. Any  such  loan
  shall  be secured by a first mortgage lien upon all of the real property
  of which the project consists and upon  all  fixtures  and  articles  of
  personal  property attached to or used in conjunction with the operation
  of such project. The agency may make temporary loans or  advances  to  a
  community  development  corporation  in anticipation of such loan and no
  such temporary loan or advance shall be deemed  to  constitute  part  of
  such loan unless such temporary loan or advance has been made out of the
  proceeds  of  definitive  bonds  sold  by  the  agency  pursuant  to the
  provisions of section forty-six of this chapter.




   §  257. Conditions and security for loans. 1. No loan shall be made to
  a community  development  corporation  for  a  project  unless  (a)  the
  planning  commission,  if  any,  of  the  municipality  has approved the
  project; (b) the local legislative body of  the  municipality,  after  a
  public  hearing,  has approved the project and has enacted or will enact
  regulations  or  appropriate  restrictions  adequately  protecting   the
  project  against  future  uses  likely to depreciate unduly the value of
  such project and has, by resolution, found that the project will aid  in
  the  replanning,  reconstruction  or  redevelopment  of an urban renewal
  area, as defined in article fifteen of the  general  municipal  law,  or
  will  provide  facilities  incidental or appurtenant to an urban renewal
  project, as defined in article fifteen of the general municipal law, and
  (c) the commissioner has found that:
    (i) the estimated revenues  of  the  project  or  the  monies  of  the
  corporation  will be sufficient to cover all probable costs of operation
  and  maintenance,  all  fixed  charges  and   operating   reserves   and
  depreciation reserves if any;
    (ii)  the  plans and specifications conform to the requirements of all
  laws applicable thereto and  assure  light,  air,  sanitation  and  fire
  protection;
    (iii)  the  project  is  in  conformity with an approved urban renewal
  plan, as defined in article fifteen of the general municipal law.




   §  258.  Transfer of real property. 1. Notwithstanding any requirement
  of law to the contrary or any provision of any general, special or local
  law, charter  or  ordinance,  every  executor,  administrator,  trustee,
  guardian  or  other  person holding trust funds or acting in a fiduciary
  capacity, unless the instrument under which  such  fiduciary  is  acting
  expressly  forbids, and the state, its subdivisions, municipalities, all
  other public bodies, all  public  officers,  persons,  partnerships  and
  corporations owning or holding any real property, may grant, sell, lease
  or  otherwise  transfer  any such real property or interest therein to a
  community development corporation and receive and hold any cash,  bonds,
  notes,   mortgages  or  other  securities  or  obligations,  secured  or
  unsecured, exchanged therefor by such corporation and may  execute  such
  instruments  and do such acts as may be deemed necessary or desirable by
  them or it and by the  corporation  in  connection  with  a  project  or
  projects,  and  such  sale, lease or transfer may be made without public
  auction or bidding; provided, however, that where such real property  is
  within  a  municipal urban renewal area the disposition thereof shall be
  in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (d) of subdivision two of
  section five hundred seven of the general municipal law.
    2. The municipality may take property by condemnation for a  community
  development  corporation  pursuant  to the provisions of article nine of
  this chapter and transfer the same to such corporation  as  provided  in
  subdivision one of this section.




   §  259.  Supervision and regulation. The commissioner may from time to
  time make, amend and repeal rules and regulations for  the  supervision,
  examination,  regulation and audit of community development corporations
  and for carrying  into  effect  the  provisions  and  purposes  of  this
  article.




   §  260.  Tax  exemption.  The  property  of  a  community  development
  corporation and its income and operations shall be exempt from taxation.




   §  261.  Separability.  If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or
  part of this article  shall  be  adjudged  by  any  court  of  competent
  jurisdiction  to  be  invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or
  invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation
  to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section  or  part  thereof  directly
  involved  in  the  controversy  in  which  such judgment shall have been
  rendered.




   §  300.  Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited and
  referred to as the "mortgage facilities corporation law".




   §  301.  Policy of state and purpose of article. It is recognized that
  there exist in New York state certain neighborhoods, which,  because  of
  heavy  in-migrations  and  other  factors,  have  been  characterized by
  over-crowding  of  population,   extensive   absentee   ownership,   and
  concentrated occupancy particularly by racial minorities. Because of the
  special  appraisal  and  servicing  problems  peculiar to such areas the
  supply of available mortgage money in these areas is insufficient. It is
  the declared policy of the state that a medium be established, owned and
  financed entirely through private enterprise institutions, through which
  the mortgage money necessary  to  re-establish  these  neighborhoods  as
  sound  communities  would  be  made  available  on a sound profit-making
  basis.




   §  302.  Definitions.  1. The term "housing accommodation," as used in
  this article, shall mean any building or  structure  which  is  used  or
  occupied,  or  is  intended to be used or occupied, wholly or partly, as
  the home or residence of one or more human beings.
    2. The term "improved real property," as used in this  article,  shall
  include real property upon which a housing accommodation is to be built,
  in  whole  or  in  part,  out  of  the  proceeds of the loan, which when
  completed will constitute a permanent improvement.
    3. The terms "encumbered" and "unencumbered," as used in this article,
  shall have the same meaning as in paragraph six  of  subsection  (a)  of
  section one thousand four hundred four of the insurance law.




   §  303.  Establishment  of  corporation.  There  is  hereby  created a
  corporation  which  shall  be  known   as   "The   Mortgage   Facilities
  Corporation."  The  principal  office of the corporation shall be in the
  borough of Manhattan in the county of New York. Within  ten  days  after
  such  office  is  established  and, within ten days after the removal of
  such office, the corporation shall notify the secretary of state of  the
  street  address  in  such borough where its principal office is located,
  and the secretary of state shall note such  address  upon  his  records.
  Except  as  otherwise provided in this article, the corporation shall be
  possessed of all the powers, privileges and immunities which now are  or
  hereafter  may  be  conferred  on corporations with capital stock by the
  stock corporation law and the general corporation law  or  the  business
  corporation  law  and  for  such  purposes  shall be deemed to have been
  organized under the provisions of said laws. Process in  any  action  or
  proceeding  against  the corporation may be served upon the secretary of
  state, as the agent of the corporation for such purposes.  Such  process
  shall be served in the manner prescribed in section three hundred six of
  the  business corporation law for service against a domestic business or
  transportation corporation, accompanied by the fee for such  service  as
  prescribed  therein  and the secretary of state shall forthwith send one
  of the copies served upon  him  to  the  corporation  at  its  principal
  office.  If  such  corporation fails to commence business by June first,
  nineteen hundred fifty-seven, its  existence  shall  terminate  and  the
  provisions  of this article shall become null and void. For the purposes
  of this section only the corporation shall be deemed to  have  commenced
  business  when  two and one-half per centum of the capital stock thereof
  shall have been paid into  the  treasury  and  ten  members  shall  have
  qualified  as hereinafter provided.  Once having commenced business, the
  duration of the corporation shall be perpetual.




   §  304.  Purposes,  powers  and  operation.  1.  The  purpose  of  the
  corporation shall be to assist, promote,  encourage  and  stimulate  the
  development  and rehabilitation of blighted areas by rendering financial
  assistance in the construction, rehabilitation or  purchase  of  housing
  accommodations in blighted or deteriorating urban areas in this state by
  making first mortgage loans in areas designated by the corporation, such
  loans  to  be made on a sound economic basis by the application of sound
  mortgage lending principles.
    2. It is not the intention or the purpose of the powers herein granted
  to take from banking  or  insurance  organizations  any  such  loans  or
  commitments  as  may  be  desired by such organizations generally in the
  ordinary  course  of  their  business;  provided   however,   that   the
  corporation  need  not  make any specific inquiry or find as a fact that
  any banking or insurance organization desires to make any such loan.
    3. In furtherance of the purpose set forth in subdivision one of  this
  section,  and  in addition to the powers conferred on stock corporations
  by general laws, the corporation shall, subject to the restrictions  and
  limitations contained in this article, have the following powers:
    (a) To issue and sell for cash capital stock of the corporation.
    (b)  To  issue and sell its debentures bearing such interest rates and
  having such  maturities  and  other  terms  and  provisions  as  may  be
  determined by the board of directors of the corporation.
    (c)  To  invest  in  bonds  and  mortgages or notes and mortgages upon
  improved  and  unencumbered  real  property  in  areas  in  this   state
  designated  by  the  board  of directors of the corporation as blighted,
  over-crowded,  or  deteriorating  areas,  subject   to   the   following
  conditions:
    (i)  The  board  of  directors shall be satisfied with respect to each
  loan that it is economically sound.
    (ii) No such loan shall be in an amount in excess of eighty per centum
  of the corporation's appraised value of such real property, except  that
  such loan may exceed eighty per centum when guaranteed or insured by the
  federal government or any agency thereof.
    (iii)  Any  appraisal of such property shall be based on its long-term
  economic value with due consideration being given, among other  factors,
  to  its  physical  maintenance  and,  in  the  case  of income-producing
  properties, to  its  stabilized  rental  value  after  adequate  vacancy
  allowances.  Except  in  cases  of  new  construction no appraisal of an
  income-producing property shall be undertaken by the corporation  unless
  it  has  first  been  supplied by the loan applicant with a current rent
  roll and statement of income and expense  for  the  twelve-month  period
  preceding  the  date  of  the  loan  application, certified by such loan
  applicant and in form and substance satisfactory to the corporation.
    (iv) No loan shall be  made  on  any  existing  housing  accommodation
  unless   (a)   such  housing  accommodation  is  in  physical  condition
  satisfactory to the corporation or (b) the loan applicant  is  committed
  to restore such housing accommodation to satisfactory condition prior to
  the  loan  closing,  or,  at the discretion of the corporation, within a
  specified period after closing, out of the proceeds of the loan.
    (v) No loan shall be made on a housing accommodation unless  (a)  such
  housing  accommodation has a suitable heating system satisfactory to the
  corporation, or (b) the loan applicant is committed to install  suitable
  heating facilities out of the proceeds of such loan.
    (vi)  Any such loan shall be for one or more of the following purposes
  only:
    A. To finance the improvement or rehabilitation of an existing housing
  accommodation.


   B.  To  consolidate,  refinance   or   liquidate   existing   mortgage
  indebtedness on a housing accommodation.
    C.  To  finance  the  bona  fide  purchase of a housing accommodation,
  provided that except in cases of loans  insured  or  guaranteed  by  the
  federal  government  or  any  agency  thereof, the purchaser of the real
  property which is to constitute the security for the proposed  loan  has
  paid to the seller in cash an amount equal to at least twenty per centum
  of the purchase price of such real property.
    D. To finance the construction of new housing accommodations.
    (vii)  The  board  of  directors  of the corporation shall cause to be
  included in  each  mortgage  the  following  protective  provisions  and
  restrictions  (in  addition  to  those contained in the statutory form M
  mortgage  with  lien  covenant  as  contained  in  section  two  hundred
  fifty-eight  of the real property law), provided that any and all of the
  said provisions and restrictions may be waived by the corporation  where
  the corporation is purchasing or otherwise acquiring an already existing
  mortgage:
    A.  A  provision  requiring  the mortgagor to obtain the prior written
  consent of the holder of the first  mortgage  to  the  creation  of  any
  junior  liens,  charges  or encumbrances affecting the real property. In
  its sole and absolute discretion the corporation may modify or waive the
  inclusion of this provision in any mortgage.
    B. A provision requiring the mortgagor to accumulate and maintain with
  the holder of the first mortgage, so long as the mortgage is held by it,
  a fund for the proper repair and maintenance of the mortgaged  premises.
  The  amount and type of such fund and conditions under which it shall be
  accumulated, applied and replenished shall be specified in the mortgage.
  Such fund may be applied from time to time to the repair or  maintenance
  of  the property by the mortgagor with the written consent of the holder
  of the first mortgage. Such fund shall be applied by  the  mortgagor  at
  the  direction of such holder, when such application is deemed necessary
  by such holder for the reasonable protection of  the  property.  In  its
  sole  and absolute discretion the corporation may waive the inclusion of
  this provision in any mortgage.
    C. A provision permitting the mortgagor to repay the principal  amount
  of the loan or any part thereof at any time without penalty, except that
  the mortgage may, in the discretion of the board of directors, contain a
  provision  for  a prepayment penalty not exceeding two per centum of any
  amount repaid within three years  after  the  closing  of  the  loan  in
  addition  to  such regular repayments without penalty as may be provided
  in the mortgage.
    (viii) No loan shall be  made  by  the  corporation  unless  the  real
  property  which  is  to  secure such loan is, or upon application of the
  loan proceeds will be, unencumbered, and the corporation shall have been
  furnished with satisfactory evidence that such real property is or  upon
  application  of  the  loan  proceeds  will  be  in  compliance  with all
  applicable laws, ordinances  and  regulations  of  governments,  whether
  federal,  state,  county  or municipal, or agencies or instrumentalities
  thereof, having jurisdiction.
    (ix) Such other and further conditions as the board  of  directors  in
  its  sole  and absolute discretion may deem advisable in the interest of
  conducting the affairs of  the  corporation  in  accordance  with  sound
  economic and mortgage lending principles.
    (x)  The mortgage shall provide that violation of any of the foregoing
  conditions by the  mortgagor  shall  constitute  an  event  of  default,
  entitling the holder of the first mortgage to accelerate maturity of the
  mortgage obligation.


   (xi)  The  mortgage  shall  provide  for  maturity  of  the  loan  and
  amortization thereof at such rate as shall be deemed appropriate by  the
  board  of  directors in accordance with sound mortgage lending practice,
  provided that except in cases of loans  insured  or  guaranteed  by  the
  federal  government  or  any  agency  thereof,  no mortgage shall have a
  maturity in excess of twenty years from the date of closing.
    (xii) The enumeration herein, or in any lending rules  or  regulations
  promulgated  by  the  corporation, of conditions or criteria relating to
  the granting of any mortgage loan shall  impose  no  obligation  on  the
  corporation  to  grant  any  application  for a loan which fulfills such
  conditions or criteria. The authority of the corporation to decline  any
  loan  application  for  any  reason  whatsoever  shall  be  absolute and
  unconditional.
    (xiii) Nothing  contained  in  this  article  shall  be  construed  as
  signifying  a  legislative  intent  to  define  what constitutes prudent
  lending practice for banking, insurance or other organizations.
    (d) To  sell  without  recourse  bonds  and  mortgages  or  notes  and
  mortgages acquired pursuant to subdivision three (c) of this section, at
  such prices and upon such terms and conditions as the board of directors
  of  the  corporation  shall determine; to service or continue to service
  such bonds and mortgages and to manage such properties for  any  of  its
  members,  provided  that if the purchaser be a member, the said bond and
  mortgage or note and mortgage is in all respects eligible for investment
  by the particular member purchasing the same.
    (e) To acquire, subscribe for,  own,  hold,  sell,  assign,  transfer,
  pledge  or  otherwise  dispose  of obligations of the United States with
  maturities not in excess of three years.
    (f) For the purpose  of  protecting  its  interests,  to  release  any
  obligation  to pay or guarantee the payment of principal or interest, or
  otherwise to waive or modify any of the terms and conditions of any bond
  and mortgage, and of any note and mortgage, and to extend  or  re-extend
  any  bond  and  mortgage, and any note and mortgage, and to accept a sum
  less  than  the  principal  amount  thereof  in  the  full  payment  and
  satisfaction of the same.
    (g)  In addition to interest rates within legal limits the corporation
  may impose a service charge upon the mortgagor or owner which shall  not
  exceed two per centum of the total amount of the loan.
    (h)  To  apply  for status as an approved mortgagee under the national
  housing act and to act as a mortgagee under said act.
    4. The corporation shall have the power to  purchase,  receive,  hold,
  lease or otherwise acquire, and to sell, convey, mortgage, lease, pledge
  or  otherwise dispose of, upon such terms and conditions as its board of
  directors may deem advisable, real and personal property, together  with
  such  rights and privileges as may be incidental and appurtenant thereto
  and the use thereof, including, but  not  restricted  to,  any  real  or
  personal property acquired by such corporation, from time to time in the
  satisfaction  of  debts or enforcement of obligations, provided that the
  corporation may purchase or acquire only the following real estate:
    (a) Plots whereon there are or may be erected buildings  suitable  for
  the convenient transaction of the business of the corporation.
    (b)  Such  real property as shall be conveyed to it in satisfaction of
  debts previously contracted in the course of its business.
    (c) Such real estate as it shall purchase at  sales  under  judgments,
  decrees or mortgages held by it.
    (d) In lieu of instituting an action to foreclose a mortgage lien, the
  corporation may purchase a deed to the underlying real property.




   §  305.  Board  of  directors.  1.  All  the  corporate powers of such
  corporation shall be exercised by a board  of  directors  consisting  of
  thirteen  persons,  all  of  whom  shall be of full age, citizens of the
  United States and at least seven of  whom  shall  be  residents  of  the
  state.
    2.  At the first annual meeting of such corporation and at each annual
  meeting thereafter the members shall elect ten directors whose  term  of
  office shall be one year.
    Each  of  the  members entitled to vote for directors pursuant to this
  subdivision two of section three hundred five of this article  shall  be
  entitled  to  one  vote  for each twenty-five thousand dollars, or major
  fraction thereof, it is subject to be called  upon  to  advance  to  the
  corporation pursuant to the provisions of section three hundred seven of
  this article.
    3.  At  such  first and succeeding annual meetings the stockholders of
  such corporation shall elect three additional directors for terms of one
  year each.
    4. If any director shall lose his citizenship, or shall cease to be  a
  resident  of  the  state,  thereby  creating  a vacancy, or if a vacancy
  occurs in the membership  of  the  board  of  directors  through  death,
  resignation  or  otherwise, the remaining directors shall elect a person
  to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term.
    5. The board of directors shall elect one of its members  as  chairman
  of such board, shall adopt by-laws for such corporation, and may appoint
  such officers and employees as it deems advisable.
    6.  In  addition to other matters, the by-laws of such corporation may
  contain specific standards and criteria by which  mortgage  applications
  will  be  judged and loans made in so far as such specific standards and
  criteria are not  inconsistent  with  any  of  the  provisions  of  this
  article.




   §  306.  Temporary  board of directors. 1. The first annual meeting of
  such corporation shall be held at a time and place to be  fixed  by  the
  temporary  board  of  directors  which  shall  be  as soon as reasonably
  possible after a minimum of two and one-half per centum of  the  capital
  stock  of  such corporation shall have been paid into its treasury and a
  minimum of ten members of  such  corporation  shall  have  qualified  as
  hereinafter provided, and such meeting shall be called in such manner as
  may be provided by the temporary board of directors.
    2. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, until the
  first   annual   meeting  of  such  corporation  and  the  election  and
  qualifications of a board of directors as hereinabove provided, all  the
  corporate  powers  of such corporation shall be exercised by a temporary
  board of directors consisting of thirteen persons, all of whom shall  be
  of  full age, citizens of the United States and residents of this state,
  and who shall be designated by the governor. Such designation  shall  be
  in  writing,  signed by the officer making it, and transmitted by him to
  the secretary of state who shall make and record in his office a copy of
  such designation and deliver the original to the designee,  who,  if  he
  accepts  such  designation,  shall notify the secretary of state of such
  fact, in writing, and thereupon his designation shall  become  effective
  and  the  secretary of state shall record such acceptance in his office.
  If any vacancy occurs in  such  temporary  board  of  directors  through
  death,  resignation  or  otherwise, a person shall be designated to fill
  such vacancy by the governor.  Upon the election and qualification of  a
  board  of  directors  pursuant  to  section  three  hundred five of this
  article, the temporary board of directors shall be deemed dissolved.
    3. As  soon  as  possible  after  the  designation  of  the  directors
  comprising the temporary board has become effective, the temporary board
  of  directors  shall meet, elect a chairman, cause stock certificates to
  be printed, appoint temporary officers and seek to enlist  the  support,
  membership and stock subscription of institutional lenders.




   § 307. Membership. 1. The members of such corporation shall consist of
  such  banking organizations, insurance and surety companies, as may make
  application for membership in such  corporation,  and  membership  shall
  become  effective  upon  the  acceptance  of  such  applications  by the
  temporary board of directors or the permanent board of directors, as the
  case may be. Each member shall lend funds to the corporation as and when
  called upon by it to do so, pursuant to subdivision two of this section,
  but the total amount on loan by any member at any  one  time  shall  not
  exceed  the following limits to be determined as of the date it became a
  member, and such amount shall thereafter be readjusted annually  in  the
  event  of  any  change  in  the  base  of the loan limit of such member:
  commercial banks, industrial banks and trust companies, one  per  centum
  of  capital  and  surplus;  private  bankers, one per centum of capital;
  savings banks,  one  per  centum  of  surplus  fund;  savings  and  loan
  associations,  one per centum of surplus; stock insurance companies, one
  per centum of capital and surplus; surety and  casualty  companies,  one
  per  centum  of capital and surplus; mutual insurance companies, one per
  centum of guaranty funds or of surplus,  whichever  is  applicable;  and
  comparable   limits   for   other   banking,   lending   and   insurance
  organizations, as established  by  the  board  of  directors;  provided,
  however,  that  the  total  amount on loan by any member at any one time
  shall not exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars; provided,  however,
  that  in  the case of banking organizations and in the case of insurance
  and surety  companies  the  superintendent  of  financial  services  may
  authorize a member to lend to the corporation an amount in excess of two
  hundred  fifty thousand dollars. All loan limits shall be established at
  the thousand dollar nearest to the amount computed on an  actual  basis.
  All  calls  of  funds  which  members  are  committed  to  lend  to such
  corporation shall be prorated by such corporation among the  members  in
  the  same  proportion  that  the maximum loan limit of each bears to the
  aggregate loan limits of all  members  of  such  corporation.  Upon  six
  months' prior written notice to the board of directors, a member of such
  corporation  may  withdraw from membership, effective at the end of such
  six-month period and, after the effective date of such withdrawal,  such
  member  shall  be  free of obligations hereunder except those accrued or
  committed  by  such  corporation  prior  to  such  effective   date   of
  withdrawal.  Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, general or
  special,  the  notes  or  other  interest-bearing  obligations  of  such
  corporation, issued in accordance with and by virtue of this article and
  the  by-laws  of  such  corporation,  shall be legal investments for the
  banking, insurance and surety organizations who become members  of  such
  corporations,   up  to  but  in  no  event  exceeding  the  loan  limits
  established herein.
    2. The board of directors of the  corporation  may,  on  thirty  days'
  written  notice  to  its  members, make a call of all or any part of the
  funds which such members are committed to lend pursuant  to  subdivision
  one  of  this  section.  The  debentures  or  evidences  of  debt of the
  corporation issued pursuant to the provisions of this article or by-laws
  may contain such terms and provisions as the board of directors  of  the
  corporation   shall  deem  advisable,  including,  but  not  limited  to
  provisions  concerning  interest  rates,  maturities,   sinking   funds,
  redemptions and refundings.






	   §  308.  Capital  and  shares.  The  total  number of shares which the
  corporation may issue is forty thousand,  all  without  par  value.  The
  consideration for which such shares may be issued is one hundred dollars
  per  share  in  cash.  The  capital of the corporation shall be at least
  equal to the consideration received by the corporation from the issuance
  of its shares plus such amounts as, from time to time, by resolution  of
  the  board  of  directors  may  be transferred thereto. At least two and
  one-half per centum of the authorized shares shall be  issued  and  paid
  for  before the corporation shall be authorized to transact any business
  other than such as relates to its organization.






    §  309.  Obligations.  At  no time shall the total obligations of such
  corporation exceed twenty-five million dollars.




   §  310.  Restrictions.  Such  corporation shall not deposit any of its
  funds in any banking organization unless such banking  organization  has
  been  designated as a depository by a vote of the majority of all of the
  directors of such corporation, exclusive  of  any  director  who  is  an
  officer  or  director  of the depository so designated. Such corporation
  shall not make any loans other than those set  forth  in  section  three
  hundred  four  hereof,  and  in  no event shall the corporation make any
  loans, directly or indirectly, to any of its officers or to any firms in
  which any of its officers is an officer, director or  stockholder.  Such
  corporation shall not receive money on deposit except that money held in
  escrow  pursuant  to  the provisions of subdivision three (c) (vii) B of
  section three hundred four hereof, or otherwise, shall not be deemed  to
  be the receipt of money on deposit.




   §   311.  Examination.  At  least  once  in  each  calendar  year  the
  corporation  shall  be  examined  by  the  superintendent  of  financial
  services  for the purpose of determining the corporation's net worth and
  the soundness of its management and operating policies. The  corporation
  shall not, however, be deemed to be a banking or insurance organization.
  The  corporation  shall pay the cost of each such examination. Copies of
  each  examination  report,  including  the  findings,  conclusions   and
  recommendations of the examiners, shall be furnished to the corporation.
  The  corporation  shall  furnish  copies  of  each report, including the
  findings, conclusions and recommendations of the examiners, to  each  of
  the  holders  of  its capital stock and to its members. Such corporation
  shall  make  an  annual  report  of  its  condition  to  the   governor,
  legislature  and  superintendent  of  financial  services  on  or before
  January first of each year.




   §  312.  Unissued  securities  and  reorganization.  1. The holders of
  capital  stock  of  such  corporation  shall  not,  as  such,  have  any
  pre-emptive  or preferential right to purchase or subscribe for any part
  of the unissued or new issue  of  capital  stock  of  such  corporation,
  whether  now  or  hereafter  authorized  or  issued,  or  to purchase or
  subscribe for any bonds or other obligations, whether or not convertible
  into stock of such corporation, now or hereafter authorized or issued.
    2. Whenever a compromise or arrangement or any plan of  reorganization
  of  such  corporation  is  proposed  between  such  corporation  and its
  creditors, members or stockholders, the supreme court, by virtue of  its
  general  equity powers, may on application of such corporation or of any
  creditor, member or stockholder thereof, or on the  application  of  any
  receiver or receivers appointed for such corporation, order a meeting of
  such  creditors,  members or stockholders, as the case may be, as may be
  affected  by  the  proposed  compromise  or  arrangement  or   plan   of
  reorganization,  which  shall be called in such manner as the said court
  directs. If, at such meeting, such compromise or arrangement or plan  of
  reorganization  is  agreed  to  by  or  on  behalf  of the creditors, if
  affected thereby, holding two-thirds in amount  of  the  claims  against
  such  corporation,  and by or on behalf of the stockholders, if affected
  thereby, holding the majority of capital stock, and by or on  behalf  of
  the  members,  if  affected thereby, holding two-thirds in amount of the
  outstanding  notes  or  other  interest-bearing  obligations   of   such
  corporation  as  provided  for  in  section  three hundred seven of this
  article, and if such agreement shall be further evidenced by the written
  acceptance of said creditors, stockholders and members,  duly  filed  in
  the said court, such compromise or arrangement or plan of reorganization
  shall,  if  approved by the said court as just and equitable, be binding
  on all creditors, stockholders or members, as the case may be,  who  are
  affected  thereby,  and also on such corporation. All persons who become
  creditors, stockholders or members of such corporation shall  be  deemed
  to  have  become  creditors,  stockholders  or  members  subject  in all
  respects to this section, and the same shall be absolutely binding  upon
  them.  For  the  purposes of this subdivision only, members shall not be
  deemed to be creditors  and  shall  act  under  this  subdivision  as  a
  separate class.




   §  313.  Participation.  Notwithstanding any rule at common law or any
  provision of any general or  special  law  or  any  provision  in  their
  respective charters, agreements of association, articles of organization
  or certificates of incorporation:
    1.  All  banking  organizations,  insurance  and  surety companies are
  hereby authorized to become members of the  corporation  established  by
  this article and to make loans to such corporation as provided herein;
    2.  A  banking  organization  which  does  not  become a member of the
  corporation established by this article shall not acquire any shares  of
  the capital stock of such corporation;
    3.  Each  banking  organization,  insurance  and  surety company which
  becomes a member of the  corporation  established  by  this  article  is
  hereby  authorized  to  acquire, purchase, hold, sell, assign, transfer,
  mortgage, pledge, or otherwise dispose of any bonds, securities or other
  evidences of indebtedness issued by such corporation or  the  shares  of
  its  capital  stock, and while owners of said stock, to exercise all the
  rights, powers and privileges of ownership, including the right to  vote
  thereon,  all  without  the approval of any regulatory authority of this
  state; provided, however, that the amount of the capital stock  of  such
  corporation  which  may  be  acquired  by  any  member  pursuant  to the
  authority granted herein, shall not exceed ten per centum  of  the  loan
  limit  of  such member as defined by section three hundred seven of this
  article. The amount of capital  stock  of  such  corporation  which  any
  member is authorized to acquire pursuant to the authority granted herein
  shall  be  in  addition  to  the amount of capital stock in corporations
  which such member may otherwise be authorized to acquire.




   §  350.  Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited and
  referred to as the  "community  senior  citizens  centers  and  services
  companies law."




   §  351. Policy and purposes of article. It is hereby declared that the
  provision of new and improved community senior  citizens  facilities  is
  necessary  to  care for the increasing number of persons who are in need
  of programs and services  for  the  aging.  Such  facilities  should  be
  located  close  to  the  people  they  serve  and  should supplement the
  programs and services provided for such persons by the  office  for  the
  aging pursuant to title one of article two of the elder law.
    It  is  hereby further declared that non-profit corporations should be
  created  to  construct,  acquire,  reconstruct,  rehabilitate,  own  and
  operate  such  facilities and that provision should be made for mortgage
  loan participation by the New York state housing finance agency in order
  to ensure that the full resources of the private  enterprise  sector  of
  the economy may be made available for this purpose; that there is a need
  for  public  assistance  to  such  corporations  by  the granting of tax
  exemption; that it is the policy of the state to promote  the  provision
  of  senior citizens facilities by such non-profit corporations; and that
  such provision is a public use and purpose.




   §  352.  Definitions.  As used in this article the following words and
  phrases shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning  is
  plainly required by the context:
    1.  "Company",  or  "community  senior  citizens  centers and services
  company". A company, duly incorporated pursuant to the provisions of the
  not-for-profit corporation law and this  article,  for  the  purpose  of
  providing  centers  for  the  aging,  and  such  facilities  as  may  be
  incidental or appurtenant thereto.
    2. "Project"  or  "community  senior  citizens  services  project".  A
  specific  work or improvement, including lands, buildings, improvements,
  fixtures and  articles  of  personal  property,  constructed,  acquired,
  reconstructed,  rehabilitated,  managed,  owned or operated by a company
  pursuant to this article, to provide centers for  the  aging,  including
  such facilities as may be incidental or appurtenant thereto.
    3.  "Project  cost"  or  "community  senior  citizens services project
  cost". The sum total of all costs incurred by a company approved by  the
  commissioner  as reasonable and necessary for carrying out all works and
  undertakings and providing all necessary equipment for  the  development
  of  a  project,  less  any  private or federal, state or local financial
  assistance available for and received by the company for the payment  of
  such  project  cost. These shall include but are not necessarily limited
  to the carrying charges during construction  up  to  and  including  the
  occupancy  date,  working  capital not exceeding three per centum of the
  estimated total cost or three per centum of the actual total final cost,
  whichever is larger, the cost of all necessary studies,  surveys,  plans
  and  specifications,  architectural, engineering, legal or other special
  services, the cost of acquisition of land and any improvements  thereon,
  site   preparation   and   development,   construction,  reconstruction,
  rehabilitation,   improvement   and   equipment,   including   fixtures,
  equipment,  and articles of personal property required for the operation
  of such facilities, the reasonable cost of  financing  incurred  by  the
  company  in  the  course  of  the  development of the project, up to and
  including the occupancy date, the fees imposed by the  commissioner  and
  by  the  New  York state housing finance agency; other fees charged, and
  necessary expenses incurred in connection with the initial occupancy  of
  the  project,  and  the cost of such other items as the commissioner may
  determine to be reasonable  and  necessary  for  the  development  of  a
  project,  less  any  and  all  rents  and  other  net  revenues from the
  operation of the real property, improvements or personal property on the
  project site, or any part thereof, by the company on and after the  date
  on which the contract between the company and the New York state housing
  finance agency was entered into and prior to the occupancy date.
    4.  "Occupancy date". The date defined in the document providing for a
  mortgage loan between a company and the New York state  housing  finance
  agency.
    5. "Commissioner". The commissioner of social services of the state of
  New York.
    6. "Department". The department of social services of the state of New
  York.






	   §  353.  Companies; how created. Notwithstanding the provisions of any
  other  law  or  requirement  to  the  contrary,   companies   shall   be
  incorporated  and  organized  pursuant to the not-for-profit corporation
  law and this article.
    In addition  to  those  matters  required  to  be  set  forth  in  the
  certificate  of incorporation by the not-for-profit corporation law, the
  certificate shall state:
    1. That, among the purposes for which it is formed, the company is  to
  plan,  construct,  acquire,  alter,  reconstruct, rehabilitate, improve,
  own, maintain and operate one or more projects pursuant to this article.
    2. The number of directors, which shall be not  less  than  three  nor
  more  than  fifteen.  Directors  shall  be elected by the members of the
  company.  One additional director may be designated by the commissioner.
  In the absence of fraud or bad  faith  the  director  appointed  by  the
  commissioner  shall  not be personally liable for the debts, obligations
  or liabilities of the company.
    3.  That  the  real  property  of  the  company  shall  not  be  sold,
  transferred,   encumbered   or  assigned  except  as  permitted  by  the
  provisions of this article.
    4. That the company has been organized exclusively to serve  a  public
  purpose  and  that it shall be and remain subject to the supervision and
  control of the department pursuant to the provisions of this article and
  all applicable laws and regulations.
    5. That  all  income  and  earnings  of  the  company  shall  be  used
  exclusively for its corporate purposes.
    6. That no part of the net income or net earnings of the company shall
  inure  to  the  benefit  or  profit  of  any private individual, firm or
  corporation.




   § 354. Consent of commissioner. Whenever any such certificate shall be
  presented  to the secretary of state, he shall not file such certificate
  unless there shall accompany the same a certificate of the  commissioner
  stating  that  he  consents to the filing of such certificate; nor shall
  any amendment to the certificate of incorporation be filed unles  it  is
  accompanied by a certificate of the commissioner consenting thereto.




   §  355.  Powers  and  limitations  of  a  company.  1.  Except  as  is
  inconsistent with the provisions of this article, a company shall  have,
  in  carrying  out  the  purpose of this article, the powers conferred on
  corporations by the not-for-profit corporation law and shall be  subject
  to the limitations contained therein.
    2. Companies shall have the following additional powers:
    (a)  To  make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary or
  convenient in the exercise of its powers;
    (b) To  acquire  or  contract  to  acquire  from  any  persons,  firm,
  corporation,  public corporation, municipality, federal or state agency,
  by grant, purchase, or otherwise, leaseholds, real,  personal  or  mixed
  property  or  any  interest  therein,  and  to  sell,  assign, exchange,
  transfer, mortgage or encumber the same;
    (c) To own, hold, clear and  improve,  leasehold,  real,  personal  or
  mixed property or any interest therein;
    (d)   To  issue  non-interest  bearing  debentures  up  to  an  amount
  representing the difference, if any, between the amount of the  mortgage
  made by the company and the estimated project cost; and in the event the
  final  project  cost  shall  exceed  the  estimated  project  cost,  the
  difference between the amount of the mortgage made by  the  company  and
  such final project cost;
    (e)  To  construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate, improve, alter, repair,
  lease, manage or operate and otherwise provide community senior citizens
  services projects;
    (f) To insure  or  provide  for  the  insurance  of  its  property  or
  operations  as  required  by law and also against such other risks as it
  may deem advisable;
    (g) To limit by contract the exercise of any of its powers;
    (h) To invest any funds held in reserves  or  sinking  funds,  or  any
  funds  not required for immediate disbursement in property or securities
  in which savings  banks  may  legally  invest  funds  subject  to  their
  control;
    (i) To sue and be sued;
    (j) To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure;
    (k)  To make and from time to time amend and repeal by-laws, rules and
  regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this article;
    (l) To enter into contracts with the New York  state  housing  finance
  agency for mortgage loans and to pay all such fees and charges as may be
  imposed by such agency as a condition of such mortgage loan;
    (m) To enter into contracts for the rendering of services;
    (n)   To  receive  assistance  from  the  state,  federal  government,
  municipalities, or any  person,  firm  or  corporation  by  contract  or
  otherwise;  and  to  comply,  subject to the provisions of this article,
  with the terms and conditions of such assistance;
    (o) To do all other things necessary or convenient to  carry  out  its
  powers.
    3. No company shall:
    (a)  Acquire any real property or interest therein unless such company
  shall first have obtained from the commissioner a certificate that  such
  acquisition is consistent with the purposes of this article;
    (b)  Issue  notes,  bonds,  debentures,  or  other  obligations  in an
  aggregate amount greater than project cost;
    (c)  Without  first  having  obtained  the  written  consent  of   the
  commissioner;
    (i) Construct, reconstruct, rehabilitate, improve, alter or repair any
  project, or enter into any contract for such purposes;


   (ii)  Sell, transfer, lease or encumber any real property, except that
  no such consent shall be necessary in any sale in  foreclosure  pursuant
  to section three hundred sixty-three;
    (iii) Enter into any contracts relating to the management or operation
  of senior citizens services projects;
    (iv)  Enter  into  any contracts for the payment of any salary, fee or
  emolument to officers or employees;
    (v) Make a guaranty of payment, or pledge any or all  of  its  assets,
  income or revenues to secure payment of its obligations;
    (vi)  Lease  a  project  or a portion thereof to a third party for the
  purposes of operation, such lease  to  be  subject  to  all  the  terms,
  provisions  and  limitations  of  any mortgage loan made by the New York
  state housing finance agency relating to such project.




   §  356.  Members;  officers  and directors. No member or director of a
  company shall receive any salary or other compensation for  services  as
  such  member  or  director,  other  than  reimbursement  of  actual  and
  necessary expenses incurred in the performance of his duties. No member,
  officer, or employee of a company shall acquire any interest, direct  or
  indirect,  in  any property then or thereafter included or planned to be
  included in a project, nor retain any interest, direct  or  indirect  in
  any  property acquired subsequent to his appointment or employment which
  is later included or planned to be included in a project. If any member,
  officer or employee of any company owns or controls an interest,  direct
  or  indirect,  in any property included in a project, which was acquired
  prior to his appointment or employment, he shall disclose such  interest
  and  the  date of acquisition thereof in writing to the company and such
  disclosure shall be entered upon the minutes of the company.




   §  357.  Financing.  1.  Any  company  formed  under this article may,
  subject to the approval of the commissioner, borrow funds from  the  New
  York  state  housing  finance agency and secure the repayment thereof by
  bond or note and mortgage which shall contain such terms and  conditions
  as  may  be  deemed necessary or desirable by the New York state housing
  finance agency or required by any agreement between the New  York  state
  housing  finance  agency  and  the  holders  of its notes and bonds with
  respect to such companies, including the right to  assignment  of  rates
  and fees and entry into possession in case of default, but the operation
  of  such  project,  in  the  event  of  such  entry, shall be subject to
  regulations promulgated by the department.
    2. The New York state housing finance agency may make  a  contract  to
  make  loans  to companies not to exceed the total project cost. Any such
  loan shall be secured by  a  first  mortgage  lien  upon  all  the  real
  property  and  improvements  of  which the project consists and upon all
  fixtures and articles of  personal  property  attached  to  or  used  in
  connection   with   the   construction,   acquisition,   reconstruction,
  rehabilitation, improvement or operation of the project.
    3. Any inconsistent provision of law to the contrary  notwithstanding,
  mortgages of a company shall be exempt from the mortgage recording taxes
  imposed by article eleven of the tax law.
    4.  The  provision  of  community  centers  for senior citizens and of
  programs and services for senior citizens is hereby  declared  to  be  a
  proper  public  and  municipal purpose for which the moneys of the state
  and of its political subdivisions and of all public corporations may  be
  raised  and  expended.  The state, and each political subdivision of the
  state,  and  each  public  corporation  of  the  state  or  a  political
  subdivision  thereof, and individuals, foundations and all other private
  organizations and corporations may make capital grants  to  any  company
  organized  pursuant  to  this  article  and  such company may accept and
  receive the same and apply the same  in  payment  or  reduction  of  the
  project cost.




   § 358. Conditions and security for loans. No loan shall be made by the
  New   York   state  housing  finance  agency  to  a  company  until  the
  commissioner has approved the project and finds that:
    (1) The company has complied  with  all  of  the  provisions  of  this
  article and all applicable laws and regulations;
    (2)  There is a need for a project of the type proposed in the area to
  be served and that the services and facilities to  be  provided  by  the
  project are consistent with such need;
    (3)  The  plans  and specifications conform to the requirements of all
  laws and regulations applicable thereto and assure adequate light,  air,
  sanitation and fire protection and are satisfactory to him;
    (4)  The  estimated revenue of the project will be sufficient to cover
  all probable costs of operation and maintenance, of  fixed  charges  and
  such  reserves  as  may be authorized by the commissioner or required by
  the New York state housing finance agency;
    (5) Provision has been made for  the  purpose  of  providing  for  the
  payment  of  the  difference, if any, between the estimated project cost
  and the mortgage loan; and in the event the  final  project  cost  shall
  exceed  the  estimated  project  cost, the difference between such final
  project cost and the mortgage loan;
    (6) Provision has been made for the filing by  the  company  with  the
  department  and  the  New  York  state  housing  finance  agency of such
  financial statements including  an  annual  report  setting  forth  such
  information as the commissioner may require; and
    (7)  Provision  has  been made for the examination by the commissioner
  and the New York state housing finance agency of the books  and  records
  of the company.




   §  359.  Rates  and  fees.  A  company shall, with the approval of the
  commissioner, fix maximum rates and fees to be charged persons served by
  each project for the facilities and services provided by the company  to
  such persons, the average of such rates and fees for any one project not
  to  exceed  the  maximum  average  rates  and  fees  determined  by  the
  commissioner before any commitments are made  by  the  company  for  the
  construction, acquisition, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement
  of   the  project.  The  commissioner  upon  his  own  motion,  or  upon
  application by the company or lienholder may vary  the  amount  of  such
  rates and fees from time to time so as to secure together with all other
  income  of  the  company,  sufficient  income to meet, within reasonable
  limits, all necessary payments by the  said  company  of  all  expenses,
  including fixed charges, sinking funds and reserves.




   §  360.  Transfer of real property. Notwithstanding any requirement of
  law to the contrary or any provision of any general,  special  or  local
  law,  charter  or  ordinance,  every  executor,  administrator, trustee,
  guardian or other person holding trust funds or acting  in  a  fiduciary
  capacity,  unless  the  instrument  under which such fiduciary is acting
  expressly forbids, and the state, its subdivisions, municipalities,  all
  other  public  bodies,  all  public  officers, persons, partnerships and
  corporations owning or holding any real property, may grant, sell, lease
  or otherwise transfer any such real property or interest  therein  to  a
  company  and  receive  and  hold  any  cash,  exchanged therefor by such
  company and may execute such instruments and do  such  acts  as  may  be
  deemed  necessary  or  desirable  by  them  or  it and by the company in
  connection with a project or projects and such sale, lease  or  transfer
  may  be  made without public auction or bidding; provided, however, that
  where  such  real  property  is  within  an  urban  renewal  area,   the
  disposition  thereof  shall  be  in  accordance  with  the provisions of
  paragraph (d) of subdivision two of section five hundred  seven  of  the
  general municipal law.




   §  361. Supervision and regulation. 1. The department may from time to
  time make, alter,  amend  and  repeal  rules  and  regulations  for  the
  supervision,  examination,  regulation  and  audit  of companies and for
  carrying into effect the provisions and purposes of  this  article,  and
  each  company  shall  submit  an  annual report of its operations to the
  department and the New York  state  housing  finance  agency  which  may
  examine and audit the books and records of the company at any time.
    2.  The  department  shall  have power to act for and in behalf of the
  agency in servicing the mortgage loans of the  agency,  and  to  perform
  such functions and services in connection with the making, servicing and
  collection of such loans as shall be requested by the agency.
    3.  (a)  The  department may, with respect to any project of which the
  New York state housing finance agency has acquired the fee or otherwise,
  enter into an agreement with said agency subject to the approval of  the
  director of the budget, for the department, as provided in paragraph (b)
  hereof,  to  operate  the  said  project in a manner consistent with the
  purposes of this article. In such event, the department shall  have  the
  power  to  use  any available funds to pay all operating expenses and to
  comply with all the terms and provisions of the mortgage, as though  the
  mortgage  had  not been foreclosed, and to comply with the provisions of
  this article.
    (b) Subject to the provisions of the agreement with said  agency,  the
  department  may  contract  with any person, firm or corporation which it
  deems qualified to operate and manage such project and to  perform  such
  duties and functions as it may deem necessary.




   §  362. Voluntary dissolution. At any time after the expiration of ten
  years after the occupancy date, a company may be voluntarily  dissolved,
  with  the  consent  of  the  commissioner, upon repayment in full of all
  obligations under the mortgage and payment of  all  obligations  of  the
  company, as approved by the commissioner.




   §  363.  Foreclosures  and judgments. 1. In any foreclosure action the
  commissioner shall be made a party defendant. He shall  take  all  steps
  necessary  to  protect  the interests of the public therein and no costs
  shall be awarded against him or the department. Foreclosures  shall  not
  be  decreed  unless  the  court  to  which  application is made shall be
  satisfied that the interests of the  lienholder  or  holders  cannot  be
  adequately  assured  except  by  the  sale  of the property. In any such
  proceeding, the court shall be authorized to appoint the commissioner as
  receiver of the property, or to grant such other and further  relief  as
  may be reasonable and proper.
    2.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, wherever
  it shall appear that the New York state  housing  finance  agency  shall
  have  made a mortgage loan which is a first lien upon any such property,
  such New York state housing finance agency shall have all  the  remedies
  available  to  a mortgagee under the laws of the state of New York, free
  from any  restrictions  contained  in  this  section,  except  that  the
  commissioner shall be made a party defendant and he shall take all steps
  necessary  to  protect the interests of the public and no costs shall be
  awarded against him or the department.
    3. In the event of a judgment against a  company  in  any  action  not
  pertaining  to the collection of a mortgage indebtedness, there shall be
  no sale of any of the real property of such company  except  upon  sixty
  days'  written notice to the commissioner and the New York state housing
  finance agency. Upon receipt of such notice  the  commissioner  and  the
  agency  shall  take  such steps as in their judgment may be necessary to
  protect the rights of all parties.




   §  364.  Fees  and charges. The department may by regulation establish
  and charge  to  any  company  such  fees  and  charges  for  inspection,
  regulation,  supervision  and audit as to the department may appear just
  and reasonable  in  order  to  recover  the  costs  of  performing  such
  functions.




   §  365.  Separability.  If  any clause, sentence, paragraph or part of
  this article shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
  be invalid, such judgment shall not affect,  impair  or  invalidate  the
  remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
  sentence,  paragraph,  section  or part thereof directly involved in the
  controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered.




   §  400.  Policy  and  purposes  of article. It is hereby declared that
  there exists in municipalities in  this  state  a  seriously  inadequate
  supply  of  safe  and  sanitary  dwelling accommodations for persons and
  families of low income; that such shortage constitutes an emergency  and
  a  grave  menace  to  the health, safety, morals, welfare and comfort of
  citizens of this state; that there exists in such municipalities a large
  number of multiple dwellings which are inadequate, unsafe or  insanitary
  by  reason  of  the absence of proper heating facilities or by reason of
  the necessity for elimination of conditions dangerous to human  life  or
  detrimental  to  health, including nuisances as defined in section three
  hundred nine of the multiple dwelling law, or for  other  rehabilitation
  or improvement and which can be made adequate, safe and sanitary, by the
  installation  of  proper  heating facilities or by other rehabilitation,
  preservation or improvement or by the elimination  of  such  conditions;
  that  such  installation,  rehabilitation,  preservation  or improvement
  cannot readily be provided by the ordinary unaided operation of  private
  enterprise  for  occupancy  by persons or families of low income without
  public aid in the form of low interest loans or grants to owners of such
  multiple dwellings for the purpose of such installation, rehabilitation,
  preservation or improvement; that the  installation  of  proper  heating
  facilities   in   such   multiple  dwellings  or  other  rehabilitation,
  preservation or improvement thereof for  occupancy  by  persons  of  low
  income  as  defined in this article is a public use and a public purpose
  for which public money may be loaned or granted;  that  such  conditions
  require  the  provisions  hereinafter  enacted; and the necessity in the
  public  interest  for  the  provisions  hereinafter  enacted  is  hereby
  declared as a matter of legislative determination.




   §  401. Definitions. As used in this article the following terms shall
  mean:
    1. a. The term "existing multiple dwelling" shall  mean  any  dwelling
  classified  as a multiple dwelling pursuant to the multiple dwelling law
  including class A and class B multiple dwellings, and  in  existence  on
  the  date  upon which an application for a loan pursuant to this article
  is received by the agency.
    b. The term "existing multiple dwelling" shall also mean any  building
  in  existence  on the date upon which an application for a loan pursuant
  to this article is received by the agency and which is intended on  such
  date to be converted to a class A or class B multiple dwelling.
    c.   The   term   "existing  multiple  dwelling"  shall  also  mean  a
  not-for-profit institution with sleeping accommodations exclusively  for
  permanent  residential purposes or any building in existence on the date
  upon which an application  for  a  loan  pursuant  to  this  article  is
  received  by  the  agency  which  is  intended  to  be  converted  to  a
  not-for-profit institution with sleeping accommodations exclusively  for
  permanent residential purposes.
    2.  The  term  "agency"  shall  mean  any  officer, board, commission,
  department, or other agency of the municipality, or the authority or any
  other public authority, designated by  the  local  legislative  body  to
  carry  out  the  functions  vested  in  the agency under this article or
  delegated to the agency by the local legislative body in order to  carry
  out the purposes and provisions of this article.
    3. a. The term "persons or families of low income" shall mean "persons
  of  low income" or "families of low income" as defined in section two of
  this chapter.
    b. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a of this  subdivision,
  the  term "persons or families of low income" shall also mean any person
  or family who, immediately prior to the date on which a contract  for  a
  loan  with  respect  to  an  existing  multiple dwelling is entered into
  pursuant to the provisions of this article, occupies any  dwelling  unit
  in such multiple dwelling and who continuously occupies such unit during
  and  after  completion  of  central  heating  or other rehabilitation or
  improvement performed pursuant to such contract provided, however,  that
  any  person  or  family  required  to remove from any such dwelling unit
  because of such installation, rehabilitation or improvement  shall,  for
  the  purpose  of  this  section, be deemed to have continuously occupied
  such unit  and  shall  have  preference  in  re-entering  such  multiple
  dwelling upon completion of the aforesaid work.
    4.  The  term  "occupancy  date"  shall  mean  the date defined in the
  contract for a loan pursuant to this article between  the  owner  of  an
  existing  multiple  dwelling  and  a municipality as the date upon which
  such multiple dwelling is to be deemed ready for occupancy, or  if  such
  term  is  not  defined  in  such  contract,  the date of issuance of the
  temporary certificate of occupancy.
    5. The term "rehabilitation", in addition to any other meaning,  shall
  include  conversion of a class B multiple dwelling or a class A multiple
  dwelling used in whole or in part for single room occupancy to a class A
  multiple dwelling  not  used  in  whole  or  in  part  for  single  room
  occupancy.  The  term "rehabilitation" shall also include the conversion
  of any existing building to a class A or class B multiple dwelling.
    6. The term "owner" shall mean a person having  record  or  beneficial
  title in fee simple to real property or the lessee thereof under a lease
  having an unexpired term of at least thirty years.




   §  402.  Loans  to  owners.   1. Notwithstanding the provisions of any
  general, special or local law, a municipality, by such officer or agency
  as determined by its local legislative body, is hereby authorized:
    (a) to make or contract to  make  loans  to  the  owners  of  existing
  multiple  dwellings  within  its  territorial  limits,  subject  to  the
  limitations in subdivision two of this section, in such amounts  as  may
  be  required  for  the  installation  of  proper heating facilities, the
  incorporation of climate  resiliency  improvements,  or  elimination  of
  conditions  dangerous  to human life or detrimental to health, including
  nuisances as defined in section  three  hundred  nine  of  the  multiple
  dwelling  law,  or  other rehabilitation, preservation or improvement of
  such multiple  dwellings,  and  if  such  owner  acquires  the  multiple
  dwelling  for  the  purposes  of  such  rehabilitation,  preservation or
  improvement or owns the multiple  dwelling  subject  to  an  outstanding
  indebtedness, such loans may be made exclusively for or may include such
  amounts  as  may be required for the cost of such acquisition or for the
  refinancing of such outstanding indebtedness,  and  may  make  temporary
  loans  or  advances  to  such  owners  in  anticipation of the permanent
  municipal loans for such purposes; and
    (b) to make or contract to make  grants  to  any  owner  described  in
  paragraph  (a) of this subdivision, on the same terms as permitted under
  such paragraph for a loan.
    1-a. As used in this article, the term "loan" shall include any  grant
  made by a municipality pursuant to this article, provided, however, that
  any  provision  of  this article concerning the repayment or forgiveness
  of, or security for, a loan shall not apply to any grant  made  pursuant
  to this article.
    2-a.  (a)  Each permanent loan shall be secured by a bond and mortgage
  or note and mortgage upon the multiple dwelling and the land upon  which
  it is situated, provided that where the multiple dwelling is held in the
  condominium  form of ownership, such loan shall be secured by a bond and
  mortgage or note and mortgage upon the condominium  units  rehabilitated
  or  improved with such loan; where the loan is made to an owner who is a
  lessee, such loan shall be secured  by  a  leasehold  interest  in  such
  property.
    (b)  Each  such bond and mortgage or note and mortgage shall be repaid
  over or within a period of forty years, provided that such period may be
  extended as the agency may determine necessary to ensure  the  continued
  affordability  or  economic  viability of the multiple dwelling, in such
  manner as may be provided in such bond and mortgage or note and mortgage
  and contract. Such bond and  mortgage  or  note  and  mortgage  and  the
  contract  in  connection  with  such  permanent  and temporary loans may
  contain such other  terms  and  provisions  not  inconsistent  with  the
  provisions  of  this article as the local legislative body or the agency
  may deem necessary or desirable to secure repayment  of  the  loan,  the
  interest  thereon and other charges in connection therewith and to carry
  out the purposes and provisions of  this  article,  including,  but  not
  limited to, providing that the lien created by such bond and mortgage or
  note and mortgage, and, if applicable, any regulatory agreement executed
  by  the  owner  and  the agency or restrictive covenant approved by such
  agency, may  be  recorded  in  an  equal  or  subordinate  position,  or
  subsequently  made  equal  or  subordinate,  to  a  lien recorded by any
  private lender against such multiple dwelling.
    2-b. If a loan pursuant to  this  article  is  made  to  a  non-profit
  company  or  a  housing development fund company which agrees to provide
  housing accommodations exclusively  for  persons  and  families  of  low
  income,  at  least  thirty  percent  of  whom  are referred to it by the
  municipality  and  have  prior  to  their  initial  occupancy  in   such


 accommodations resided in emergency shelter facilities operated by or on
  behalf  of  the  municipality,  the agency may provide that the note and
  mortgage shall automatically be reduced to zero  in  five  equal  annual
  decrements  commencing  on  the  tenth  year after the initial occupancy
  date, provided that such accommodations have been owned and operated  in
  a manner consistent with an agreement with the municipality contained in
  such note and mortgage to provide housing for such persons.
    3.  The bond or note issued by the owner of such multiple dwelling and
  the mortgage relating thereto may authorize such owner, with the consent
  of the agency, to prepay the principal of the loan subject to such terms
  and conditions as therein provided. Such bond or note and  mortgage  may
  contain such other clauses and provisions as the agency shall require.
    4.  The  agency may require the payment of charges by an owner of such
  multiple  dwelling  in  consideration  for  the  financing,  regulation,
  supervision  and  audit  of  such loan. Such fees shall be paid into the
  treasury of the municipality requiring the charges and shall be paid and
  deposited in the general fund of any such municipality.
    5. Whenever reference is made in this article to a municipal  loan,  a
  loan  by  a  municipality,  a loan from a municipality, a contract for a
  loan between a municipality and an owner,  or  any  similar  term,  with
  respect  to  the  territorial  limits of the city of New York such terms
  shall be construed to refer to a loan made or to be made either by  such
  municipality  or  by  the New York city housing development corporation,
  whichever is applicable.
    6. The bond and mortgage or note and mortgage issued by the  owner  of
  any such multiple dwelling may provide that the loan shall be reduced to
  zero  commencing  on  the fifteenth year after the execution of the bond
  and mortgage or note and mortgage, provided that, as of the date of  any
  such reduction, the multiple dwelling has been and continues to be owned
  and operated in a manner consistent with a regulatory agreement with the
  municipality.  Notwithstanding  such  provision as contained in the bond
  and mortgage or note and mortgage, the loan shall  be  reduced  to  zero
  only  if,  prior  to  or  simultaneously  with delivery of such bond and
  mortgage or note and mortgage, the agency made a  written  determination
  that   such  reduction  would  be  necessary  to  ensure  the  continued
  affordability or economic  viability  of  the  multiple  dwelling.  Such
  written  determination  shall document the basis upon which the loan was
  determined to be eligible for evaporation.




   §  403.  Occupancy.  1.  The  dwelling  units in any existing multiple
  dwelling aided by a loan pursuant to this  article  shall  be  available
  solely  for persons or families of low income during the period in which
  any part of such loan remains unpaid, any exemption and  abatement  from
  taxation  on  the property resulting from the installations, alterations
  or improvements made with such loan remains in effect or for a period of
  at least ten years from the occupancy date, whichever is the later.
    2. Any person or  family  in  occupancy  whose  income  precludes  the
  inclusion  of  such  person  or family within the definition provided in
  paragraph a of subdivision three of section four  hundred  one  of  this
  article  may  be required to pay a rental surcharge in accordance with a
  schedule of surcharges to be promulgated by the agency.  In  determining
  imposition of any such surcharge, the agency shall consider factors such
  as  the  net  operating  income  and  debt service coverage ratio of the
  property aided by a loan pursuant to  this  article.  Rental  surcharges
  collected  pursuant  to  this  section shall be paid by the owner to the
  municipality which has granted such owner tax exemption or tax abatement
  pursuant to any law authorizing the granting of same,  as  reimbursement
  to  such municipality therefor. In the event that such tax exemption and
  tax abatement have not been granted, or in the event that a sum equal to
  the total amount of tax exemption and tax abatement granted to the owner
  has been paid to the municipality, the excess,  if  any,  of  surcharges
  shall be paid to the municipality in reduction of the loan.




   §  404.  Conditions  precedent  to  making such loans. 1. No such loan
  shall be made by a municipality to an  owner  of  an  existing  multiple
  dwelling  unless  the  owner of such multiple dwelling shall covenant in
  writing that so long as any  part  of  such  loan  remains  unpaid,  any
  exemption and abatement from taxation on the property resulting from the
  installations,  alterations  or improvements made with such loan remains
  in effect or for a period of at least ten years from the occupancy date,
  whichever is the later:
    (a) Each dwelling unit in such multiple dwelling  shall  be  available
  solely for persons or families of low income;
    (b)  Preference shall be given to persons who shall have lived in such
  multiple dwelling at the time the contract for the loan was entered into
  and were required to move because of such  installation,  rehabilitation
  or improvement;
    (c)  No  charge  or rental for housing accommodations in such multiple
  dwelling shall be made or charged in excess of  the  rentals  prescribed
  pursuant to this article;
    (d)  The agency may order such repairs as will preserve the health and
  safety of the occupants of such multiple dwelling;
    (e) All persons operating or  managing  such  multiple  dwelling  will
  comply with the provisions of this article and the rules and regulations
  adopted  by  the agency pertaining to multiple dwellings aided hereunder
  and will refrain from doing any acts in violation thereof;
    (f) All  such  persons  will  permit  the  duly  authorized  officers,
  employees,  agents  or  inspectors of the agency to enter in or upon and
  inspect such multiple dwelling at all reasonable hours;
    (g) The agency shall have full power to investigate into and order the
  owner of said multiple dwelling to furnish such reports and  information
  as  the  agency  may require concerning the planning and construction of
  the installation, rehabilitation or improvement and the  management  and
  operation  of  said  multiple  dwelling. The agency shall also have full
  power to audit the books of such owner with respect to such matters;
    (h) The foregoing covenants shall run with the land.
    2. The local legislative body of the municipality or the agency  shall
  have power to impose additional terms and conditions precedent to making
  such loans.




   §  405. Rent control; tax exemption. 1. Notwithstanding the provisions
  of, or any regulations promulgated pursuant to,  the  emergency  housing
  rent  control law, the local emergency housing rent control act or local
  law enacted pursuant thereto: (1) housing accommodations in any multiple
  dwelling aided by a loan pursuant to this  article  shall  have  maximum
  rents  prescribed  in  accordance with and shall be fully subject to the
  provisions of said laws and regulations during the life of the  loan  or
  during  any period in which any exemption and abatement from taxation on
  the  property  resulting  from   the   installations,   alterations   or
  improvements  made with such loan remain in effect or for a period of at
  least ten years from the occupancy date, whichever is  later;  (2)  upon
  payment  of the loan or the expiration of the said tax exemption and tax
  abatement or of the said ten year period, whichever  is  later,  housing
  accommodations in any such multiple dwelling shall, upon application, be
  decontrolled, unless immediately prior to such payment or expiration the
  rents  of  such housing accommodations would have been controlled by the
  provisions of said laws and regulations, other  than  pursuant  to  this
  article,  in  which  event  such  housing  accommodations shall continue
  subject to the provisions of said  laws  and  regulations  to  the  same
  extent  and  in  the same manner as if this article had never applied to
  such  accommodations;  (3)  should  the  provisions  of  said  laws  and
  regulations  expire while any loan made pursuant to this article remains
  unpaid or before the expiration  of  the  said  tax  exemption  and  tax
  abatement  or  of  the  said  ten  year period, whichever is later, then
  housing accommodations in multiple dwellings aided by such  loans  shall
  be  subject  to control by the agency to the same extent and in the same
  manner as they were subject to control by the  temporary  state  housing
  rent  commission  or by the city housing rent agency created pursuant to
  the local emergency housing rent control act. However, the maximum  rent
  for  any  such housing accommodations shall be the rent last established
  by the said rent commission or by the  said  city  housing  rent  agency
  subject  to  adjustment by the agency pursuant to the provisions of this
  article and regulations of the agency promulgated pursuant  thereto  and
  (4) should the provisions of said laws and regulations not be applicable
  in  a  municipality  prior  to  the  making  of  a loan pursuant to this
  article, then rents in  housing  accommodations  in  multiple  dwellings
  aided  by  such  loans shall be subject to regulation by the agency in a
  manner calculated to assure compliance with the policy and  purposes  of
  this article.
    1-a.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  subdivision  one  of  this
  section, and subject to the provisions of subdivision twenty of  section
  six hundred fifty-four of this chapter, where the housing accommodations
  in  any  multiple  dwelling are aided pursuant to this article by a loan
  made by the New York city housing development corporation, maximum rents
  during the life of such loan shall be prescribed by the agency  and  the
  rental  rate  may  be  varied  by  the  agency  from  time  to time upon
  application by the owner or by the New  York  city  housing  development
  corporation  so  as  to secure, together with all other income from such
  property, sufficient  income  to  meet  within  reasonable  limits,  all
  necessary  payments  to  be  made by the owner of all expenses including
  fixed charges, sinking funds, reserves and dividends.
    * 1-b. Notwithstanding the  provisions  of  subdivision  one  of  this
  section,  where  the housing accommodations in any multiple dwelling are
  aided by a loan pursuant to this article made by the municipality on  or
  after  September  first, nineteen hundred eighty-four, and provided that
  such housing accommodations were vacant at the time of the making of the
  loan, maximum rents during the life of such loan shall be prescribed  by
  the  agency and the rental rate may be varied by the agency from time to


 time upon application by the owner or by the agency  so  as  to  secure,
  together  with all other income from such property, sufficient income to
  meet within reasonable limits, all necessary payments to be made by  the
  owner  of all expenses, including fixed charges, sinking funds, reserves
  and dividends.
    * NB Effective until July 1, 2024
    * 1-b. Notwithstanding the  provisions  of  subdivision  one  of  this
  section,  where  the housing accommodations in any multiple dwelling are
  aided by a loan pursuant to this article made by the municipality on  or
  after  September  first, nineteen hundred eighty-four, and provided that
  such housing accommodations were vacant at the time of the making of the
  loan, maximum rents during the life of such loan shall be prescribed  by
  the  agency and the rental rate may be varied by the agency from time to
  time upon application by the owner or by the agency  so  as  to  secure,
  together  with all other income from such property, sufficient income to
  meet within reasonable limits, all necessary payments to be made by  the
  owner  of all expenses, including fixed charges, sinking funds, reserves
  and dividends.
    * NB Effective July 1, 2024
    * 1-c. Except with  respect  to  dwelling  accommodations  subject  to
  subdivision   one-a  or  one-b  of  this  section,  notwithstanding  the
  provisions  of  subdivision  one  of  this  section  or  any  regulation
  promulgated  pursuant  to  the  emergency  housing rent control law, the
  local  emergency  housing  rent  control  act,  the   emergency   tenant
  protection  act  of  nineteen  seventy-four,  or  any  local law enacted
  pursuant thereto, upon completion of the rehabilitation  of  a  multiple
  dwelling  which  is aided by a loan pursuant to this article made by the
  municipality on or after September first, nineteen  hundred  eighty-six,
  the  agency  shall  establish  the initial rent for each rental dwelling
  unit within  the  multiple  dwelling.  All  dwelling  units  within  the
  multiple  dwelling  subsequent  to establishment of initial rents by the
  agency shall be subject  to  the  rent  stabilization  law  of  nineteen
  hundred  sixty-nine.  The occupant in possession of such a dwelling unit
  when it is made subject  to  the  rent  stabilization  law  of  nineteen
  hundred  sixty-nine shall be offered a choice of a one or two year lease
  at the initial rents  established  by  the  agency  notwithstanding  any
  contrary  provisions  of,  or  regulations adopted pursuant to, the rent
  stabilization law of  nineteen  hundred  sixty-nine  and  the  emergency
  tenant  protection  act of nineteen seventy-four. The agency shall cause
  all  tenants  in  occupancy  of  each  dwelling  unit  affected  by  the
  provisions  of this section to be notified of and have an opportunity to
  comment on the  contemplated  rehabilitation.  Such  notification  shall
  advise  such  tenants  of the approximate expected rent increase and the
  subsequent availability of a one or two year  lease.  Such  notification
  and  opportunity  to comment shall be provided before the rehabilitation
  and  again  after  the  construction  is  completed   and   before   the
  establishment of the initial rents.
    * NB Expires July 1, 2024
    2.  The  municipality  may,  by  local law, provide for exemption from
  taxation of any increase in valuation resulting from  the  installation,
  alterations  or improvements performed with the aid of such loans or for
  abatement of taxation on such property, including the land, or for  both
  such  exemption  and abatement, to the same extent, for the same period,
  and under the same terms and conditions as such exemption or  abatement,
  or  both,  may  be  provided by local law enacted under the terms of any
  currently effective statute authorizing the granting of tax exemption or
  tax abatement, or both, in aid  of  the  rehabilitation,  alteration  or
  improvement  of  multiple dwellings or the elimination of unhealthful or


 dangerous conditions therein. Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of
  any general, special or local law, a property aided by a  loan  pursuant
  to  this  article  shall  not  be  ineligible  for  tax exemption or tax
  abatement or both, as provided by local law enacted pursuant to statute,
  solely  because  such  property is not subject to control of rents under
  the emergency housing rent control law or local law enacted pursuant  to
  the local emergency housing rent control act, but such tax exemption and
  tax  abatement  shall  terminate if and when such property is subject to
  control of rents neither under the emergency housing rent  control  law,
  local  law  enacted pursuant to the local emergency housing rent control
  act or this article.




   §  406.  Rules and regulations. An agency may promulgate supplementary
  rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this  article,  not
  inconsistent with the provisions of this article.




   §  407.  Participation by certain corporations and individuals. 1. One
  or more banking  institutions,  foundations,  labor  unions,  employers'
  associations,  veterans'  organizations,  insurance companies, trustees,
  fiduciaries or any combination of the foregoing, shall have the power to
  participate and invest, singly or jointly, with a  municipality  or  the
  New  York  city  housing  development  corporation in a bond or note and
  single participating  mortgage,  or  in  separate  bonds  or  notes  and
  mortgages  pursuant  to  and  in  accordance with the provisions of this
  article. As used in this section, the terms "trustees" and "fiduciaries"
  shall include any fiduciary or fiduciaries holding funds for investment.
    2. Banking institutions and  insurance  companies  may  exercise  such
  power  on  such  conditions  as  may  be prescribed or authorized by the
  superintendent of financial services.
    3. Where one or more banking institutions, foundations, labor  unions,
  employers'  associations,  veterans' organizations, insurance companies,
  trustees or fiduciaries participates and invests with a municipality  or
  the  New  York  city  housing  development  corporation  as  provided in
  subdivision one, the interest of each need not be equal as  to  priority
  of lien, interest rate, time or rate of amortization or otherwise.
    4.   Where   a  municipality  joins  with  one  or  more  corporations
  organizations or individuals of the kind hereinabove mentioned in making
  a loan secured  by  a  single  participating  mortgage  or  by  separate
  mortgages,  the  municipality may make provision, either in the mortgage
  or mortgages or by separate  agreement,  for  the  performance  of  such
  services  as  are  generally  performed  by  a  banking  institution  or
  insurance company which itself owns and holds a mortgage or by a trustee
  under a trust mortgage. The  agency  is  hereby  authorized  to  act  as
  trustee or to consent to the appointment of a banking institution to act
  in such capacity.




   * §  408.  Minimization of displacement. The agency shall use its best
  efforts to ensure that activities carried out pursuant to  this  article
  are  structured  so  as  to  minimize  the likelihood of any involuntary
  physical or economic displacement of  tenants  who  reside  in  multiple
  dwellings   which  are  the  subject  of  such  activities,  other  than
  temporarily,  as  a  direct  result  of  rehabilitation  work  which  is
  performed  in  such  multiple  dwelling in which case suitable temporary
  relocation arrangements shall be provided.
    * NB Expires July 1, 2024




   §  450.  Policy  and  purposes  of article. It is hereby declared that
  there exists in municipalities in  this  state  a  seriously  inadequate
  supply  of safe and sanitary dwelling accommodations; that such shortage
  constitutes an emergency and a  grave  menace  to  the  health,  safety,
  morals,  welfare  and  comfort  of citizens of this state; that existing
  conditions of deterioration of housing marked by noncompliance with  the
  multiple dwelling law or local housing codes threaten a further decrease
  in  such  supply;  that  rehabilitation  and improvement of dwellings to
  prolong the useful life of such dwellings may  be  necessary  to  arrest
  such   conditions   of  deterioration;  that  the  elimination  of  such
  conditions by rehabilitation or  other  improvement  cannot  readily  be
  provided by the ordinary unaided operation of private enterprise without
  public aid in the form of low interest loans or grants to owners of such
  multiple  dwellings;  that  such  rehabilitation or other improvement of
  such dwellings to bring them into conformance with the multiple dwelling
  law and local housing codes is a public use, a public purpose and a city
  purpose  for  which  public  money  may  be  loaned  or  granted  by   a
  municipality   and  for  which  indebtedness  may  be  contracted  by  a
  municipality; that such conditions require  the  provisions  hereinafter
  enacted,  and  the  necessity  in the public interest for the provisions
  hereinafter enacted is  hereby  declared  as  a  matter  of  legislative
  determination.




   §  451. Definitions. As used in this article the following terms shall
  mean:
    1. "Existing multiple dwelling." Any dwelling classified as a multiple
  dwelling pursuant to the multiple dwelling law and in existence  on  the
  date  upon  which  an application for a loan pursuant to this article is
  received by the municipality. For purposes of this article  an  existing
  multiple  dwelling shall be deemed to include any garden-type maisonette
  dwelling project consisting of a series of dwelling units which together
  and in their aggregate were arranged or designed  to  provide  three  or
  more  apartments  and  are  provided  as  a  group collectively with all
  essential services such as, but not  limited  to,  water  supply,  house
  sewers and heat, and which are in existence and operated as a unit under
  single  ownership  on  the  date  upon  which  an application for a loan
  pursuant  to   this   article   is   received   by   the   municipality,
  notwithstanding  that certificates of occupancy were issued for portions
  thereof as private dwellings.
    2. "Occupancy by persons of low income." Occupancy by "persons of  low
  income"  or  "families  of  low  income,"  as  such terms are defined in
  section two of this chapter.
    3. "Owner." An individual, partnership, corporation or  other  entity,
  including   a  non-profit  company,  a  mutual  company,  or  a  housing
  development fund company, which holds record or beneficial title in  fee
  simple  to  the multiple dwelling and the real property upon which it is
  situate or the lessee thereof under a lease the unexpired term of  which
  shall  be  not  less  than  the  term  of the loan to be made under this
  article.
    4. "Federal grant funds." Any grants received from the  United  States
  of   America   for   community   development   activities   or  for  the
  rehabilitation or conservation of multiple dwellings.




   §  452.  Loans  to  owners.   1. Notwithstanding the provisions of any
  general, special or local law, a municipality is hereby authorized:
    (a) to make or contract to  make  loans  to  the  owners  of  existing
  multiple  dwellings  within  its  territorial  limits,  subject  to  the
  limitations in subdivision two of this section, for the  elimination  of
  any  substandard  or  insanitary condition or conditions in violation of
  the multiple dwelling law or local housing code, for  the  incorporation
  of   climate   resiliency  improvements  or  for  such  replacement  and
  rehabilitation of the heating, plumbing, electrical and related  systems
  or  other  improvements  as shall be reasonably necessary to prolong the
  useful life of such dwellings, and may  make  temporary  loans  to  such
  owners  in  anticipation  of  the  permanent  municipal  loans  for such
  purposes; and
    (b) to make or contract to make  grants  to  any  owner  described  in
  paragraph  (a) of this subdivision, on the same terms as permitted under
  such paragraph for a loan.
    1-a. As used in this article, the term "loan" shall include any  grant
  made by a municipality pursuant to this article, provided, however, that
  provisions  of  this article concerning the repayment or forgiveness of,
  or security for, a loan shall not apply to any grant  made  pursuant  to
  this article.
    2. Each loan shall be evidenced by a note executed by the owner of the
  existing multiple dwelling. The supervising agency in its discretion may
  require  one or more of the shareholders of a corporate owner to co-sign
  such note or to otherwise guarantee or pledge security for the repayment
  of the loan. Each such note shall be repaid within  a  period  of  forty
  years,  provided  that  such  period  may be extended as the supervising
  agency may determine necessary to ensure the continued affordability  or
  economic  viability  of  the  existing  multiple dwelling. The repayment
  shall be made in such manner  as  may  be  provided  in  such  note  and
  contract,  if  any,  in connection with such loan and may authorize such
  owner, with the  consent  of  the  supervising  agency,  to  prepay  the
  principal  of  the  loan subject to such terms and conditions as therein
  provided. Such note and  contract  may  contain  such  other  terms  and
  provisions  not  inconsistent with the provisions of this article as the
  local legislative body or  supervising  agency  may  deem  necessary  or
  desirable  to  secure  repayment  of  the loan, the interest thereon and
  other charges in connection therewith and to carry out the purposes  and
  provisions  of  this  article,  including  but not limited to provisions
  ensuring  availability  of  rents  for  such  repayment  and  provisions
  permitting  the  lien  created  by  such  note  and  mortgage,  and,  if
  applicable,  a  regulatory  agreement  executed  by   such   owner   and
  supervising agency, be recorded in an equal and subordinate position, or
  subsequently  made  equal  or  subordinate,  to  a  lien recorded by any
  private lender against such multiple dwelling.
    3. The supervising agency in its discretion may require that the owner
  execute a financing statement for real property  improvement  to  be  in
  such  form  as  the  agency  shall  specify and to contain the following
  information: the name and mailing address of the owner, the  address  of
  the  real  property,  a  statement  that  a  loan  has  been made by the
  municipality under this article, the amount and duration thereof and the
  applicable interest  rate.  Said  financing  statement  shall  be  filed
  without  charge  in  the office for recording mortgages of real property
  and from the date of such filing the  municipality  shall  have  a  lien
  against said real property for the amount advanced or so much thereof as
  remains  unpaid  and interest thereon. If a financing statement is filed
  as herein provided, the rights and remedies of the municipality and  the
  priority  of  its  lien shall be the same as those of a holder of a lien


 for the materials furnished or labor performed  in  the  improvement  of
  real property pursuant to articles two and three of the lien law, except
  that the lien shall be valid for one year after the maturity date of the
  final  installment payable under said note and thereafter as provided in
  section seventeen of the lien law. Upon payment of all sums advanced  by
  the municipality and interest thereon and upon demand of the then record
  owner  of  the  real property, the agency shall deliver to him a copy of
  the financing statement with an endorsement thereon  that  the  lien  is
  satisfied;  upon  filing  of such copy in the office where the financing
  statement was filed and upon payment of the  proper  fee  therefor,  the
  lien of such financing statement shall be discharged.
    4.  The supervising agency may require the owner to execute a mortgage
  as security for a loan in lieu of a financing statement as  provided  in
  the  foregoing  subsection three. Such mortgage shall contain such terms
  and provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this  article  as
  the  supervising  agency  shall  deem  necessary  or desirable to secure
  repayment of the loan under this article.
    5. The supervising agency may require the payment of  charges  by  the
  owner  of  such  existing  multiple  dwelling  in  consideration for the
  financing, regulation, supervision and audit of such loan. Such  charges
  shall  be  paid  into  the  treasury  of  the municipality requiring the
  charges and shall be paid and deposited in the general fund of any  such
  municipality.
    6.  In  the  case  of  a  loan  made  pursuant  to  this  article, the
  supervising agency may pay any liens and charges the priority  of  which
  is  superior  to  its mortgage and may pay such other expenses as may be
  appropriate to protect its loan or to protect the lien of  the  mortgage
  relating  thereto,  provided that such expenditures shall not exceed the
  total amount of such loan.
    * 7. Notwithstanding the provisions of, or any regulation  promulgated
  pursuant to, the emergency housing rent control law, the local emergency
  housing  rent  control  act,  the  emergency  tenant  protection  act of
  nineteen seventy-four, or any local law enacted pursuant  thereto,  upon
  completion  of  the rehabilitation of a multiple dwelling which is aided
  by a loan made pursuant to this article, the supervising agency, may  as
  an  alternative  to  permissible  rental adjustments under such laws and
  regulations, adjust the rent for each rental dwelling  unit  within  the
  multiple  dwelling.  The  initial  rental  adjustment,  if  set  by  the
  supervising agency, shall  be  established  based  solely  on  the  debt
  service  attributable to the loan, provided, that the supervising agency
  may establish rental adjustments less than such debt  service,  provided
  further  that  the  supervising  agency  may  establish  greater  rental
  adjustments for vacant dwelling units than for occupied dwelling  units.
  The  supervising  agency  shall  cause  all tenants in occupancy of each
  dwelling unit affected by the  provisions  of  this  subdivision  to  be
  notified   of  and  have  an  opportunity  to  comment  on  contemplated
  rehabilitation. Such notification  shall  advise  such  tenants  of  the
  approximate expected rent increase. Such notification and opportunity to
  comment  shall be provided before the rehabilitation and again after the
  construction is completed and before the  establishment  of  the  rental
  adjustment.
    * NB Expires July 1, 2024
    * 8.  Notwithstanding the provisions of, or any regulation promulgated
  pursuant to, the emergency housing rent control law, the local emergency
  housing rent  control  act,  the  emergency  tenant  protection  act  of
  nineteen  seventy-four,  or any local law enacted pursuant thereto, upon
  completion of the rehabilitation of a class B multiple dwelling, class A
  multiple dwelling used for single room occupancy purposes, lodging house


 or  a  substantially  vacant  building  intended  to   be   used   after
  rehabilitation  for single room occupancy purposes and which is aided by
  a loan pursuant to this article made by the  municipality  on  or  after
  September   first,   nineteen  hundred  eighty-five,  the  agency  shall
  establish the initial rent for each  rental  dwelling  unit  within  the
  multiple  dwelling.  All  dwelling  units  within  the multiple dwelling
  subsequent to establishment of initial rents  by  the  agency  shall  be
  subject  to  the  rent stabilization law of nineteen hundred sixty-nine.
  The occupant in possession of such a  dwelling  unit  when  it  is  made
  subject  to  the  rent  stabilization law of nineteen hundred sixty-nine
  shall be offered a choice of a one or two  year  lease  at  the  initial
  rents  established by the agency notwithstanding any contrary provisions
  of, or regulations adopted pursuant to, the rent  stabilization  law  of
  nineteen  hundred  sixty-nine and the emergency tenant protection act of
  nineteen seventy-four. The agency shall cause all tenants  in  occupancy
  of  each dwelling unit affected by the provisions of this subdivision to
  be notified of and have an opportunity to comment  on  the  contemplated
  rehabilitation.  Such  notification  shall  advise  such  tenants of the
  approximate expected rent increase and the subsequent availability of  a
  one  or  two  year  lease.  Such notification and opportunity to comment
  shall  be  provided  before  the  rehabilitation  and  again  after  the
  construction  is  completed  and before the establishment of the initial
  rents.
    * NB Expires July 1, 2024
    9. The note or note and contract issued  by  the  owner  of  any  such
  multiple dwelling to secure such loan may provide that the loan shall be
  reduced  to zero commencing on the fifteenth year after the execution of
  the note or note and contract, provided that, as of  the  date  of  such
  reduction,  the multiple dwelling has been and continues to be owned and
  operated in a manner consistent with a  regulatory  agreement  with  the
  municipality. Notwithstanding such provision as contained in the note or
  note  and  contract, the loan shall be reduced to zero only if, prior to
  or simultaneously with delivery of such note or note and  contract,  the
  agency  made  a  written  determination  that  such  reduction  would be
  necessary to ensure the continued affordability or economic viability of
  the multiple dwelling. Such written  determination  shall  document  the
  basis upon which the loan was determined to be eligible for evaporation.




   §  453.  Conditions precedent to making such loans. No such loan shall
  be made by a municipality to an owner of an existing  multiple  dwelling
  unless  the  owner  of  such multiple dwelling shall covenant in writing
  that so long as any part of such loan  shall  remain  unpaid  or  for  a
  period  of  at  least  ten years from the date of the loan, whichever is
  later:
    1. Each dwelling unit in such multiple  dwelling  shall  be  available
  solely for occupancy by persons of low income;
    2.  No person who lives in such multiple dwelling at the time the loan
  is made shall be required to  move  because  of  the  rehabilitation  or
  improvement  financed thereby, except that a temporary relocation may be
  required in connection with such rehabilitation or improvement;
    3. All persons operating  or  managing  such  multiple  dwelling  will
  permit  the duly authorized officers, employees, agents or inspectors of
  the municipality to enter in or upon and inspect such multiple  dwelling
  at all reasonable hours;
    4.  The  municipality  by  such  duly  authorized  representatives  as
  aforesaid shall have full power to investigate into and order the  owner
  of  such multiple dwelling to furnish such reports and information as it
  may require concerning such rehabilitation or improvement and shall have
  full power to audit the  books  of  said  owner  with  respect  to  such
  matters; and
    5.  The  owner  will  submit  to  the  supervising  agency  annually a
  statement of the income and expenses of such multiple dwelling, in  such
  form as shall be approved by such agency.




   §  454.  Servicing  of  municipal  loans  by banking institutions. The
  municipality is  authorized  to  make  provision,  either  in  the  loan
  agreement  or  by separate agreement, for the performance by one or more
  banking institutions of such services as are generally performed by  any
  such  bank  itself owning and holding such a loan and as may be approved
  by the superintendent of financial services, for which services  a  bank
  may  make  and  collect such service charges as the superintendent shall
  prescribe or approve.




   §  455.  Rules and regulations.  The supervising agency may promulgate
  supplementary rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of  this
  article, not inconsistent with the provisions of this article.




   * §  456.  Minimization  of displacement. The supervising agency shall
  use its best efforts to ensure that activities carried out  pursuant  to
  subdivisions  seven  and eight of section four hundred fifty-two of this
  article  are  structured  so  as  to  minimize  the  likelihood  of  any
  involuntary  economic  displacement  of  tenants  who reside in multiple
  dwellings  which  are  the  subject  of  such  activities.  However,  if
  temporary  physical  displacement  is  required  as  a  direct result of
  rehabilitation  work  which  is  performed  in  such  multiple  dwelling
  receiving  a loan pursuant to this article suitable temporary relocation
  arrangements shall be provided.
    * NB Expires July 1, 2024




   * §  457.  Records. The supervising agency shall take reasonable steps
  to determine and maintain a record of tenants economically displaced  by
  virtue  of the exercise of powers granted pursuant to subdivisions seven
  and eight of section four hundred fifty-two of this article.
    * NB Expires July 1, 2024




   § 470. Policy and purposes of article. It is hereby declared and found
  that  there  exists  in  municipalities within the state substandard and
  unsanitary areas and neighborhoods containing deteriorated one  to  four
  unit  private  and  multiple  dwellings,  and that the rehabilitation or
  preservation of such dwellings is necessary  in  order  to  aid  in  the
  prevention  and  elimination  of  slums  and  blight  in  such areas and
  neighborhoods.
    It further is  found  that  there  exists  in  such  municipalities  a
  seriously  inadequate  supply  of  safe  and  sanitary  one to four unit
  private and multiple dwellings, particularly  for  persons  of  low  and
  moderate  income,  that existing non-compliance with local housing codes
  and with the multiple  dwelling  law  and  the  multiple  residence  law
  threatens   to  decrease  such  supply,  and  that  the  rehabilitation,
  preservation and improvement of such dwellings is  necessary  to  arrest
  such conditions of deterioration.
    It  further  is  found  that  the  elimination  of  such conditions by
  rehabilitation or other improvements in one to  four  unit  private  and
  multiple  dwellings cannot be readily provided without public aid in the
  form of low interest loans or grants to owners of such one to four  unit
  dwellings.
    The  rehabilitation, preservation or other improvement of such private
  and multiple dwellings  is  hereby  declared  a  public  purpose  and  a
  municipal purpose for which public monies may be loaned or granted.
    In  order,  further, to promote the preservation and rehabilitation of
  such dwellings, it is hereby declared that additional provisions  should
  be  made  to  provide public monies for interest reduction subsidies for
  private loans made by private investors for such rehabilitation.
    The necessity in the  public  interest  for  the  provisions  of  this
  article is hereby declared as a matter of legislative determination.




   §   471.   Definitions.   1.   "Agency"   shall  mean  any  agency  or
  instrumentality of a municipality that is  created  by  legislation  and
  designated  by  the chief executive to act on behalf of the municipality
  with regard to the provisions of this article.
    2. "Banking organization" shall mean any corporation,  association  or
  organization  organized  under the banking laws of New York state or the
  United States which is authorized to transact business in this state.
    3. "Existing multiple dwelling" shall mean any dwelling classified  as
  a  multiple  dwelling  pursuant  to  the  multiple  dwelling  law or the
  multiple residence law and in  existence  on  the  date  upon  which  an
  application  for  a  loan  pursuant  to  this article is received by the
  agency.
    4. "Existing private dwelling" shall mean any dwelling classified as a
  private dwelling pursuant to the multiple dwelling law or  the  multiple
  residence law and in existence on the date upon which an application for
  a loan pursuant to this article is received by the agency.
    5.  "Federal  grant  funds"  shall  mean  any grants received from the
  federal government for  community  development  activities  or  for  the
  rehabilitation or conservation of private or multiple dwellings.
    6.  "Low  and moderate income persons" shall mean persons and families
  who cannot afford to improve their homes by relying  upon  the  ordinary
  unaided operation of private enterprise.
    7. "Municipality" shall mean any city, town or village.
    8.  "Owner"  shall mean an individual or individuals, a partnership, a
  corporation or other entity, including but not limited to,  a  trust,  a
  joint  tenancy,  tenancy  in  common  or tenancy by the entirety holding
  record or beneficial title in fee  simple  to  an  existing  private  or
  multiple  dwelling  and  the real property upon which it is situated, or
  the lessee thereof under a lease having an unexpired term  of  at  least
  thirty  years.  "Owner"  shall  be  deemed to also include a cooperative
  corporation or a condominium association.
    9. Reserved.
    10. "Private investor" shall mean one or more  banking  organizations,
  foundations,  public  benefit corporations, labor unions, credit unions,
  employers'    associations,    veterans'    organizations,     colleges,
  universities,   educational   institutions,   child  care  institutions,
  hospitals, medical research institutes, insurance companies, trustees or
  fiduciaries, trustees of  pension  and  retirement  funds  and  systems,
  corporations,   partnerships,  individuals  or  other  entities  or  any
  combination of the foregoing, and shall include  the  United  States  of
  America and any of its agencies and departments.
    11.  "Rehabilitation"  shall  mean  the  installation, replacement, or
  repair of heating, plumbing,  electrical  and  related  systems  or  the
  elimination  of  conditions  dangerous  to  human life or detrimental to
  health, including nuisances as defined in local housing or health  codes
  or  as  defined  in  section three hundred nine of the multiple dwelling
  law, or in section three hundred five of the multiple residence law,  or
  other   rehabilitation  or  general  property  and  energy  conservation
  improvements.
    12. "State grant funds" shall mean any grants received from the  state
  or  any  public benefit corporation for community development activities
  or for  the  rehabilitation  or  conservation  of  private  or  multiple
  dwellings.




   §  472.  Loans  to  owners.  1.  Notwithstanding the provisions of any
  general, special or local law, a municipality, acting through an agency,
  is authorized:
    (a) to make, or contract to make, loans to owners of one to four  unit
  existing  private  or  multiple dwellings within its territorial limits,
  subject to the limitation of subdivisions  two  through  seven  of  this
  section,  in  such  amounts as shall be required for the rehabilitation,
  improvement or acquisition of such dwellings  provided,  that  any  such
  rehabilitation   or   improvement   may   include   climate   resiliency
  improvements. Such loans may also be made exclusively for or include the
  refinancing of the outstanding indebtedness of such dwellings,  and  the
  municipality  may  make  temporary  loans  or advances to such owners in
  anticipation of permanent loans for such purposes; and
    (b) to make or contract to make  grants  to  any  owner  described  in
  paragraph  (a) of this subdivision, on the same terms as permitted under
  such paragraph for a loan.
    1-a. As used in this article, the term "loan" shall include any  grant
  made by a municipality pursuant to this article, provided, however, that
  provisions  of  this article concerning the repayment or forgiveness of,
  or security for, a loan shall not apply to any grant  made  pursuant  to
  this article.
    2. Each loan shall be evidenced by a note executed by the owner of the
  existing  dwelling. Repayment of each such note shall be within a period
  of forty years, provided that such period may be extended as the  agency
  may  determine  necessary  to  ensure  the  continued  affordability  or
  economic viability of the existing dwelling. The repayment shall be made
  in such manner as may be provided in such note and contract, if any,  in
  connection  with  such  loan,  and  may  authorize  such owner, with the
  consent of the agency, to prepay the principal of the  loan  subject  to
  such terms and conditions as therein provided. In order to make any such
  loan  affordable  to  the owner, the agency may provide in such note and
  contract that all of the outstanding  principal  of  said  loan  may  be
  self-liquidated  over  a  period  of  not  less  than  fifteen  years of
  continuous compliance by the owner with a regulatory agreement or  other
  restrictive  covenant  with  or  approved  by  the  agency  and upon the
  satisfaction of any additional conditions specified therein.  Such  note
  and   contract   may   contain  such  other  terms  and  provisions  not
  inconsistent with the provisions of this article as the agency may  deem
  necessary  or  desirable  to  secure repayment of the loan, the interest
  thereon, if any, and other charges in connection therewith, and to carry
  out the purposes and provisions of  this  article,  including,  but  not
  limited  to,  providing  that the lien created by the note and mortgage,
  and, if applicable, any regulatory agreement executed by such owner  and
  agency, or restrictive covenant approved by such agency, may be recorded
  in  an  equal  or  subordinate  position,  or subsequently made equal or
  subordinate, to a lien recorded  by  any  private  lender  against  such
  existing dwelling.
    3.  The  agency  in its discretion may require that the owner execute,
  acknowledge and deliver a uniform commercial  code  financing  statement
  for the real property improvement to be in such form as the agency shall
  specify and in accordance with the requirements of section 9--502 of the
  uniform  commercial  code  of  the  state  of  New  York. Said financing
  statement shall be filed or recorded without charge in  accordance  with
  the  provisions  of paragraph one of subsection (a) of section 9--501 of
  the uniform commercial code, and  from  the  date  of  such  filing  the
  municipality  shall  have  a lien against said real property improvement
  for the amount advanced or so much thereof as  remains  unpaid  together
  with  the  interest  thereon.  Upon  payment of all sums advanced by the


 municipality and interest thereon, and upon demand of  the  then  record
  owner  of  the  real  property,  the  agency shall deliver a copy of the
  financing statement  with  an  endorsement  thereon  that  the  lien  is
  satisfied.  Upon  filing  of such copy in the office where the financing
  statement was filed and upon payment of the  proper  fee  therefor,  the
  lien of such financing statement shall be discharged.
    4.  The agency may require the owner to execute a mortgage as security
  for a loan in lieu of  or  in  addition  to  a  financing  statement  as
  provided  in  subdivision  three  of  this  section. Such mortgage shall
  contain such terms and provisions not inconsistent with  the  provisions
  of  this  article  as  the  agency  shall deem necessary or desirable to
  secure repayment of the loan.
    5. Loans may be made with respect to a one to  four  unit  private  or
  multiple  dwelling  encumbered  by mortgages, provided no mortgage is in
  default, except if such  default  shall  be  remedied  by  the  proposed
  rehabilitation or improvement.
    6.  The agency may require the payment of charges by the owner of such
  existing  private  or  multiple  dwelling  in  consideration   for   the
  financing,  regulation, supervision and audit of such loan. Such charges
  shall be paid into  the  treasury  of  the  municipality  requiring  the
  charges  and shall be paid and deposited in the general fund of any such
  municipality.
    7. In making a loan under this article, an agency shall have the power
  to participate in a loan made by any private  investor  The  agency  may
  enter  into  an  agreement with a private investor to deposit funds with
  such private investor to cover the agency's participation  in  loans  to
  owners  of one to four unit existing private and multiple dwellings with
  such funds advanced by such  private  investor  to  owners  of  existing
  dwellings.  The portion of the loan funded by the agency may be equal to
  or subordinate in lien to the portion of the loan funded by the  private
  investor  and  the note and contract may contain such terms with respect
  to interest rate, if any, and time of payment of principal and  interest
  as  determined  by  the agency. The agency may make provision, either in
  the mortgage or mortgages or by separate agreement, for the  performance
  by the private investor of such services as are generally performed by a
  banking  institution  which  itself holds a mortgage, including, without
  limitation,  construction  loan  advances,   construction   supervision,
  initiation of foreclosure proceedings, procurement of insurance, and all
  other  matters in connection with the financing, supervision, regulation
  and audit of any such loan. In order to make the loan affordable to  the
  owner,  the agency may provide an interest reduction subsidy pursuant to
  section four hundred seventy-five of this article, or may  provide  that
  all  or part of the agency's portion of the outstanding principal of any
  such participation loan may be self-liquidated over a period of not less
  than fifteen  years  of  continuous  compliance  by  the  owner  with  a
  regulatory  agreement  or other restrictive covenant with or approved by
  the agency and  upon  the  satisfaction  of  any  additional  conditions
  specified therein.




   §  473.  Conditions  precedent  to  making such loans. 1. No such loan
  shall be made to an owner of an existing private  or  multiple  dwelling
  unless  the owner of such private or multiple dwelling shall covenant in
  writing that so long as any part of such loan shall remain unpaid or any
  requirement imposed as a condition for making such  loan  that  survives
  the  repayment  of  such  loan,  including,  but  not  limited  to, in a
  regulatory agreement  executed  by  such  owner  and  the  agency  or  a
  restrictive covenant approved by such agency, remains in effect: (i) the
  owner  or  managing  agent or operator of such dwelling shall permit the
  duly authorized officers, employees, agents or inspectors of the  agency
  to enter in or upon and inspect such private or multiple dwelling at all
  reasonable   hours;   (ii)   the   agency   by   such   duly  authorized
  representatives as aforesaid shall have full power to  investigate  into
  and  order  the  owner  of  such  dwelling  to  furnish such reports and
  information  as  it  may  require  concerning  such  rehabilitation   or
  improvement  and  shall have full power to audit the books of said owner
  with  respect  to  such  matters;  and  (iii)  if  the  property  to  be
  rehabilitated  is  a  multiple  dwelling,  the  owner will submit to the
  agency annually a statement of income and expenses of such dwelling,  in
  such form as shall be approved by the agency.
    2.  A  municipality shall neither make nor participate in a loan to an
  owner of an existing private  or  multiple  dwelling  pursuant  to  this
  article unless the agency finds that (i) the area in which such dwelling
  is  situated  is a blighted, deteriorated or deteriorating area or has a
  blighting influence on the surrounding area, or is in danger of becoming
  a slum or a blighted area  because  of  the  existence  of  substandard,
  unsanitary,  deteriorating  or  deteriorated conditions, an aged housing
  stock, or other factors indicating an inability of the private sector to
  cause such rehabilitation to be made; or (ii) the owner of such  private
  or multiple dwelling is a person or family of low income.
    3.  The  agency  shall  have  the power to impose additional terms and
  conditions precedent to make such loans.




   §  474.  Servicing of loans by banking institutions and loan servicing
  companies. 1. The agency is authorized to make provision in the note and
  loan agreement or by separate agreement for the performance  by  one  or
  more banking institutions of such services as are generally performed by
  any  such  bank  itself  owning  and  holding  such a loan and as may be
  approved by the superintendent of financial services for which  services
  a  bank  may make and collect such service charges as the superintendent
  shall prescribe or approve.
    2. The agency is authorized to make provision in  the  note  and  loan
  agreement  or by separate agreement for the servicing of such loans by a
  loan servicing company or other qualified entity, as determined  by  the
  agency,  and  such  services  may  include,  but  not be limited to, the
  collection of the debt services on such  loans  and  the  establishment,
  administration, and distribution of an escrow account for the payment of
  the owner's real estate taxes, sewer and water rents and fire insurance.




   § 475. Interest reduction subsidies. Notwithstanding the provisions of
  any  general,  special  or  local law, a municipality, acting through an
  agency, is authorized to  provide,  or  contract  to  provide,  interest
  reduction subsidies for loans made by private investors to owners of one
  to   four  unit  existing  private  or  multiple  dwellings  within  its
  territorial limits, if such owners would have been  eligible  under  the
  provisions  of this article for a loan made by the municipality pursuant
  to this article.




   §   476.   Mortgage   recording  tax  exemption.  Notwithstanding  any
  inconsistent provision of law, mortgages to secure a loan made  pursuant
  to  the  provisions  of  this  article shall be exempt from the mortgage
  recording taxes imposed by article eleven of the tax law.




   §  477.  Rules  and  regulations.  The agency may promulgate rules and
  regulations to carry out the provisions of this article.




   §  478.  Source  of  funds.  A  municipality may utilize federal grant
  funds, state grant funds or any municipal funds to  make  loans  and  to
  provide interest reduction subsidies pursuant to this article.




   §  500. Acquisition of real property. Real property may be acquired by
  a housing company, a limited-profit housing company or by a municipality
  for a housing company or a  limited-profit  housing  company,  by  gift,
  grant, devise, purchase, condemnation or otherwise.




   §   501.   Proceedings   to   acquire.  1.  A  housing  company  or  a
  limited-profit  housing  company   electing   to   acquire   through   a
  municipality,  may  petition  the  municipality to institute proceedings
  under any applicable general, special or local law, to acquire  property
  described  in  the  petition  for a project. The resolution granting the
  petition shall set forth the amount to be paid by the housing company or
  limited-profit housing company to the municipality for such property  or
  in  lieu  thereof  that  the  housing  company or limited-profit housing
  company shall pay to the municipality all sums expended or  required  to
  be expended by the municipality in the acquisition thereof, and the time
  of  payment and manner of securing payment thereof, and may require that
  the municipality shall receive, before proceeding with  the  acquisition
  of  such property, such assurances as to payment or reimbursement by the
  housing company or limited-profit housing company or  otherwise  as  the
  municipality may deem advisable. Upon the passage of a resolution by the
  local  legislative  body  of the municipality granting the petition, the
  housing company or limited-profit housing company shall cause two copies
  of surveys or maps of the property described in the petition to be made,
  one of which shall be filed in the office  of  the  housing  company  or
  limited-profit  housing  company,  one  in the office of the corporation
  counsel or chief law officer of the municipality.  The  filing  of  such
  copies of surveys or maps shall be conclusive evidence of the acceptance
  by  the  housing  company or limited-profit housing company of the terms
  and conditions of such  resolution.  The  municipality  may  proceed  in
  accordance with the provisions of the eminent domain procedure law. When
  title  to  the  property shall have vested in the municipality, it shall
  convey the same to the housing company or limited-profit housing company
  upon payment by the housing company or limited-profit housing company of
  the sums and the giving of  the  security  required  by  the  resolution
  granting  the  petition.  As  soon  as  title  shall  have vested in the
  municipality, the housing company or limited-profit housing company may,
  upon the authorization of the mayor, enter upon the property taken, take
  over and dispose of existing improvements, and carry out  the  terms  of
  the   project   with   respect  thereto.  Whenever  in  connection  with
  acquisition proceedings, requirement is made in any applicable  general,
  special  or  local  law for the performance of an act by a department or
  officer of the municipality, it shall be regarded for  the  purposes  of
  this  section  as compliance therewith if with the approval of the mayor
  such act is performed by the housing company or  limited-profit  housing
  company or by persons specially designated by it.
    2.  In  any proceedings for the assessment of compensation and damages
  for property taken or to be taken by condemnation by or  for  a  housing
  company  or  limited-profit  housing  company,  the following provisions
  shall be applicable:
    (a) Evidence of the price and other terms upon any sale  or  the  rent
  received  or  reserved,  whichever  is  less,  and  other terms upon any
  option, lease or tenancy relating to any of the property taken or to  be
  taken  or  to any similar property in the vicinity when the option, sale
  or lease was given, occurred or the tenancy existed, within a reasonable
  time of the trial, shall be admissible on  direct  examination.  At  any
  stage  of  the  proceeding, the court or tribunal may require such prior
  notice to be given of an intention to introduce evidence as to the sale,
  option, leasing or tenancy of property other than the property  directly
  involved in the proceeding and of particulars relating thereto as it may
  deem necessary to prevent surprise.
    (b) The deposition of any person, whether or not a party, may be taken
  in  the  manner provided by article thirty-one of the civil practice law
  and rules, and the provisions of this section. Such  deposition  may  be


 taken  upon any question or issue in the proceeding, including the facts
  as to any sale, option, lease or tenancy admissible in evidence pursuant
  to this subdivision. The deposition may be taken at the instance of  the
  housing  company  or limited-profit housing company, the municipality or
  of any owner or at the direction of the court, at any  time  during  the
  pendency  of the action or proceeding. At least five days' notice, or if
  service is through the mails, at least  eight  days'  notice,  shall  be
  given of the taking of the testimony, if on the part of an owner, to the
  housing  company  or  limited-profit  housing  company  and to all other
  owners who have appeared in the proceeding; if by the housing company or
  limited-profit housing company or a municipality, to all owners who have
  appeared in the proceeding.
    (c) Any time during the pendency of  such  action  or  proceedings,  a
  housing  company  or  limited-profit housing company, municipality or an
  owner may apply to the court for an order  directing  an  owner  or  the
  housing  company  or limited-profit housing company or the municipality,
  as the case may be, to show cause why further proceedings should not  be
  expedited,  and  the  court  may  upon  such  application  make an order
  requiring that the hearings proceed and that any other  steps  be  taken
  with all possible expedition.
    (d)  For the purposes of this article, the award of compensation shall
  not be increased by reason of any increase in the value of the  property
  caused  by  the  clearance,  reconstruction  or  proposed  clearance  or
  reconstruction for the purposes of this chapter of the  property  or  of
  the  area  in which the property is situated. No allowance shall be made
  for improvements begun on property after notice to  the  owner  of  such
  property of the institution of the proceedings to condemn such property.
    (e)  Evidence  shall be admissible bearing upon the insanitary, unsafe
  or substandard condition of the premises, or the illegal use thereof, or
  the enhancement of rentals from such illegal use, and such evidence  may
  be  considered  in  fixing  the compensation to be paid, notwithstanding
  that no steps to remedy or abate such conditions have been taken by  the
  department  or  officers having jurisdiction. If a violation order is on
  file against the premises in any such department,  it  shall  constitute
  prima facie evidence of the existence of the condition specified in such
  order.
    (f) If any of the property included within the project is devoted to a
  public  use,  it  may nevertheless be acquired provided that no property
  belonging to the municipality or  to  any  government  may  be  acquired
  without  its  consent,  and  no  property  belonging to a public utility
  corporation may be acquired without the approval of  the  commission  or
  other officer or tribunal having regulatory power over such corporation.
    (g)  Upon the trial, evidence of the price and other terms upon a sale
  or assignment or of a contract for the sale or assignment of a mortgage,
  award, proposed award, transfer of a tax lien  or  lien  of  a  judgment
  relating  to  property taken, shall be relevant, material and competent,
  upon the issue of value or damage and  shall  be  admissible  on  direct
  examination.
    (h)  Upon  the  trial  a  statement,  affidavit,  deposition,  report,
  transcript of testimony in an action or proceeding, or appraisal made or
  given by any owner or prior owner of  the  premises  taken,  or  by  any
  person  on  his behalf, to any court, governmental bureau, department or
  agency respecting the value of the property for tax purposes,  shall  be
  relevant,  material  and competent upon the issue of value or damage and
  shall be admissible on direct examination.
    (i) The term "owner," as used in this section, shall include a  person
  having an estate, interest or easement in the property to be acquired or
  a lien, charge or encumbrance thereon.


   3.  The term "housing company", as used in this section, shall include
  a housing development fund company organized pursuant to the  provisions
  of article eleven of this chapter.




   §  502.  Condemnation  of  excess  property.  A  municipality may take
  private property for a limited-profit housing  company  by  condemnation
  for  the  purpose  of  providing  low  rent  housing for families of low
  income,  or  for   the   clearance,   replanning,   reconstruction   and
  rehabilitation  of  areas,  or  for  both  of  such  purposes,  and  for
  recreational and other facilities incidental or appurtenant thereto, but
  in excess of that required for public use after such purposes shall have
  been accomplished. A municipality or a  limited-profit  housing  company
  may  improve  and  utilize such excess property wholly or partly for any
  other public purpose, or may lease or sell  such  excess  property  with
  restrictions   to   preserve   and  protect  the  project  or  projects.
  Proceedings to acquire such  excess  property  may  be  brought  by  the
  municipality  for a limited-profit housing company in the same manner as
  for the real property required for the project and may  be  included  in
  the  proceedings  for  the acquisition of real property required for the
  project.




   §  503. Sale or lease of municipal lands to a housing company. 1.  The
  local legislative body of a municipality, by resolution,  may  determine
  that  real property of the municipality, specified and described in such
  resolution is not required for use by the municipality and may authorize
  the municipality to sell or  lease  such  real  property  to  a  housing
  company.
    2. Notwithstanding the provisions of any general, special or local law
  or  ordinance,  such sale or lease may be made without appraisal, public
  notice or public bidding for such price or rental and  upon  such  terms
  (and, in case of a lease, for such term not exceeding fifty years with a
  right to one renewal term of thirty years) as may be agreed upon between
  the municipality and the housing company.
    3.  Before any sale or lease to a housing company shall be authorized,
  a public hearing shall be held by the local legislative body to consider
  the proposed sale or lease.
    4. Notice of such hearing shall be published at least ten days  before
  the  date  set for the hearing in such publication and in such manner as
  may be designated by the local legislative body.
    5. The deed or lease of such property shall be executed  in  the  same
  manner  as  a  deed or lease by the municipality for other real property
  and shall contain appropriate conditions and provisions  to  enable  the
  municipality to re-enter the property in the event of a violation by the
  housing  company  of  any  of the provisions of this chapter relating to
  such company or of the conditions or provisions of such deed or lease.
    6. A housing company purchasing or leasing land from  a  municipality,
  shall  not,  without  the written approval of the municipality, use such
  land for any purpose except in connection with a project approved  under
  this  chapter.  The deed shall contain a condition that the company will
  devote the land granted only for the purposes of a project,  subject  to
  the  restrictions  of  this chapter for breach of which the municipality
  shall have the right to re-enter and repossess itself of the land.




   §  504.  Re-entry  of lands sold or leased. 1. After the expiration of
  one year from the sale or lease of real property by the municipality  to
  a  housing company, the municipality shall have the right of re-entry in
  the manner hereinafter provided. Such right of re-entry may,  where  the
  property  has  been sold, be exercised at any time prior to twenty years
  after such sale, or where the property has  been  leased,  at  any  time
  prior  to  the termination of the lease.  The local legislative body may
  by resolution determine to re-enter the real  property  of  any  housing
  company which has purchased or leased property from the municipality.
    2. A certified copy of such resolution shall be filed in the office of
  the county clerk or register in which the deed or lease of such property
  is  recorded, and shall be served upon the housing company and also upon
  all obligees, mortgagees or holders of liens upon the real  property  or
  upon  any  interest  therein.  Upon  the  filing  of such resolution all
  indebtedness of the housing company shall  become  immediately  due  and
  payable.
    3.  The municipality shall, within ninety days after the filing of the
  resolution to re-enter, or as soon thereafter as may be feasible, pay to
  the company a sum which, together with the assets of such company, shall
  be sufficient to discharge all the indebtedness of the company, pay  the
  reasonable  expenses  of  liquidation  and dissolution and return to the
  holders of stock and debentures then outstanding, the par value  thereof
  plus  interest  at  the rate of six per centum per annum and any accrued
  and  unpaid  dividends  or  interest  on  such  outstanding  stock   and
  debentures.
    4.  Upon  the making of such payment the housing company shall deliver
  to the municipality proper instruments evidencing  the  cancellation  of
  the  indebtedness  and  the  surrender  of the rights of the company and
  thereupon the repossession by the municipality shall be complete.
    5. In the event of a foreclosure of a mortgage or other lien  held  by
  any  other  person,  bodies, institutions, associations, or corporations
  specified  in  section  eighty-one  the  right  of   re-entry   by   the
  municipality shall terminate upon the entry of a judgment of foreclosure
  and sale.




   §   507.  Condemnation  certificate  of  commissioner.  The  power  of
  condemnation shall not be exercised by a housing  company,  except  with
  the   authorization   of   such   action   by  the  commissioner,  which
  authorization shall be in the form of a certificate declaring  that  the
  acquisition  of  the  property  is  necessary  for the construction of a
  project and that the acquisition is in the public interest and necessary
  for the public use. Such certificate shall be issued only after a public
  hearing. The certificate shall state the nature of the  interest  to  be
  acquired.




   §  508.  Notice of public hearing. The hearing shall be held at a time
  and place appointed by the commissioner who shall give  notice  of  such
  hearing  by  publication in a newspaper, designated by him, published or
  circulated in  the  municipality  or  county  wherein  the  property  is
  located,  at  least ten days prior to such hearing. Where a municipality
  publishes an official daily publication,  notice  of  hearing  shall  be
  published  only  in  such official publication. A duly certified copy of
  such certificate shall be conclusive evidence as to the matters lawfully
  certified therein in any proceeding to acquire  property,  or  any  part
  thereof, set forth in such certificate.




   §  550.  Application  of  article.  This  article  shall apply only to
  federal,  state  or  municipal  projects  purchased   or   leased   from
  municipalities  or  housing  authorities by housing companies. Except as
  otherwise expressly provided in this article, the terms  and  provisions
  of  this  chapter and other applicable laws shall apply to projects sold
  or leased to housing companies and to housing companies  acquiring  such
  projects.




   § 551. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall
  mean and include:
    1.  "Cost  of acquisition." In the case of a project purchased from an
  authority or municipality, the cost of  acquisition  shall  include  the
  purchase  price,  costs  incidental  to  the  transfer of title, and the
  estimated cost, if any, of  necessary  alterations  and  repairs  to  be
  performed  within  six  months  after  transfer  of title to the housing
  company. Such cost of acquisition  shall,  in  the  case  of  a  limited
  dividend  or  state-aided  limited-profit housing company, be determined
  and certified by the commissioner; in the case  of  a  municipally-aided
  housing company, it shall be determined and certified by the supervising
  agency.
    In  the case of a project leased from a municipality or authority, the
  cost of acquisition shall be the value of the lease to the  company,  as
  determined  and  certified  by the commissioner in the case of a limited
  dividend or  state-aided  limited-profit  housing  company,  or  by  the
  supervising  agency,  in  the case of a municipally-aided limited-profit
  housing company.
    2. "Housing company." A limited dividend  or  limited  profit  housing
  company  organized pursuant to the provisions of article four or article
  two of this chapter.
    3.  "Project."  A  specific  work  or  improvement,  including  lands,
  buildings  and  improvements  acquired,  owned,  constructed, managed or
  operated  by  an  authority  or  a  municipality  to  provide   dwelling
  accommodations for persons of low income.




   §  552.  Sale or lease of projects.  1. An authority or a municipality
  may grant, sell, lease or convey a  project,  or  part  thereof,  either
  prior  to,  at  the  date  of,  or subsequent to the physical completion
  thereof, to a housing company, without public bidding,  public  sale  or
  public  offering,  and  a housing company may accept, purchase, lease or
  otherwise acquire such project or  part  thereof  upon  such  terms  and
  conditions  as  may be agreed upon by such authority or municipality and
  such housing company, and provided that such sale or lease and the terms
  and  conditions  thereof  shall  be  subject  (a)  in  the  case  of   a
  federally-aided  project, to the approval of the federal government; (b)
  in  the  case  of  a  state-aided  project,  to  the  approval  of   the
  commissioner;  or  (c)  in the case of municipally-aided project, to the
  approval of the supervising agency and the local  legislative  body.  In
  the  event  of  a grant, sale, lease or conveyance of a project prior to
  the physical completion thereof, the authority or municipality may agree
  to complete construction and development of such project.
    2. The purchase price to be paid on or prior to the date  of  transfer
  of  title,  or upon the physical completion of the project, shall not be
  less than the amount required by the municipality or  authority  to  pay
  and  retire, or to make provision for the payment and retirement of, all
  bonds, notes  and  other  obligations  issued  by  the  municipality  or
  authority to finance the project cost.
    3.  An  authority or a municipality which has granted, sold, leased or
  conveyed a project or part thereof to a housing company may reenter  all
  or  part  of such project in the manner provided in section five hundred
  four of this chapter.
    4. The sale or lease  of  a  project  to  a  housing  company  may  be
  conditioned on the inclusion in the certificate of incorporation of such
  housing  company of a provision that no dividends or interest be paid on
  all or any issues of stock or debentures.
    5. The parties to any lease or conveyance effecting the transfer of  a
  publicly-assisted  project  to  a housing company, executed prior to the
  effective date hereof, may amend such lease or conveyance in  accordance
  with the provisions of this article.




   §  553.  Conditions  precedent to sale or lease.  No such grant, sale,
  lease or conveyance under this article shall  be  made  unless  (1)  the
  authority  or municipality, after a public hearing on ten days published
  notice, and with the approval of the government providing the  financial
  assistance,  shall  find  that  such  transfer  is  in  the  best public
  interest, (2) adequate provision will be made for tenant relocation, and
  (3) adequate provision will be made for the payment or retirement of all
  bonds, notes  and  other  obligations  issued  by  the  municipality  or
  authority to finance the project cost.




   §  554.  Provisions  of lease.   1. Every lease of a project or a part
  thereof to a housing company:
    (a) shall provide that all improvements shall be the property  of  the
  lessor;
    (b)  may  require  that  provision  be  made  for  the  retirement and
  surrender of all outstanding shares and debentures upon the  termination
  of the lease;
    (c)  may reserve such easements or other rights in connection with the
  property as may be deemed necessary or desirable for the future planning
  and  development  of  the  municipality  and  the  extension  of  public
  facilities therein;
    (d)  shall  contain  a provision authorizing the lessor to designate a
  director of the housing company; and
    (e) may contain such other provisions as are not inconsistent with the
  provisions of this chapter.
    2. Such lease shall not  impose  upon  the  lessor  any  liability  or
  obligations  in  connection  with  or  arising  out  of  the  financing,
  construction, reconstruction, alteration, management or operation  of  a
  project,  but  such  lease  shall  contain  such  provisions  as  may be
  necessary to protect the interests of the authority or municipality.




   §  555.  Financial  structure.  1. (a) The entire amount to be paid in
  cash or property by the stockholders and income debenture holders  of  a
  housing  company acquiring fee title to a project shall be equivalent to
  at least twenty per centum of the cost of acquisition of such project as
  certified by  the  commissioner  in  the  case  of  companies  organized
  pursuant  to the provisions of article four of this chapter, or at least
  ten per centum of the cost of  acquisition  in  the  case  of  companies
  organized  pursuant to the provisions of article two of this chapter, as
  certified by the commissioner or supervising agency, as the case may be.
    (b) The  entire  amount  to  be  paid  in  cash  or  property  by  the
  stockholders and income debenture holders of a housing company acquiring
  a   project  by  lease  shall  be  determined  by  the  commissioner  or
  supervising agency, as the case may  be.  In  the  event  a  state-aided
  project  shall  be acquired by a municipally-aided company by lease, the
  approval of the commissioner  shall  be  required  in  addition  to  the
  approval of the supervising agency.
    2. The provisions of subdivision one hereof shall not be applicable to
  any  housing  company organized pursuant to article four of this chapter
  if such company shall receive a loan from the federal government or  any
  instrumentality thereof, or if any mortgage or mortgage bonds insured by
  the federal housing administration are used in financing the project, or
  the  acquisition  thereof,  in whole or in part. In such case the equity
  required shall be the difference between the  amount  of  such  loan  or
  mortgage and the cost of acquisition.




   §  556.  Tax  exemptions.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions of section
  fifty-two, subdivisions three and four of the public housing law, or  of
  sections thirty-three or ninety-three of this chapter, the real property
  in  a  project  sold  or  leased  as  provided in this article, when the
  transfer thereunder becomes effective, shall be exempt  from  local  and
  municipal  taxes, other than assessments for local improvements, only to
  such extent as may be granted by  the  local  legislative  body  of  any
  municipality  in  which such project is located; provided, however, that
  any company to which such project is so sold or leased shall  pay,  with
  respect  to  each such project, local and municipal taxes in amounts not
  less than the sum or sums which the authority would be obligated to  pay
  to  the  municipality  had  it  not  sold  or leased the project to such
  company. The tax exemption shall operate and continue  (1)  so  long  as
  capital  loans of the company to which such project shall have been sold
  or leased are outstanding, or in case of lease, so long  as  obligations
  of  the  municipality  or authority to the government granting financial
  assistance to the municipality or authority with respect to the  project
  so  leased  shall continue and (2) until and unless the project shall be
  repossessed by the authority or municipality. Any project that  received
  a  tax  exemption under this section may, upon the expiration of the tax
  exemption period, be granted an additional tax exemption period of up to
  fifty years, or until such time as the project  is  no  longer  operated
  under  the  restrictions and for the purposes set forth in this article,
  whichever is sooner.




   §  557.  Supervision  of  certain housing companies. The provisions of
  section  thirteen  of  this  chapter  requiring  the  approval  by   the
  commissioner  of  housing  of the persons incorporating a limited-profit
  housing company, and the provisions of section fourteen of this  chapter
  requiring  the consent of the commissioner of housing to the filing of a
  certificate of incorporation of a limited-profit housing company in  the
  office of the secretary of state and amendments thereof, shall not apply
  to  a  municipally-aided  housing  company  organized for the purpose of
  purchasing or leasing a  federally-aided  project  or  municipally-aided
  project  from  a  municipality  or  housing authority. The deed or lease
  shall, in such  cases,  make  provision  for  the  supervision  of  such
  companies by one or more state, federal or municipal agencies.




   §  558.  Subsidies.  1.  The  obligation  of the state to pay periodic
  subsidies to an authority or municipality for a project which  has  been
  leased   or  sold  to  a  housing  company,  and  the  obligation  of  a
  municipality to make subsidies in at least an equal amount, as  required
  by  section  seventy-three  of the public housing law, shall cease as of
  the last day of the fiscal year next after the  effective  date  of  the
  grant, sale, lease or conveyance.
    2.  In  the event that an authority or municipality which has granted,
  sold, leased or conveyed a project to a housing company, for any  reason
  or in any way resumes possession of such project, the obligations of the
  state  and  municipality  to  pay subsidies, as provided by the terms of
  section seventy-three  of  the  public  housing  law,  shall  be  deemed
  restored  as  of the first day of the fiscal year next prior to the date
  of such resumption of possession of such project.




   §  559.  Savings clause. 1. The repeal of laws as specified in section
  five hundred sixty of this article, or amendment of any law as  provided
  by this act, shall not affect or impair the validity of any action taken
  by  any public official under the law in effect immediately prior to the
  time this article shall take effect nor affect or impair any contract or
  remedy or any act done or right accruing, accrued or  acquired,  or  any
  penalty,  forfeiture  or  punishment  under  or by virtue of the laws so
  repealed and in existence prior to the  time  when  this  article  takes
  effect,  but  the  same may be asserted, enforced or prosecuted, and for
  such purposes all of the laws specified in section  five  hundred  sixty
  are hereby continued in full force and effect.
    2. This article or anything herein contained shall not affect or abate
  any  actions,  proceedings,  civil or criminal, pending at the time when
  this article takes effect, brought by, for or  against  the  state,  any
  municipality,  authority,  limited  dividend  or  limited-profit housing
  company, under or in pursuance of the provisions of the laws repealed or
  amended by this article or act; but all such actions or proceedings  may
  be continued, prosecuted, conducted and completed.
    3. If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section or part of this article
  shall  be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
  such judgment shall not  affect,  impair  or  invalidate  the  remainder
  thereof, but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence,
  paragraph,  section or part thereof directly involved in the controversy
  in which such judgment shall have been rendered.
    4. The provisions of this article shall be construed liberally  so  as
  to facilitate the purposes of this article.




   §  560. Laws repealed. Subdivision four of section thirty-seven of the
  public housing law, as added by chapter nine hundred fifty-nine  of  the
  laws  of  nineteen  hundred sixty, and section one hundred thirty-two of
  such law, as amended by chapter one hundred forty-eight of the  laws  of
  nineteen hundred forty, and section one hundred thirty-three of such law
  are hereby repealed.




   §  570.  Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited and
  referred to as the "housing development fund companies law".




   § 571. Statement of legislative findings and purposes. The legislature
  hereby  finds  and declares that there continues to exist in the state a
  seriously inadequate supply of safe and sanitary dwelling accommodations
  within the financial reach of families and persons of low  income.  This
  condition  is  contrary to the public interest and threatens the health,
  safety, welfare, comfort and security of the people of the state.
    The  legislature  further  finds  and  declares  that   the   ordinary
  operations  of  private  enterprise cannot provide an adequate supply of
  safe and sanitary dwelling accommodations at rentals which families  and
  persons of low income can afford.
    The   legislature   further   finds  that  eleemosynary  institutions,
  settlement houses, fraternal and labor  organizations,  foundations  and
  other  non-profit  associations  are desirous of organizing companies to
  build or rehabilitate housing for low income families; that in order for
  such organizations to build or rehabilitate housing, such  organizations
  need and can effectively utilize development funds to procure government
  aided or other permanent financing therefor.
    The  legislature  further  finds  that  such development funds and the
  provision of technical assistance in the organization and management  of
  housing  development  fund  companies  will  maximize  federal funds and
  credits which may be available for the  provision  of  housing  for  low
  income residents of the state.
    It  is  the  purpose  of  this  act to provide temporary financial and
  technical assistance  to  enable  such  companies  to  participate  more
  effectively in existing municipal, state and federal assistance programs
  and  to  make more effective use of other sources of financing which may
  be available for housing of persons and families of low income.
    It is further the purpose of this  article  to  coordinate  activities
  aided  under  existing  municipal, state and federal programs with other
  public and private actions in order to provide the  most  effective  and
  economical  concentration  of federal, state, local, and private efforts
  to increase the supply of housing  accommodations  for  persons  of  low
  income,  and  thereby  improve the quality of life for all the people of
  the state.
    It is further the purpose of this article to  provide  assistance  for
  existing not-for-profit housing companies by providing advances from the
  housing   development   fund   to   facilitate   the  rehabilitation  or
  construction of housing for low income families.
    It is further the purpose of this article to  provide  assistance  for
  the  improvement  of  housing  for  farmworkers by providing advances to
  local loan administrators to make loans to  agricultural  producers  for
  the  purpose  of  constructing  or  improving  non-conforming farmworker
  housing in order to comply  with  state  regulations  relating  to  such
  housing.




   § 572. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall
  mean and include:
    1.  "Commissioner."  The commissioner of housing and community renewal
  of the state of New York.
    2. "Comptroller." The comptroller of the state  of  New  York  in  the
  context  of  the  housing  development  fund established by section five
  hundred seventy-four of this article, or the comptroller or chief fiscal
  officer of a municipality  in  the  context  of  the  municipal  housing
  development   fund   established   pursuant   to  section  five  hundred
  seventy-four-a of this article, as the case may be.
    3. "Development cost." The cost approved by the  commissioner  or  the
  supervising  agency,  as  the  case  may be, as appropriate expenditures
  which may be incurred prior to commitment and  initial  advance  of  the
  proceeds  of  a mortgage, including but not limited to: (a) payments for
  options to purchase properties on the  proposed  housing  project  site,
  deposits  on  contracts  of  purchase,  or,  with  prior approval of the
  commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case may be, payments for
  the purchase of such properties; (b) legal and organizational  expenses,
  including payment of attorneys' fees, project manager and clerical staff
  salaries, office rent and other incidental expenses; (c) payment of fees
  for  preliminary feasibility studies, advances for planning, engineering
  and architectural work;  (d)  expenses  for  tenant  or  home  ownership
  surveys  and  market analyses; (e) necessary application and other fees;
  (f) bridge loans which shall mean  such  interim  financing  as  may  be
  necessary  for the development of residential properties and which shall
  be repaid out of equity which may include proceeds from the  syndication
  of  the federal low income housing tax credit as established pursuant to
  the federal internal revenue code; and (g) such other expenses  incurred
  by  the  housing  development fund company or housing corporation as the
  commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case  may  be,  may  deem
  appropriate to effectuate the purposes of this article.
    4.  "Division."  The  division of housing and community renewal in the
  executive department of the state of New York.
    5. "Federally-aided mortgage." A  mortgage  made  or  insured  by  the
  federal  government  or  any  agency  or  instrumentality  thereof, or a
  mortgage loan entered into in  conjunction  with  a  housing  assistance
  payments  contract  in  connection  with new construction or substantial
  rehabilitation pursuant to section eight of the  United  States  Housing
  Act of 1937, as amended.
    6.  "Fund."  The  housing  development  fund  created  by section five
  hundred seventy-four of this article, or a municipal housing development
  fund established pursuant to section five hundred seventy-four-a of this
  article, as the case may be.
    7. "Gross project cost." The sum total of all reasonable and necessary
  costs incurred by a housing development fund company  for  carrying  out
  all  works  and  undertakings  for the development of a housing project.
  These shall include but not necessarily be limited to the  cost  of  all
  necessary  studies,  surveys,  plans  and specifications, architectural,
  engineering, legal or other special  services,  financing,  acquisition,
  demolition,  construction,  equipment,  and  site development of new and
  rehabilitated  buildings,  rehabilitation,  reconstruction,  repair   or
  remodeling  of  existing buildings, and the cost of tenant placement and
  tenant relocation services in connection with a project.
    8. "Housing project." A specific work or improvement undertaken  by  a
  housing  development  fund  company  to provide dwelling accommodations,
  including the acquisition, construction and/or rehabilitation of  lands,
  buildings  and  improvements, and such commercial, social, recreational,


 communal or  other  non-housing  facilities  as  may  be  incidental  or
  appurtenant thereto.
    8-a.   "State   urban  development  corporation  project."  A  project
  acquired,  owned,  constructed,  managed  or  operated  by   a   housing
  development  fund  company  which  is a subsidiary of the New York state
  urban development corporation, as the term "subsidiary"  is  defined  in
  the New York state urban development corporation act.
    8-b. "Farmworker housing project." A specific work or improvement that
  is undertaken by one or more agricultural producers for the construction
  or  improvement  of  dwelling accommodations for farmworkers who are not
  family members of the agricultural producers. For the purposes  of  this
  section  only,  an "agricultural producer" shall mean a person or entity
  which owns or operates land  eligible  for  an  agricultural  assessment
  pursuant  to  section three hundred five or section three hundred six of
  the agriculture and markets law and which produces food by  the  tillage
  of  the  soil,  or  raises,  sheers,  feeds  or manages animals or other
  dairying processes.
    9. "Housing development fund  company."  A  company  incorporated  and
  organized  pursuant  to  section  five  hundred  seventy-three  of  this
  chapter.
    10. "Local legislative body." In a city, the board of aldermen, common
  council, commission, or other board or body now or hereafter vested with
  jurisdiction to enact ordinances or local laws, except that if there be,
  in a city of one million population or more, a board  of  estimate,  the
  term  shall mean only such board of estimate; in a town, the town board;
  in a village,  the  board  or  trustees;  in  a  county,  the  board  of
  supervisors.
    11.  "State-aided  mortgage."  A loan made by the state of New York or
  any agency or instrumentality thereof.
    12. "Taxing  jurisdiction."  Any  municipal  corporation  or  district
  corporation,  including  any  school  district  or any special district,
  having the power to levy or collect taxes and benefit  assessments  upon
  real  property, or in whose behalf such taxes or benefit assessments may
  be levied or collected.
    13. "Municipally-aided  Mortgage."  A  loan  made  by  a  municipality
  pursuant  to  the  provisions of article two of this chapter to a mutual
  company as defined in section twelve of this chapter or to a  non-profit
  company  incorporated  pursuant  to the provisions of the not-for-profit
  corporation law and article two of this chapter, or a  loan  made  by  a
  municipality pursuant to the provisions of article eight of this chapter
  to a mutual company as defined in section twelve of this chapter or to a
  not-for-profit  corporation  incorporated  pursuant to the provisions of
  the not-for-profit corporation law  and  this  article  or  a  temporary
  construction  loan  or  advance or a permanent loan that the supervising
  agency certifies is made pursuant to the provisions of  article  fifteen
  of this chapter to a mutual company as defined in section twelve of this
  chapter  or to a not-for-profit corporation incorporated pursuant to the
  provisions of the not-for-profit corporation law and this article.
    14. "Supervising Agency." The comptroller in a municipality  having  a
  comptroller;  in  a municipality having no comptroller, the chief fiscal
  officer of such municipality; except that in the city  of  New  York  it
  shall be the department of housing preservation and development.
    15.  "Housing corporation." A not-for-profit or charitable corporation
  which has as one of its primary purposes the improvement of housing  for
  persons  of low income, or a wholly owned subsidiary of such corporation
  or organization.
    16. "Local loan administrator." A farm credit bureau or member of  the
  farm  credit system or a banking institution with a demonstrated ability


 to provide financial assistance and service  to  agricultural  producers
  that  have entered into a master servicing agreement prescribed pursuant
  to section five hundred seventy-six-d of this chapter.




   §   573.   Incorporation   and   organization  of  non-profit  housing
  corporations.  1.  A  housing  development   fund   company   shall   be
  incorporated  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  this  article  and  the
  provisions  of  either  (a)  the  business  corporations  law,  (b)  the
  not-for-profit  corporation  law,  or (c) the not-for-profit corporation
  law and article two of this chapter.
    2.  The  term  "housing  development  fund  corporation"  or  "housing
  development  fund  company" shall be included as a part of the corporate
  name as set forth in the certificate of incorporation.
    3. The certificate of incorporation of any such corporation shall,  in
  addition to any other requirements of law, provide:
    a.  that  the  company  has  been  organized  exclusively to develop a
  housing project for persons of low income;
    b. that all income and earnings  of  the  corporation  shall  be  used
  exclusively  for  corporate purposes, and that no part of the net income
  or net earnings of the corporation shall inure to the benefit or  profit
  of any private individual, firm, corporation or association;
    c.  that  if the corporation receives a temporary loan or advance from
  the housing development fund or a municipal housing development fund, as
  established by or pursuant to article  eleven  of  the  private  housing
  finance  law, it shall be authorized to enter into an agreement with the
  commissioner of housing and community renewal of the state of  New  York
  or  the supervising agency, as the case may be, providing for regulation
  with respect to rents, profits, dividends and disposition of property or
  franchises;
    d. that if the corporation receives a temporary loan or  advance  from
  the housing development fund or a municipal housing development fund, as
  established  by  or  pursuant  to  article eleven of the private housing
  finance law, the commissioner of housing and community  renewal  of  the
  state  of  New York or the supervising agency, as the case may be, shall
  have the power, if, in his or its discretion, he or it determines either
  that any such temporary loan or advance is  in  jeopardy  of  not  being
  repaid,  or  that  the proposed housing project for which such temporary
  loan or advance was made is in jeopardy of  not  being  constructed,  to
  appoint  to  the  board of directors of such corporation a number of new
  directors, which number shall be sufficient to constitute a majority  of
  such  board,  notwithstanding any other provision of such certificate of
  incorporation or of any other provision of law.
    4. The certificate of incorporation of any such corporation  organized
  pursuant  to  the  business  corporation  law and this article shall, in
  addition, provide that each housing project of such corporation shall be
  operated exclusively for the benefit of the persons or families who  are
  entitled  to occupancy in such housing project by reason of ownership of
  shares in such corporation, and that such corporation may  issue  shares
  for  home owners purchase notes if the purchase transaction has received
  the  written  endorsement  of  the  commissioner  in   accordance   with
  supplementary  rules  and  regulations of the commissioner made therefor
  and if at least two hundred dollars in money or property is received  by
  such corporation toward the issuance of such shares.
    5.   The  secretary  of  state  shall  not  file  the  certificate  of
  incorporation of any such corporation or any  amendment  thereto  unless
  the  consent  or approval of the commissioner or the supervising agency,
  as the case may be, is affixed thereon or attached thereto.  Consent  to
  the  filing  of  such  certificate  of incorporation shall be based upon
  findings by the commissioner or supervising agency as to  the  character
  and competence of the sponsor.




   §  574.  Establishment  of  fund.  1.  There  is  hereby  created  and
  established in the division of housing and community renewal a revolving
  fund to be known as the "housing development fund."
    2. There shall be paid into such  housing  development  fund  (a)  any
  moneys  appropriated and made available by the state for the purposes of
  such fund, (b) notwithstanding the provisions of the state  finance  law
  or  any other provision of law, any moneys which the division of housing
  and community renewal shall receive in repayment of advances  made  from
  such  fund,  and (c) any other moneys which may be made available to the
  division of housing and community renewal for the purpose of  such  fund
  from any other source or sources.
    2-a. All moneys paid into the fund from repayments of loans authorized
  by  section five hundred seventy-six-d of this article shall continue to
  be made available for the purpose of providing loans  pursuant  to  such
  section.
    3.  Any  moneys held in such housing development fund not required for
  immediate disbursement  may  be  invested,  at  the  discretion  of  the
  commissioner,   in  obligations  of  the  state  or  the  United  States
  government or obligations  the  principal  and  interest  of  which  are
  guaranteed  by  the state or the United States government. Any income or
  interest earned by, or increment to, such housing development fund shall
  be added to the moneys  held  in  such  fund  for  the  purposes  herein
  provided.




   §  574-a.  Municipal  housing  development fund. 1. A municipality may
  create and establish a revolving fund to  be  known  as  the  "municipal
  housing  development  fund."  Such a revolving fund shall be created and
  established in the supervising agency.
    2. There shall be paid into such municipal  housing  development  fund
  (a)  any  moneys appropriated and made available by the municipality for
  the purposes of such fund, (b) notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  the
  local  finance law or any other provision of law, any moneys received in
  repayment of advances made from such fund,  and  (c)  any  other  moneys
  which  may  be  available  for  the  purpose of such fund from any other
  source or sources.
    3. Any moneys held in such  municipal  housing  development  fund  not
  required  for  immediate disbursement may be invested, at the discretion
  of the supervising agency, in obligations of the  state  or  the  United
  States government or obligations the principal and interest of which are
  guaranteed  by  the state or the United States government. Any income or
  interest earned by, or increment to, such municipal housing  development
  fund  shall  be  added  to the moneys held in such fund for the purposes
  herein provided.




   § 575. Advances; conditions; repayment. 1. The commissioner of housing
  and community renewal is hereby authorized to use the moneys held in the
  housing  development  fund  to  make  non-interest  bearing  advances to
  housing  development  fund  companies,  and  housing   corporations   in
  accordance  with  the  provisions  of this article. Such moneys shall be
  paid out of such fund, after audit  by  and  upon  the  warrant  of  the
  comptroller, on vouchers approved by the commissioner.
    1-a.  The  supervising  agency  is hereby authorized to use the moneys
  held  in  the  municipal  housing  development  fund  or   other   funds
  appropriated  by  the municipality to make non-interest bearing advances
  to housing development fund companies in accordance with the  provisions
  of this article and the applicable law of the municipality.
    2.  No  such  advances shall be made with respect to a housing project
  unless the commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case  may  be,
  (a)  finds  (1)  that  the  housing development fund company, or housing
  corporation proposes to finance the project in whole or  in  part  by  a
  federally-aided,  state-aided  or municipally-aided mortgage or (2) that
  the project, if otherwise financed, will provide housing for persons  or
  families  of  low  income,  as defined in this chapter, and is otherwise
  consistent with the purposes of this article; (b) finds that the project
  site is suitable, there is a need for this housing type proposed in  the
  area  to  be  served  and  the  project  is feasible; and (c) reasonably
  anticipates that financing will be obtained and makes a finding to  that
  effect.
    3.  No  such  advances  may be made to a housing corporation unless it
  enters into an agreement with the  commissioner  to  be  regulated  with
  respect  to rents, profits, dividends and disposition of its property or
  franchises. No such advances may be made to a housing  development  fund
  company  unless  it  enters  into  an  agreement  in accordance with the
  provisions of section five hundred seventy-six of this article.
    4. The proceeds of such  advance  may  be  used  only  to  defray  the
  development costs of such project.
    5. Each such advance shall either (i) be consolidated with the lien of
  a  municipally-aided  mortgage, or (ii) be repaid in full by the housing
  development fund company, or housing  corporation  to  the  division  of
  housing  and  community renewal or to the supervising agency as directed
  in  paragraph  (b)  of  subdivision  two   of   section   five   hundred
  seventy-four-a of this article, as the case may be. Such repayment shall
  be  made concurrent with receipt by the housing development fund company
  or its successor in interest, or housing corporation of the proceeds  of
  its  mortgage  or  construction  loan,  unless  the  commissioner or the
  supervising agency, as the case may be, shall extend the period for  the
  repayment  of  such advances. In no event shall the time of repayment be
  extended later than the date of final advance of funds pursuant to  such
  mortgage financing.
    6.  If the commissioner or the supervising agency, as the case may be,
  in his or its discretion shall, at any time,  determine  that  permanent
  financing  for the housing project may not be obtained, then and in that
  event all advances made to the  housing  development  fund  company,  or
  housing  corporation  pursuant  to  this  article  shall  become due and
  payable upon the demand of the commissioner or the  supervising  agency,
  as the case may be.






	   §  576.  Regulatory  agreements.  1.  Every  housing  development fund
  company as a condition precedent to receiving  an  advance  pursuant  to
  this  article,  shall  enter  into an agreement with the commissioner or
  with the supervising agency, as the case may  be,  to  be  regulated  as
  follows:
    a.  Maximum  rentals  shall  be  fixed  by  the  commissioner  or  the
  supervising agency, as the case may  be,  based  upon  the  final  gross
  project  cost, at an amount sufficient to pay the necessary costs of the
  project.
    b. Dwellings in any such project shall be  available  for  persons  or
  families  whose  probable  aggregate  annual  income does not exceed six
  times the rental (including the value or cost to them  of  heat,  light,
  water and cooking fuel) of the dwellings to be furnished such persons or
  families,  except  that in the case of persons or families with three or
  more dependents, such ratio shall not exceed seven to one. For  purposes
  of this paragraph, tenants in a housing project of a housing development
  fund company organized under the provisions of the business corporations
  law  and  this  article  shall have added to their total annual carrying
  charges an amount equal to six per centum of the original investment  of
  such person or family in the equity obligations of such housing company.
    c.  Profits  shall  be  used  for  capital  improvements  or to reduce
  rentals.
    d. Ordinary dividends may not be declared. Capital  dividends  may  be
  declared  only  with  the consent of the commissioner or the supervising
  agency, as the case may be.
    e. The property or franchises of the corporation may not  be  disposed
  of without the consent of the commissioner or the supervising agency, as
  the  case may be, nor may the corporation be dissolved unless payment in
  full is made of remaining balances of principal  and  interest  due  and
  unpaid  on any mortgage or mortgages, of any advances made from the fund
  pursuant to this article  and  of  any  and  all  expenses  incurred  in
  effecting such dissolution.
    f.  The  commissioner  or  the supervising agency, as the case may be,
  shall have power, in his or its discretion, if he or it determines  that
  any advance pursuant to this article is in jeopardy of not being repaid,
  or  that the proposed housing project for which such advance was made is
  in jeopardy of not  being  constructed,  to  appoint  to  the  board  of
  directors  of  the  corporation  a number of new directors, which number
  shall be sufficient to constitute a majority of such board. Directors so
  appointed  need  not  be  stockholders  or   members   or   meet   other
  qualifications   which   may   be   prescribed  by  the  certificate  of
  incorporation or by-laws.    In  the  absence  of  fraud  or  bad  faith
  directors  so  appointed  shall  not be personally liable for the debts,
  obligations or liabilities of the corporation.
    2. A regulatory agreement pursuant to this section shall be terminated
  upon repayment in full of any and all advances  made  pursuant  to  this
  article  provided  that  such termination shall not take place until (a)
  assumption of the regulation of the project by the commissioner, in  the
  case  of  a  state-aided  mortgage, or by the supervising agency, in the
  case of a municipally-aided  mortgage  or  by  the  appropriate  federal
  authorities  in  the  case  of  a federally-aided mortgage or (b) if the
  project is not to be financed with a state-aided,  municipally-aided  or
  federally-aided  mortgage,  the  expiration of any exemption of the real
  property of the project from local and municipal taxes.
    3. The commissioner  or  supervising  agency  may  require  a  housing
  development  fund  company  receiving  advances  under  this  article to
  execute  a  financing  statement  for  real  property  improvement.  The
  financing  statement  shall  be  in  such  form  as  the commissioner or


 supervising agency shall  prescribe  and  shall  include  the  name  and
  address of the housing development fund company and of the agency making
  the advances, the location of the project, with a description sufficient
  to  identify  the  property,  including  street  address,  if any, and a
  statement that funds have or will be advanced to the company pursuant to
  this article and the maximum amount of such advances, together with such
  other information as the form shall  specify.  The  financing  statement
  shall  be  filed  in the office in which a mechanic's lien affecting the
  property would be filed, which office shall accept it for filing without
  fee and docket it in the manner of such lien.  From  the  date  of  such
  filing  the state or municipality, as the case may be, shall have a lien
  for the total of advances under this article made and  not  repaid.  The
  provisions  of  articles two and three of the lien law shall govern such
  lien, except that it shall be valid for a period of three years from the
  date of filing, unless extended as provided in section seventeen of  the
  lien   law.   Upon  repayment  of  the  advances,  the  commissioner  or
  supervising agency shall deliver to the housing development fund company
  a copy of the financing statement with an endorsement thereon  that  the
  lien  is satisfied. Upon filing of such copy, without payment of fee, in
  the office in which the financing statement was filed, the lien shall be
  discharged.




   § 576-a. Acquisition and disposition of real property by municipality.
  1.  Real  property  may  be  acquired  by  a  municipality for a housing
  development fund company by gift, grant, devise, purchase,  condemnation
  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  article  nine  of  this  chapter,  or
  otherwise.
    2. Notwithstanding any other provision of general,  special  or  local
  law,  charter  or ordinance, a municipality may sell, lease or otherwise
  dispose of real property to a housing development fund  company  without
  public  auction or sealed bids, provided that notice of such sale, lease
  or other disposition is published and a hearing is held before the local
  legislative body not less than ten days after such publication.
    3. In any case where a municipality shall acquire real property for or
  convey real property to a housing development  fund  company  under  the
  provisions  of  this  section,  the deed or lease of the property to the
  housing development fund company shall  contain  appropriate  provisions
  restricting  the  disposition of the property by the housing development
  fund company,  through  provisions  for  a  reversion  of  the  property
  conditioned  on  its  continued  use for purposes of housing, provisions
  requiring the approval  of  the  municipality  to  any  sale,  transfer,
  exchange, assignment or lease, or otherwise.




   §  576-b.  Special  provisions with respect to state urban development
  corporation projects. Any state urban  development  corporation  project
  shall  comply  with  the  requirements of local laws, ordinances, codes,
  charters or regulations applicable to the construction,  reconstruction,
  rehabilitation,  alteration or improvement of such project, except where
  the state urban development corporation, in its discretion,  finds  such
  compliance  not  feasible  or  practicable,  in which event such project
  shall comply with the requirements of the  state  building  construction
  code,  formulated by the state building code council pursuant to article
  eighteen  of  the  executive  law,  applicable  to  such   construction,
  reconstruction,  rehabilitation,  alteration  or improvement. No county,
  city, town or village shall have power to modify or change the drawings,
  plans  or   specifications   for   the   construction,   reconstruction,
  rehabilitation,  or improvement of any such project or the construction,
  plumbing, heating, lighting or other mechanical branch of work necessary
  to complete the work in question, nor to require that any  person,  firm
  or  corporation employed on any such work shall perform any such work in
  any other or different manner than  that  provided  by  such  plans  and
  specifications, nor to require that any such person, firm or corporation
  obtain   any   other   or  additional  authority,  approval,  permit  or
  certificate from such county, city, town or village as  a  condition  of
  doing such work, nor shall any condition whatever be imposed by any such
  county,  city,  town  or village in relation to the work being done, and
  the doing of any such  work  by  any  person,  firm  or  corporation  in
  accordance  with  the  terms  of such drawings, plans, specifications or
  contracts shall not subject said person,  firm  or  corporation  to  any
  liability  or penalty, civil or criminal, other than as may be stated in
  such contracts or incidental to  the  proper  enforcement  thereof;  nor
  shall  any  county, city, town or village have power to require that any
  subsidiary of the New York state urban development corporation,  or  any
  lessee  therefrom  or successor in interest thereto, obtain any other or
  additional authority, approval, permit, certificate  or  certificate  of
  occupancy  from  such  county,  city,  town or village as a condition of
  owning, using, maintaining, operating or occupying any project acquired,
  constructed,  reconstructed,  rehabilitated  or  improved  by  any  such
  subsidiary of the New York state urban development corporation.




   * §  576-c.  Loans to housing development companies by a municipality.
  1. In addition to the powers granted to municipalities pursuant to  this
  article,  a  municipality,  acting  by  its supervising agency, may make
  loans for the purposes of acquisition, rehabilitation or construction of
  dwelling  accommodations  to  a  non-profit  housing  development   fund
  company,  a  wholly-owned  subsidiary of such company, a partnership the
  controlling interest of which is held by  such  company  and  which  has
  agreed  to  limit  profits  or rate of return of investors in accordance
  with a formula established or approved by  the  company,  or  a  private
  developer  which  has  agreed  to  limit  profits  or  rate of return of
  investors in accordance with a formula established or  approved  by  the
  company,  which agrees to provide housing accommodations exclusively for
  persons and families of low income, at least thirty percent of whom  are
  referred  to  it  by  a  municipality  and  have  prior to their initial
  occupancy in such accommodations resided in emergency shelter facilities
  operated by or on behalf of the municipality or  who  are  otherwise  in
  need  of emergency shelter as determined by the municipality, providing,
  however, that in the case of a building  acquired  by  such  a  company,
  subsidiary,  partnership, or developer the obligation to provide housing
  accommodations for such persons shall be  applicable  only  to  dwelling
  accommodations which are or become vacant after the date of acquisition.
  Such  loans  may  be  made  for such period of time and pursuant to such
  terms and conditions as may be required by the municipality,  including,
  but not limited to, terms and conditions providing that the lien created
  by  the  note and mortgage, and, if applicable, any regulatory agreement
  executed by the owner and  such  municipality  or  restrictive  covenant
  approved  by  a  supervising  agency,  may  be  recorded  in an equal or
  subordinate position, or subsequently made equal or  subordinate,  to  a
  lien  recorded  by  any private lender against the dwelling aided by the
  loan made pursuant to this article, and the supervising agency  of  such
  municipality  may provide that the amount of the note and mortgage shall
  automatically be reduced to zero in five equal decrements commencing  on
  the  tenth  year  after the initial occupancy date, provided that, as of
  the date of such reduction, such accommodations have been  and  continue
  to  be  owned and operated in a manner consistent with an agreement with
  the municipality contained in such note and mortgage to provide  housing
  for  such  persons.  Notwithstanding  such provision as contained in the
  note and mortgage, the loan shall be reduced to zero only if,  prior  to
  or   simultaneously  with  delivery  of  such  note  and  mortgage,  the
  supervising agency made a  written  determination  that  such  reduction
  would  be  necessary  to  ensure the continued affordability or economic
  viability of such housing  project.  Such  written  determination  shall
  document the basis upon which the loan was determined to be eligible for
  evaporation.
    2.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions of, or any regulation promulgated
  pursuant to, the emergency housing rent control law, the local emergency
  housing rent  control  act,  the  emergency  tenant  protection  act  of
  nineteen  seventy-four,  or any local law enacted pursuant thereto, upon
  completion of the rehabilitation of  any  building  used  primarily  for
  residential  purposes,  in  a  jurisdiction in which rents are regulated
  pursuant to any of the above laws and which is aided by a loan  pursuant
  to  this  section made by the municipality, the supervising agency shall
  establish the initial rent for each  rental  dwelling  unit  within  the
  building.   All   dwelling  units  within  the  building  subsequent  to
  establishment of initial  rents  by  the  supervising  agency  shall  be
  subject  to  either  the  rent  stabilization  law  of  nineteen hundred
  sixty-nine  or  the  emergency  tenant  protection   act   of   nineteen
  seventy-four,  or  both,  if  applicable to the locality. The tenants in


 occupancy of such a dwelling unit regulated pursuant to any of the above
  laws shall be offered a choice of a one or two year lease at the initial
  rents established by the supervising agency notwithstanding any contrary
  provisions   of,   or   regulations   adopted   pursuant  to,  the  rent
  stabilization law of  nineteen  hundred  sixty-nine  and  the  emergency
  tenant  protection  act of nineteen seventy-four. The supervising agency
  shall cause all tenants in occupancy of each dwelling unit  affected  by
  the  provisions  of  this  subdivision  to  be  notified  of and have an
  opportunity  to  comment  on  the  contemplated   rehabilitation.   Such
  notification  shall advise such tenants of the approximate expected rent
  increase and the subsequent availability of a one  or  two  year  lease.
  Such  notification  and  opportunity to comment shall be provided before
  the rehabilitation and again after the  construction  is  completed  and
  before the establishment of the initial rents.
    3.  The  supervising  agency shall use its best efforts to ensure that
  activities carried out pursuant to this article are structured so as  to
  minimize  the  likelihood  of  any  involuntary economic displacement of
  tenants who reside in multiple dwellings which are the subject  of  such
  activities. However, if temporary physical displacement is required as a
  direct result of rehabilitation work which is performed in such multiple
  dwelling  receiving  a loan pursuant to this article, suitable temporary
  relocation arrangements shall be provided.
    * NB Effective until July 1, 2024


    * § 576-c. Loans to housing development companies by  a  municipality.
  In  addition  to  the  powers granted to municipalities pursuant to this
  article, a municipality, acting by  its  supervising  agency,  may  make
  loans for the purposes of acquisition, rehabilitation or construction of
  dwelling   accommodations  to  a  non-profit  housing  development  fund
  company, a wholly-owned subsidiary of such company,  a  partnership  the
  controlling  interest  of  which  is  held by such company and which has
  agreed to limit profits or rate of return  of  investors  in  accordance
  with  a  formula  established  or  approved by the company, or a private
  developer which has agreed  to  limit  profits  or  rate  of  return  of
  investors  in  accordance  with a formula established or approved by the
  company, which agrees to provide housing accommodations exclusively  for
  persons  and families of low income, at least thirty percent of whom are
  referred to it by  a  municipality  and  have  prior  to  their  initial
  occupancy in such accommodations resided in emergency shelter facilities
  operated  by  or  on  behalf of the municipality or who are otherwise in
  need of emergency shelter as determined by the municipality,  providing,
  however,  that  in  the  case  of a building acquired by such a company,
  subsidiary, partnership, or developer the obligation to provide  housing
  accommodations  for  such  persons  shall be applicable only to dwelling
  accommodations which are or become vacant after the date of acquisition.
  Such loans may be made for such period of  time  and  pursuant  to  such
  terms  and conditions as may be required by the municipality, including,
  but not limited to, terms and conditions providing that the lien created
  by the note and mortgage, and, as applicable, any  regulatory  agreement
  executed by the owner and such municipality, may be recorded in an equal
  or  subordinate  position, or subsequently made equal or subordinate, to
  the lien recorded by any private lender against the  dwelling  aided  by
  the  loan  made  pursuant to this article, and the supervising agency of
  such municipality may provide that the amount of the note  and  mortgage
  shall  automatically  be  reduced  to  zero  in  five  equal  decrements
  commencing on the tenth year after the initial occupancy date,  provided
  that,  as  of  the date of such reduction, such accommodations have been
  and continue to be owned and operated in a  manner  consistent  with  an
  agreement  with  the municipality contained in such note and mortgage to


 provide housing for such  persons.  Notwithstanding  such  provision  as
  contained  in  the  note and mortgage, the loan shall be reduced to zero
  only if, prior to or simultaneously  with  delivery  of  such  note  and
  mortgage,  the supervising agency made a written determination that such
  reduction would be necessary to ensure the  continued  affordability  or
  economic  viability  of such housing project. Such written determination
  shall document the basis upon  which  the  loan  was  determined  to  be
  eligible for evaporation.
    * NB Effective July 1, 2024




   §  576-d.  Master  servicing  agreement. 1. The commissioner is hereby
  authorized to use the monies held in the  housing  development  fund  to
  make  advances  to  a  local  loan administrator that has entered into a
  written  master  servicing  agreement  prescribed  by  the  commissioner
  pursuant to subdivision two of this section.
    2.  The  commissioner,  in  consultation  with  the comptroller, shall
  prescribe  a  master  servicing  agreement  to  be   executed   by   the
  commissioner and local loan administrators. Such agreement shall provide
  that:  (a) any advances made to a local loan administrator shall be used
  solely for the purpose of providing loans to agricultural producers  for
  undertaking  farmworker  housing projects; (b) the total amount of loans
  made to any single agricultural producer shall not  exceed  two  hundred
  thousand  dollars  per  annum; (c) the term of any loan shall not exceed
  ten years and equal payments of principal  payable  no  less  frequently
  than  annually shall be required to be made on such loan during the term
  such loan is  outstanding  which  payments  will  liquidate  the  entire
  principal  balance  of  the  loan  over  its  term;  (d)  the local loan
  administrator is required to pay to the commissioner  for  deposit  into
  the  housing development fund all repayments including interest, if any,
  received from any agricultural producers on account of such loan, except
  for  that  portion  permitted  to  be  retained  by   the   local   loan
  administrator  as  a fee pursuant to the master servicing agreement. The
  master servicing agreement shall also set forth: (i)  the  form  of  any
  note  and security agreement to be executed by the agricultural producer
  in connection with any loan, which shall include a provision that use of
  the loan to provide housing for a family member of the borrower  or  its
  principals  shall  constitute  a  default  under  the  loan and security
  agreement; (ii) the rate of interest, if any, to be charged on any loan;
  (iii)  the  amount  of  any  fee  to  be  retained  by  the  local  loan
  administrator  for  servicing  any  loan;  (iv)  the form of application
  required to be completed by an agricultural producer for any  loan;  (v)
  the  form  of  requisition and certification to be required from a local
  loan administrator to obtain an advance of funds from the  commissioner;
  (vi) any other conditions to be imposed upon an agricultural producer as
  a  condition  of  receiving  a  loan;  (vii)  the responsibilities to be
  performed by the local loan administrator in connection with  reviewing,
  approving  and  servicing the loan and the circumstances under which the
  commissioner  may  terminate  a  master  servicing   agreement;   (viii)
  conditions  necessary  to insure prompt closing on loans for which funds
  are advanced, including payment of  interest  of  funds  from  the  time
  advanced  until  utilized;  and  (ix)  such  other  requirements  as the
  commissioner may from time to time establish by  rules  and  regulations
  consistent with the purposes of this section.
    3. (a) The commissioner shall, subject to the availability of funds as
  appropriated  by  the  legislature, advance from the housing development
  fund to a local loan administrator the amount of funds requested in  any
  requisition  within  fifteen  business  days after receipt of all of the
  following: a completed requisition for an advance of  funds;  copies  of
  any   applications  and  any  supporting  documentation  to  which  such
  requisition  pertains;  and  a  certification  from   the   local   loan
  administrator  with respect to such requisition in addition to any other
  representation  and  statement  required  by   the   commissioner.   The
  certification  from  the  local loan administrator shall state that: (i)
  the loan administrator has performed its responsibilities in  connection
  with  review  and  approval  of  applications  to which such requisition
  pertains, (ii) to the best of the local loan  administrator's  knowledge
  the  loans,  to  which  the  advances  pertain,  comply  with the master
  servicing agreement and the provisions of this section,  and  (iii)  the


 borrowers  have  demonstrated  their  ability  to  make  the  repayments
  required under the loan. In the event that funds are  not  available  or
  the   commissioner  determines  that  the  requisition,  application  or
  certification   is   defective,  it  shall  so  notify  the  local  loan
  administrator  within  fifteen  business  days  after  receipt  of   the
  requisition.
    (b)  The  commissioner  shall establish criteria for prioritizing loan
  applications in  the  event  that  the  requisitions  submitted  to  the
  commissioner  by one or more local loan administrators exceed the amount
  then available for the purposes of this  section.  Such  criteria  shall
  give  a  priority  to housing for farmworkers and take into account: (i)
  whether the farmworker housing project to which the application pertains
  is  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  non-conforming  accommodations   in
  compliance  with  the provisions of the state sanitary code or the state
  fire prevention and building code; (ii) whether the  farmworker  housing
  project  to  which  the  application pertains is the most cost effective
  approach  to  enable  the  agricultural   producer   to   construct   or
  rehabilitate  dwelling accommodations for farmworkers; (iii) whether the
  agricultural producer making application lacks the  financial  resources
  to  undertake  the  farmworker  housing project without obtaining a loan
  pursuant  to  this  section;  and  (iv)  such  other  factors   as   the
  commissioner deems relevant. In applying the criteria to be utilized for
  prioritizing  loans,  the  commissioner shall be entitled to rely on the
  information contained in the copies of the applications  submitted  with
  the requisition.




   §  576-e.  Municipal  housing  assistance  fund. 1. A municipality may
  create and establish a fund  to  be  known  as  the  "municipal  housing
  assistance  fund".  Such  a fund shall be created and established in the
  supervising agency.
    2. There may be paid into such municipal housing assistance  fund  (a)
  any  moneys  appropriated and made available by the municipality for the
  purposes of such fund, (b) notwithstanding the provisions of  the  local
  finance  law  or  any  other  provisions  of law, any moneys received in
  repayment of loans from such fund, and (c) any other moneys which may be
  available for the purpose of such fund from any other source or sources.
    3. The purpose of  such  fund  shall  be  to  make  loans  to  housing
  development  fund  companies  which  have  agreed to acquire residential
  properties by deed from the commissioner of finance  of  a  municipality
  and  to  operate  and  manage  such  properties  in  accordance  with  a
  regulatory agreement with the  municipality  until  the  properties  are
  transferred to a new owner approved by the municipality.
    4.  The supervising agency may make loans from the fund to enable such
  housing development fund companies to  pay  development  costs  and  any
  other  expenses  incurred  by  the  housing development fund company and
  approved by the supervising agency.
    5. Any housing development fund company which receives a loan pursuant
  to this section shall execute a note and regulatory agreement. The  note
  may  provide that it shall be reduced to zero over a period of continued
  compliance with either the regulatory  agreement  required  pursuant  to
  this  section  or  such  other  regulatory  agreement as the supervising
  agency shall require. The loan shall be reduced to zero only if prior to
  or simultaneously with delivery of such note, the supervising agency has
  made a written determination that such reduction would be  necessary  to
  ensure the continued affordability or economic viability of the project.
  Such  written determination shall document the basis upon which the loan
  was determined eligible for evaporation.
    6. A regulatory agreement pursuant to this section may terminate  upon
  such terms and conditions as provided by the supervising agency.
    7.  A  housing development fund company which receives a loan pursuant
  to this section shall provide in its certificate of  incorporation  that
  the  supervising  agency  shall  have  the power if in its discretion it
  determines that the company has defaulted  in  its  obligations  to  the
  municipality to appoint to the board of such corporation a number of new
  directors  which  number shall be sufficient to constitute a majority of
  the board, notwithstanding any other provisions of such  certificate  or
  of any other provision of law.




   §  577.  Tax  exemptions.  1.  (a)  The  local legislative body of any
  municipality in which a project of a housing development fund company is
  or is to be located may exempt the real property in  such  project  from
  local and municipal taxes including school taxes, other than assessments
  for local improvements, to the extent of all or part of the value of the
  property  included  in  the  completed  project. The tax exemption shall
  operate and continue for such period as may be provided  by  such  local
  legislative body, but in no event for a period of more than forty years,
  commencing  in each instance from the date on which the benefits of such
  exemption first became available and effective.
    (b) Where a municipality acts on behalf of another taxing jurisdiction
  in assessing real property for the purpose of taxation,  or  in  levying
  taxes  therefor,  the  action  of  the  local  legislative  body of such
  municipality in granting such tax exemption shall  have  the  effect  of
  exempting  the  real  property  in such project from local and municipal
  taxes  including  school  taxes,  other  than  assessments   for   local
  improvements, levied by or in behalf of both such taxing jurisdictions.
    (c)  The  local  legislative  body  of  any  municipality may grant an
  exemption under paragraph (a) of this subdivision to the  real  property
  of  a  project  of  any  entity to which it is authorized to make a loan
  pursuant to section five hundred seventy-six-c of this article.
    (d) In a city having a population of one million or more,  within  one
  hundred  twenty  days following receipt of a written submission from the
  supervising agency requesting a tax exemption pursuant to paragraph  (a)
  of  this  subdivision  for the real property containing the project of a
  housing development fund  company,  the  local  legislative  body  shall
  approve  or disapprove by resolution the requested tax exemption. If the
  local legislative body fails to take  such  action  within  one  hundred
  twenty  days  following  receipt  of  such  written submission from such
  supervising agency, then the tax exemption requested by the  supervising
  agency  shall  be  deemed  approved  pursuant  to  paragraph (a) of this
  subdivision.
    2. Any inconsistent provision of law to the contrary  notwithstanding,
  mortgages of a housing development fund company shall be exempt from the
  mortgage recording taxes imposed by article eleven of the tax law.
    2-a.   Notwithstanding  any  inconsistent  provision  of  law  to  the
  contrary, a project of a housing development fund  company  incorporated
  pursuant to the not-for-profit corporation law and this article shall be
  exempt  from  the  sales  and compensating use taxes imposed pursuant to
  article twenty-eight or twenty-nine of the tax law, provided  that  such
  housing development fund company has entered into a regulatory agreement
  with   respect   to   the  provision  of  affordable  housing  with  the
  commissioner, a state agency or authority as defined  in  this  chapter,
  the New York city department of housing preservation and development, or
  the  New  York  city  housing  development  corporation,  and  such  tax
  exemption shall continue only so long as such agreement is in force  and
  effect.
    3.  (a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one hereof, the
  real property of a state urban development corporation project acquired,
  owned, constructed,  managed  or  operated  by  a  company  incorporated
  pursuant to the not-for-profit corporation law and this article shall be
  entitled to all the benefits provided by section four hundred twenty-two
  of  the  real  property  tax  law.  The  real  property of a state urban
  development corporation project, other than a  state  urban  development
  corporation project acquired, owned, constructed, managed or operated by
  a  company  incorporated  pursuant to the not-for-profit corporation law
  and this article, shall be exempt from all local  and  municipal  taxes,
  other  than  assessments  for  local  improvements, to the extent of the


 value of the property included in such project as represents an increase
  over the  assessed  valuation  of  the  real  property,  both  land  and
  improvements, acquired for the project on the date of its acquisition by
  the  housing  development  fund company. The tax exemption shall operate
  and continue so long as the mortgage loans of such  housing  development
  fund  company are outstanding, but in no event for a period of more than
  forty years, commencing in each instance from the date when such housing
  development fund company first acquired such property. If a state  urban
  development corporation project qualifying for tax exemption pursuant to
  this  subdivision  is  sold,  with  the approval of the commissioner, to
  another housing development fund company, such successor  company  shall
  be entitled to all the benefits of this subdivision.
    (b)  In the event a state urban development corporation project is not
  subject to a state-aided, federally-aided or municipally-aided mortgage,
  as defined herein, it shall receive  the  tax  exemption  granted  under
  paragraph  (a)  of  this  subdivision  only  if  it  has  entered into a
  regulatory agreement with the  commissioner  pursuant  to  section  five
  hundred  seventy-six  of  this  article,  and  such  tax exemption shall
  continue only so long as such agreement is in force and effect.




§  577-a.  Adjusting fair rental equalization for the elderly. (a) For
  the purpose of enabling lower income  elderly  persons  to  continue  in
  occupancy without paying rentals in excess of a fair proportion of their
  income, any municipality having a population of less than one million is
  authorized  to  make  and  to  contract  to  make periodic payments to a
  housing  development  fund  company  in  an  amount  not  exceeding  the
  difference  between  the  rent  or  carrying  charges  for the dwellings
  occupied by such  lower  income  persons  and  one-third  of  their  net
  probable  aggregate  annual  income, where such rent or carrying charges
  exceed such one-third of income; provided that the aggregate  amount  of
  periodic  payments  to be made in accordance with contracts entered into
  by the municipality during any fiscal  year  thereof  pursuant  to  this
  section,  subdivision  nine  of section thirty-one, subdivision seven of
  section eighty-five-a,  and  section  one  hundred  twenty-six  of  this
  chapter shall not exceed the aggregate amount of all real property taxes
  paid  or  payable  during  such  fiscal  year by all companies organized
  pursuant to this article, article II, article IV, and article V of  this
  chapter  and  the  aggregate estimated receipts of all such companies in
  such fiscal year from rental surcharges collected  or  to  be  collected
  pursuant to this chapter.
    (b)  Such  payments  shall  be made only where over-income tenants are
  required to pay surcharges to the municipality.
    (c) Such payments shall be made only on account of a person or  family
  in  occupancy  where the head of the household is sixty-two years of age
  or older and is not a recipient of public  assistance  pursuant  to  the
  social  services law, and where the net probable aggregate annual income
  of the person or family in occupancy does not exceed six  thousand  five
  hundred  dollars  a year.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision
  twenty-nine of section two  of  this  chapter,  net  probable  aggregate
  annual  income  as used in this subdivision shall mean the annual income
  of family members from all sources after deduction of federal, state and
  city income taxes; provided  that  any  municipality  may  provide  that
  increases  in  benefits  under the social security act which take effect
  after such person or family has assumed occupancy  shall  not  be  taken
  into account.
    (d) A company having a contract with the municipality pursuant to this
  subdivision  may  not  collect  from persons or families in occupancy on
  whose account such payments are  made  any  rentals  in  excess  of  the
  amounts specified in such contract.


   §  577-b.  Payment  of arrears for certain taxes. 1. The term eligible
  property as used in this section shall mean a multiple dwelling  located
  in  a  city  with  a  population  of  one million or more and owned by a
  company established pursuant to this article which:
    (a) is controlled  by  and  provides  housing  accommodations  to  its
  resident  shareholders  or  members  or agrees, on terms approved by the
  supervising agency, to offer to the residents of the  multiple  dwelling
  the opportunity to acquire ownership and control of the company; and
    (b) on January first, two thousand two, had outstanding municipal real
  estate taxes relating to any period prior to January first, two thousand
  one.
    2.  (a)  The supervising agency may offer to each company that owns an
  eligible property an opportunity to enter into  a  regulatory  agreement
  pursuant  to  which  the  obligation to pay arrears of real estate taxes
  attributable to such property, including interest and penalties if  any,
  shall be dealt with as provided in such agreement.
    (b) The regulatory agreement shall include the following provisions:
    (1) a term of thirty years;
    (2)  that  the  suspension  of  the  obligation  to  pay arrears shall
  continue provided that the  company  complies  with  the  terms  of  the
  regulatory agreement;
    (3)  that all suspended arrears including interest and penalties shall
  be forgiven provided that  the  company  complies  with  the  regulatory
  agreement for an initial period of ten years;
    (4)  that portions of the suspended arrears may be forgiven during the
  initial ten year period  pursuant  to  a  schedule  established  in  the
  regulatory agreement;
    (5) that any suspended obligations which have not been forgiven may be
  reinstated if the company fails to comply with the regulatory agreement;
    (6) that all new municipal charges must be paid in a timely fashion;
    (7)  that the supervising agency shall be authorized to assume control
  of the company if the company fails to comply with the agreement;
    (8) that the company must comply with customary  financial  and  other
  reporting requirements; and
    (9) that the company shall be required to increase maintenance charges
  or  impose  assessments  to  insure that the company can provide for its
  obligations.
    (c) The regulatory agreement shall also include terms to  address  the
  following  matters  as  well  as  any  other issues that the supervising
  agency deems appropriate:
    (1) establishment of a structured reserve fund;
    (2) restrictions to insure  sales  and  rentals  only  to  low  income
  individuals and families;
    (3)  establishment  of a transfer fee payable to the company's reserve
  fund upon the sale of any units;
    (4) restrictions on subletting;
    (5) primary residence requirements; and
    (6) certification of annual elections.
    (d) The regulatory agreement may contain such alterations to the terms
  of the original disposition as the supervisory agency deems necessary.




   §  578.  Advisory  and  educational services. The commissioner and the
  supervising agency are each hereby  authorized  to  provide  to  housing
  development  fund  companies  such  advisory, consultative, training and
  educational services as will assist them to become eligible borrowers in
  accordance with the  provisions  of  this  article.  Such  advisory  and
  educational  services  may  include  but  are not necessarily limited to
  technical and professional  planning  assistance,  the  preparation  and
  promulgation  of  organizational,  planning and development outlines and
  guides, consultation services, training courses, seminars and  lectures,
  the  preparation  and  dissemination  of  newsletters  and other printed
  materials, and the services of field representatives.  The  commissioner
  and the supervising agency are each also authorized to provide advisory,
  consultative,  technical,  training  and educational services to housing
  development fund companies in the management of  such  projects  and  to
  residents thereof, including but not limited to home management and such
  other  training  and  advisory  services  as  may  be  necessary for the
  efficient and harmonious management of the project.




   §  579.  Rules  and  regulations. The commissioner and the supervising
  agency shall each have power to make rules and regulations to carry  out
  their  respective  powers  and  duties  pursuant  to this article and to
  effectuate the purposes thereof.




   §  580. Examination by comptroller. 1. The comptroller, or his legally
  authorized representative, is hereby authorized and empowered from  time
  to  time  to  examine the books and accounts of the division relating to
  the housing development fund, and from time to time, not less than  once
  every  five  years,  to  examine  the books and accounts of each housing
  development fund company which received or is to receive aid  from  such
  fund  pursuant  to  this article, including its receipts, disbursements,
  contracts, leases, loans, and any other moneys relating to its financial
  operation, and from time to time, to examine the books and  accounts  of
  any  local loan administrator which has received advances from such fund
  pursuant to this article, but only insofar as those books  and  accounts
  relate to such advances and to the local loan administrator's compliance
  with  the  master  servicing  agreement entered into pursuant to section
  five hundred seventy-six-d of this article.
    2. The comptroller of a municipality or, in the case of a municipality
  having no comptroller, the chief fiscal officer of such municipality, is
  hereby authorized and empowered from time to time to examine  the  books
  and accounts relating to the municipal housing development fund, and the
  supervising agency is hereby authorized and empowered from time to time,
  not  less  than once every five years, to examine the books and accounts
  of each housing development fund company which received or is to receive
  aid from such fund, including its  receipts,  disbursements,  contracts,
  leases, loans, and any other moneys relating to its financial operation.




   §  581.  Inconsistent  provisions in other laws superseded. Insofar as
  the provisions of this article are inconsistent with the  provisions  of
  any other law, general, special or local, the provisions of this article
  shall be controlling.




   §  582.  Separability  clause.  If  any  clause,  sentence, paragraph,
  section or part of this article  shall  be  adjudged  by  any  court  of
  competent  jurisdiction  to  be  invalid such judgment shall not affect,
  impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its
  operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section  or  part  thereof
  directly  involved  in the controversy in which such judgment shall have
  been rendered.




   §  600.  Construction.  This  chapter  shall be construed liberally to
  effectuate the purposes hereof, and the enumeration of  specific  powers
  in this chapter shall not operate to restrict the meaning of any general
  grant  of  power  contained  in  this chapter or to exclude other powers
  comprehended in such general grant.




   §  601.  Separability  clause.  If  any  clause,  sentence, paragraph,
  section or part of this chapter  shall  be  adjudged  by  any  court  of
  competent  jurisdiction  to  be invalid, such judgment shall not affect,
  impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined in its
  operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph, section  or  part  thereof
  directly  involved  in the controversy in which such judgment shall have
  been rendered.




   §  602.  Prohibition  against  discrimination. For all the purposes of
  this chapter, no person shall, because of race, creed, color or national
  origin, be subjected to any discrimination.




   §  603.  Pending  actions  or  proceedings.  This  chapter or anything
  therein contained shall not affect or abate  any  actions,  proceedings,
  civil  or  criminal,  pending  at  the time when this chapter shall take
  effect, brought by, for or against the  state,  the  state  division  of
  housing,  any municipality, limited-profit housing company, the New York
  state housing  finance  agency,  limited-dividend  housing  corporation,
  redevelopment  company,  urban  redevelopment  corporation  or  mortgage
  facilities corporation, under or in pursuance of the provisions  of  the
  laws  repealed  by this chapter; but all such actions or proceedings may
  be continued, prosecuted, conducted and completed as if such  laws  were
  not repealed but continued to be fully effective.




   §  604.  Saving  clause.  1.  The  repeal  of the laws as specified in
  section six hundred five and any other provisions of this chapter, shall
  not affect or impair any contract or remedy, or  any  act  done  or  any
  right   accruing,  accrued  or  acquired,  taxes,  tax  obligations,  or
  exemptions from  taxation,  the  validity  of  or  rights  as  to  taxes
  collected  or  proceeds  thereof  or the validity as to any acts done or
  rights or exemptions accruing, accrued or acquired under any  tax  laws,
  general,  local  or  special,  or  any penalty, forfeiture or punishment
  under or by virtue of the laws so repealed and in existence prior to the
  time when this chapter or any section thereof takes effect, but the same
  may be asserted, enforced, prosecuted or inflicted and for such purposes
  all of the laws  specified  in  section  six  hundred  five  are  hereby
  continued in full force and effect.
    2.  An  act of the legislature of the years nineteen hundred sixty-one
  or sixty-two which, in form, amends or repeals or purports to  amend  or
  repeal  any provision or provisions of articles seven, nine, ten, twelve
  or twelve-a, of the public housing law, chapter eight hundred forty-five
  of the  laws  of  nineteen  hundred  forty-two,  chapter  eight  hundred
  ninety-two  of  the  laws  of nineteen hundred forty-one or chapter five
  hundred sixty-four of the laws of  nineteen  hundred  fifty-six,  as  in
  force  immediately  prior  to  March  first, nineteen hundred sixty-two,
  shall be deemed and construed as an amendment or repeal, as the case may
  be, of the  corresponding  provision  or  provisions  of  such  article,
  section or law, as contained in this chapter.
    3.  An  act of the legislature of the years nineteen hundred sixty-one
  or sixty-two which adds, or purports to add a new  section,  subdivision
  or  other  provision  of  law  to  articles  seven, nine, ten, twelve or
  twelve-a of the public housing law, chapter eight hundred forty-five  of
  the laws of nineteen hundred forty-two, chapter eight hundred ninety-two
  of  the  laws  of  nineteen  hundred  forty-one, or chapter five hundred
  sixty-four of the laws  of  nineteen  hundred  fifty-six,  as  in  force
  immediately  prior  to March first, nineteen hundred sixty-two, shall be
  deemed and construed as having been added to this chapter and  shall  be
  given full effect according to its context as if the same had been added
  expressly and in terms to this chapter and shall be deemed and construed
  to  have  been  inserted  in this chapter in the appropriate position in
  regard to and as modifying the effect of the corresponding provision  or
  provisions of this chapter.
    4.  Reference  in  any  act  of  the legislature of the years nineteen
  hundred sixty-one or sixty-two to articles seven, nine, ten,  twelve  or
  twelve-a  of the public housing law, chapter eight hundred forty-five of
  the laws of nineteen hundred forty-two, chapter eight hundred ninety-two
  of the laws of  nineteen  hundred  forty-one  or  chapter  five  hundred
  sixty-four  of  the laws of nineteen hundred fifty-six, or any provision
  or provisions thereof, as in force immediately  prior  to  March  first,
  nineteen  hundred  sixty-two,  shall be deemed and construed to refer to
  the corresponding article, section or other provision  of  this  chapter
  and  shall  be  given  full  effect  according  to  its  terms as though
  specifically referring to such corresponding article, section  or  other
  provision of this chapter.




   §  605.  Laws  repealed. Of the laws enumerated in the schedule hereto
  annexed, that portion specified in the last column is  hereby  repealed,
  except as provided in sections ninety-six and six hundred four.
 
                          SCHEDULE OF LAWS REPEALED
 
  Public Housing      Article 1        Subdivision 14-a of section 3
  Law                 Article 7        Sections 129, 130, 131, 134, 135
                      Article 9        All
 
  Laws of             Chapter          Section
       1941             892               All
       1942             845               All
       1943             234               All
       1946             673               All
       1947             840               All
       1951             190               All
       1955             407               All except section 2
       1956             564               All
       1956             832               All
       1956             877               All
       1957             218               All
       1957             334               All
       1957             608               All
       1957             750               All
       1957             971               All
       1957             973               Sections 1, 2, 3 and 4
       1958             364               All
       1958             505               Sections 1 and 2
       1958             656               All
       1958             904               All
       1958             957               Section 1
       1959             486               All
       1959             675               Sections 1, 2, 3 and 4
       1959             727               All
       1960             116               Sections 1 and 2
       1960             359               Sections 4, 5 and 6
       1960             669               All
       1960             670               Sections 1, 2 and 3
       1960             671               All except section 3
       1960             694               All
       1960             892               Section 3
       1960             959               Section 2
       1960             990               All






   §  606. Extension of the time for payment and suspension of payment of
  real estate tax liens. 1. As used in this  section  the  term  abandoned
  multiple  dwelling  shall  mean  a  class A or class B multiple dwelling
  containing in the aggregate not less than three dwelling units, at least
  eighty percent of the occupied dwelling units of which are  occupied  by
  persons  or  families  of  low  income  as defined in subdivision ten of
  section twelve of this chapter and which the  supervising  agency  shall
  find has been abandoned by the owner or owners thereof. Any such finding
  shall be based on one or more of the following conditions:
    (a)  Failure  to  make any payments in respect of real estate taxes on
  said multiple dwelling for twelve  months  or  more,  and  a  continuing
  failure  to maintain essential services, or failure to remove violations
  of the local housing maintenance code or other  statutes  applicable  to
  multiple  dwellings,  where,  as  a  result  of  either such failure the
  multiple dwelling has become dangerous to the life, health and safety of
  its occupants; or
    (b) Failure to make any payments in respect of real  estate  taxes  on
  said  multiple dwelling for twelve months or more and failure to attempt
  to collect rent from a majority of the tenants in  lawful  occupancy  of
  dwelling  units  in  such  multiple  dwelling  for  a  period  of  three
  consecutive months or more; or
    (c) The entry of a judgment in favor of the petitioning tenants  in  a
  proceeding  instituted  pursuant to article seven-A of the real property
  actions and proceedings law, and the  failure  by  the  owner  or  other
  respondent to secure the removal of the administrator appointed pursuant
  to   such   judgment  within  ninety  days  after  his  appointment  and
  qualification; or
    (d) The entry or filing of an order appointing a receiver pursuant  to
  section three hundred nine of the multiple dwelling law or any other law
  authorizing  the appointment of a municipality or any agency or official
  thereof as receiver of a multiple dwelling, and the failure by the owner
  or other party entitled thereto to secure the removal  or  discharge  of
  such receiver within ninety days thereafter.
    2.  Whenever  a  housing  project  (i)  of  a housing development fund
  company organized pursuant to the provisions of article eleven  of  this
  chapter,  (ii)  of  a  company  organized  pursuant to the provisions of
  article two, four or five of this chapter, (iii) of a company  or  owner
  aided  by  article  three,  eight,  twelve,  fourteen or fifteen of this
  chapter, or (iv) is to be financed by a mortgage made or insured by  the
  federal  government  or  any  agency  or  instrumentality  thereof  or a
  mortgage loan entered into in  conjunction  with  a  housing  assistance
  payments  contract  in  connection  with new construction or substantial
  rehabilitation pursuant to section eight of the  United  States  Housing
  Act  of  1937,  as amended, is premised upon the acquisition, ownership,
  rehabilitation and management of an abandoned multiple dwelling, as said
  term is defined in subdivision one  of  this  section,  the  supervising
  agency  may,  subject  to  the  requirements of subdivision four of this
  section, enter into an agreement with such  housing  company  or  owner,
  which  agreement  shall  provide  for  one or more of the following with
  respect to accrued real estate tax liens and municipal  charges  arising
  by  operation  of  law  upon  the  properties  upon which such abandoned
  multiple dwelling is located:
    (a) The extension of the time for  the  payment  of  all  or  part  of
  accrued real estate tax liens and municipal charges arising by operation
  of law by spreading the payment thereof over a period or periods of time
  to  commence  presently  or  at some future time, but in no event beyond
  forty years from the date of such agreement;


   (b) The elimination of interest and penalties on all or  part  of  the
  unpaid  real estate tax liens and municipal charges arising by operation
  of law;
    (c)  The  suspension  of  the payment of all or a part of accrued real
  estate tax liens and municipal charges arising by operation of law for a
  period not to exceed forty years from the date of such agreement;
    (d) The elimination of all or part of accrued real  estate  tax  liens
  and  municipal  charges  arising  by  operation  of law provided that in
  consideration of such  elimination  the  municipality  may  require  the
  housing  company to convey to it by deed an indefeasibly vested interest
  in the real property of the project, the value of  which  shall  be  set
  forth in such agreement but shall in no event be less than the amount of
  real  estate tax liens and municipal charges arising by operation of law
  eliminated, to take effect as provided therein but not later than  forty
  years from the date thereof.
    3.  No  such  agreement  for the extension or suspension of payment or
  elimination of accrued real  estate  tax  liens  and  municipal  charges
  arising  by operation of law shall be entered into until the supervising
  agency shall first have made written findings supported by  satisfactory
  evidence that:
    (a)  The  project  is  an  abandoned  multiple dwelling, as defined in
  subdivision one of this section, and the owner  who  so  abandoned  such
  dwelling  has  no  direct  or  indirect interest or participation in the
  project; and
    (b) The housing company has available or has a reasonable  expectation
  of obtaining from public or private sources, or both, adequate financing
  to acquire and rehabilitate the property; and
    (c)  The  housing company possesses or has given satisfactory evidence
  of its ability and intention  to  employ  adequate  competent  personnel
  capable  of  rehabilitating, supervising the rehabilitation and managing
  and  operating  the  property  in  accordance  with  the  standards  and
  conditions prescribed by this section and by the supervising agency; and
    (d)  The  proposed  rehabilitation  will effectuate the removal of all
  housing and other violations of record against the property as  well  as
  all  incipient  violations  disclosed  by inspections of the supervising
  agency and other agencies of the municipality charged  with  enforcement
  of   applicable   statutes   and  ordinances  prescribing  standards  of
  construction and housing maintenance and will result in the  removal  of
  all unsafe and unsanitary conditions; and
    (e)  The  proposed  rehabilitation  will not require the removal of or
  relocation  of  any  residential  tenants  in  occupancy,   other   than
  temporarily,  during  the period of construction, in which case suitable
  arrangements have been made for such temporary relocation; and
    (f) In order for the housing company to acquire the  property  and  to
  rehabilitate,  operate and maintain the same as provided herein, accrued
  real estate tax liens and municipal charges arising by operation of  law
  affecting  the  property  must  be extended, suspended or eliminated, in
  whole or in part, as provided in subdivision two of this section,  which
  finding  shall  set  forth  the  exact amount of accrued real estate tax
  liens and municipal charges arising by operation of law  and  set  forth
  full  details  as  to  the extension, suspension and elimination thereof
  required in order for the rents or carrying  charges  to  be  fixed  and
  established  by the supervising agency or as otherwise provided pursuant
  to the provisions of article two,  three,  four,  five,  eight,  eleven,
  twelve,  fourteen  or  fifteen  of this chapter, or in connection with a
  mortgage made or insured by the federal  government  or  any  agency  or
  instrumentality  thereof  or a mortgage loan entered into in conjunction
  with a housing assistance  payments  contract  in  connection  with  new


 construction  or substantial rehabilitation pursuant to section eight of
  the United States Housing Act of 1937,  as  amended,  whichever  may  be
  applicable,  and  shall further contain the calculations and assumptions
  upon  which  such  finding  is  based and shall state that the projected
  rents or carrying charges are as  high  as  the  present  occupants  can
  reasonably  afford,  and  as can reasonably be charged and collected for
  comparable housing accommodations  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the
  abandoned multiple dwelling; and
    (g)  The  abandoned  multiple dwelling is located in a deteriorated or
  deteriorating   neighborhood   or   one   imminently   threatened   with
  deterioration,  and that unless the project is carried out, the property
  will become unsafe and unfit for continued human habitation in the  near
  future, and that by reason of its present and probable future condition,
  the property is exerting or will in the near future, exert a deleterious
  influence  upon  the  block  in which it is located and upon the blocks,
  neighborhood and area immediately surrounding and adjacent thereto.
    4. The agreement, with respect to a housing development fund  company,
  shall  contain  all  of  the provisions required by section five hundred
  seventy-six of this chapter, and with regard  to  any  housing  company,
  including  such  housing  development  fund  company, shall contain such
  other provisions as may be approved by the local legislative body.
    5. (a) An agreement authorized by subdivisions two and  four  of  this
  section  shall  be  submitted  by  the  supervising  agency to the local
  legislative body of the municipality in  which  the  project  is  to  be
  located,  which  body  may determine to extend, suspend and/or eliminate
  the payment of all or any part of the accrued real estate tax liens  and
  municipal  charges  arising  by operation of law on the real property in
  such project, but in no  event  beyond  the  limitations  set  forth  in
  subdivision   two   of   this  section.  The  extension,  suspension  or
  elimination of real estate tax liens and municipal  charges  arising  by
  operation  of  law  may  include  all accrued local and municipal taxes,
  including assessments, water and  sewer  rents  and  sewer  charges  and
  special  ad valorem levies and all emergency repair levies but shall not
  include any taxes or municipal charges accruing in respect of any parcel
  for any period commencing after a date fixed by  the  local  legislative
  body,  such  date being not later than the projected date of substantial
  completion of the  rehabilitation  of  the  building  situated  on  such
  parcel.
    (b)   Where   the  municipality  acts  on  behalf  of  another  taxing
  jurisdiction in assessing real property for the purpose of taxation,  or
  in  levying  taxes  therefor, the determination of the local legislative
  body in granting such extension, suspension or  elimination  shall  have
  the  effect  of  extending,  suspending  or eliminating the accrued real
  estate tax liens against the real property in such project to the extent
  and subject to the provisions of paragraph (a) of this subdivision.




   § 607. Rent regulation of multiple dwellings rehabilitated with a loan
  granted  pursuant  to section three hundred twelve of the housing act of
  nineteen hundred sixty-four. 1.   In cities with  a  population  of  one
  million or more, upon completion of rehabilitation of a class A multiple
  dwelling,  which  is  aided  by  a  loan  made pursuant to section three
  hundred twelve of the housing act of nineteen  hundred  sixty-four,  the
  agency  shall  establish  the initial rent for each rental dwelling unit
  within the rehabilitated or converted multiple dwelling  notwithstanding
  the  provisions  of,  or  any  regulation  promulgated  pursuant to, the
  emergency housing rent control law, the  local  emergency  housing  rent
  control   act,   the   emergency   tenant  protection  act  of  nineteen
  seventy-four, the local rent stabilization law or any local law  enacted
  pursuant thereto. After the agency has set the initial rents, all rental
  dwelling units within such rehabilitated or converted multiple dwellings
  shall  become  subject to the rent stabilization law of nineteen hundred
  sixty-nine.
    2. The occupant in  possession  of  such  a  dwelling  unit  when  the
  multiple  dwelling  is  made  subject  to  the rent stabilization law of
  nineteen hundred sixty-nine shall be offered a choice of a  one  or  two
  year   lease   at   the   initial   rents   established  by  the  agency
  notwithstanding any  contrary  provisions  of,  or  regulations  adopted
  pursuant  to,  the rent stabilization law of nineteen hundred sixty-nine
  and the emergency tenant protection act of nineteen seventy-four.
    3. Prior to establishing initial rents  the  agency  shall  cause  all
  tenants  in  occupancy  of such multiple dwelling to be notified of, and
  have an opportunity to comment on, the contemplated rehabiliation.  Such
  notification  shall advise such tenants of the approximate expected rent
  increase and the subsequent availability of a one  or  two  year  lease.
  Such  notification  and  opportunity to comment shall be provided before
  the rehabilitation and again after  the  construction  is  complete  and
  before the establishment of the initial rents.
    4. For the purposes of this section, "multiple dwelling" shall include
  any  class  A  multiple  dwelling  having three or more units, and shall
  include multiple family garden-type maisonette dwelling complexes  under
  single  ownership  having  common facilities such as a sewer line, water
  main and heating plant notwithstanding the  fact  that  certificates  of
  occupancy  were  issued  for  portions  thereof  as  one  or  two family
  dwellings.
    5. For the  purposes  of  this  section,  the  meaning  of  the  terms
  "agency",  "conversion", "non-residential property" and "rehabilitation"
  shall be the meaning provided pursuant to section eight hundred  one  of
  this chapter.
    6.  The  agency  may promulgate supplementary rules and regulations to
  carry out the provisions of this  section,  not  inconsistent  with  the
  provisions of this section.




   §  608.  Rent  regulation of rehabilitated multiple dwellings aided by
  certain federal  housing  assistance  programs.  1.  In  cities  with  a
  population  of one million or more, upon completion of rehabilitation of
  a class A multiple dwelling which is aided by a  mortgage  loan  entered
  into  in  conjunction  with  a  housing  assistance payments contract in
  connection with moderate rehabilitation pursuant to section eight of the
  United States  housing  act  of  1937,  as  amended,  the  agency  shall
  establish  the  initial  rent  for  each rental dwelling unit within the
  rehabilitated  or  converted  multiple  dwelling   notwithstanding   the
  provisions  of, or any regulation promulgated pursuant to, the emergency
  housing rent control law, the local emergency housing rent control  act,
  the  emergency tenant protection act of nineteen seventy-four, the local
  rent stabilization law or any local law enacted pursuant thereto.  After
  the  agency  has set the initial rents, all rental dwelling units within
  such rehabilitated or converted multiple dwellings shall become  subject
  to the rent stabilization law of nineteen hundred sixty-nine.
    2.  The  occupant  in  possession  of  such  a  dwelling unit when the
  multiple dwelling is made subject  to  the  rent  stabilization  law  of
  nineteen  hundred  sixty-nine  shall be offered a choice of a one or two
  year  lease  at  the   initial   rents   established   by   the   agency
  notwithstanding  any  contrary  provisions  of,  or  regulations adopted
  pursuant to, the rent stabilization law of nineteen hundred  sixty-nine,
  and the emergency tenant protection act of nineteen seventy-four.
    3.  Prior  to  establishing  initial  rents the agency shall cause all
  tenants in occupancy of such mulitple dwelling to be  notified  of,  and
  have an opportunity to comment on, the contemplated rehabilitation. Such
  notification  shall advise such tenants of the approximate expected rent
  increase and the subsequent availability of a one  or  two  year  lease.
  Such  notification  and  opportunity to comment shall be provided before
  the rehabilitation and again after  the  construction  is  complete  and
  before the establishment of the initial rents.
    4. For the purposes of this section, "multiple dwelling" shall include
  any  class  A  multiple  dwelling  having three or more units, and shall
  include multiple family garden-type maisonette dwelling complexes  under
  single  ownership  having  common facilities such as a sewer line, water
  main and heating plant notwithstanding the  fact  that  certificates  of
  occupancy  were  issued  for  portions  thereof  as  one  or  two family
  dwellings.
    5. For the  purposes  of  this  section,  the  meaning  of  the  terms
  "agency",  "conversion", "non-residential property" and "rehabilitation"
  shall be the meaning provided pursuant to section eight hundred  one  of
  this chapter.
    6.  The  agency  may promulgate supplementary rules and regulations to
  carry out the provisions of this  section,  not  inconsistent  with  the
  provisions of this section.




   * §   608-a.  Rent  regulation  of  rehabilitated  multiple  dwellings
  acquired and reconveyed by the federal government. 1. For  the  purposes
  of this section:
    (a)"Agency"  shall  mean  a  department  of  housing  preservation and
  development in a city having a population of one million or more.
    (b) "Eligible property" shall mean real property  located  in  a  city
  having  a  population of one million or more that has been: (i) acquired
  by the federal government as the result of the foreclosure of a mortgage
  loan insured by the federal government, and (ii) conveyed by the federal
  government to an owner  approved  by  the  agency  for  the  purpose  of
  undertaking an eligible rehabilitation project.
    (c)  "Eligible  multiple  dwelling"  shall  mean  a  multiple dwelling
  located on eligible property that has been the subject  of  an  eligible
  rehabilitation project.
    (d) "Eligible rehabilitation project" shall mean the rehabilitation of
  an  eligible  multiple  dwelling in accordance with an agreement between
  the owner of the eligible property and the federal government.
    2. Notwithstanding the provision of,  or  any  regulation  promulgated
  pursuant to, the emergency housing rent control law, the local emergency
  housing  rent  control  act,  the  emergency  tenant  protection  act of
  nineteen seventy-four, and/or any local law  enacted  pursuant  thereto,
  upon  completion  of  an eligible rehabilitation project, the agency may
  establish the initial rent for each dwelling unit  within  the  eligible
  multiple dwelling. All dwelling units within such building subsequent to
  establishment  of  initial  rents  by the agency shall be subject to the
  emergency housing rent control law, the  local  emergency  housing  rent
  control   act,   the   emergency   tenant  protection  act  of  nineteen
  seventy-four,  and/or  any  local  law  enacted  pursuant  thereto,   if
  applicable  in  the  municipality in which such building is located, but
  only if such laws and/or acts would otherwise  apply  to  such  dwelling
  units; provided, however, that substantial rehabilitation work performed
  in the course of an eligible rehabilitation project shall not cause such
  laws  and/or  acts to cease to apply to such dwelling units. The tenants
  in occupancy of  such  dwelling  units  in  such  a  building  that  are
  regulated pursuant to such laws and/or acts shall be offered a choice of
  a  one-year  or  two-year  lease  at the initial rent established by the
  agency, notwithstanding  any  contrary  provisions  of,  or  regulations
  adopted  pursuant  to, such laws and/or acts. The agency shall cause all
  tenants in occupancy of each dwelling unit affected by this  subdivision
  to  be  notified  of  and  have  an  opportunity  to  comment  upon  the
  contemplated rehabilitation. Such notification shall advise such tenants
  of  the  approximate  expected  rent   increase   and   the   subsequent
  availability  of  a  one-year  or  two-year lease. Such notification and
  opportunity to comment shall be provided prior to  commencement  of  the
  rehabilitation  and  again  after its completion before establishment of
  the initial rents.
    3. The supervising agency shall use its best efforts  to  ensure  that
  activities  carried out pursuant to this section are structured so as to
  minimize the likelihood of  any  involuntary  economic  displacement  of
  tenants  who  reside in multiple dwellings which are the subject of such
  activities. However, if temporary physical displacement is required as a
  direct result of rehabilitation work which is performed in the course of
  the  eligible  rehabilitation  project,  suitable  temporary  relocation
  arrangements shall be provided.
    * NB Repealed June 30, 2024




   §  609.  This  act  shall  take  effect  March first, nineteen hundred
  sixty-two.




   §   610.   Rental   assistance  and  legal  regulated  rents.  1.  (a)
  Notwithstanding  the  emergency  tenant  protection  act   of   nineteen
  seventy-four   or   the  rent  stabilization  law  of  nineteen  hundred
  sixty-nine, any regulation promulgated pursuant to such act or  law,  or
  any  other provision of law, where a housing accommodation is subject to
  a regulatory agreement with  a  state  or  municipal  agency  or  public
  benefit  corporation, or a political subdivision of the state, and where
  a federal, state, or local program provides rental assistance  for  such
  housing  accommodation, such state or municipal agency or public benefit
  corporation, or political subdivision of the state, may  allow  in  such
  regulatory  agreement  the owner of such housing accommodation to charge
  and collect a rent for such housing  accommodation  that  (i)  does  not
  exceed  the  maximum  payment  standard or contract rent that the rental
  assistance program may provide for such housing accommodation, but  (ii)
  does exceed the legal regulated rent for the housing accommodation.
    (b) If any such rental assistance ends upon the vacancy of the housing
  accommodation,  the owner of such housing accommodation shall thereafter
  charge and collect a rent for such housing accommodation that  does  not
  exceed the lesser of (i) the previously established legal regulated rent
  for   such  housing  accommodation,  as  adjusted  by  the  most  recent
  applicable guidelines increases approved  by  a  rent  guidelines  board
  established  pursuant to the emergency tenant protection act of nineteen
  seventy-four and any other increases authorized by  law,  regardless  of
  when  the  previously established legal regulated rent was last charged,
  and (ii) any lower rent that is required by such regulatory agreement.
    (c) If any such rental assistance ends during  a  tenancy,  including,
  but  not  limited  to,  upon  the  renewal of a lease, the owner of such
  housing accommodation shall thereafter charge and  collect  a  rent  for
  such  housing  accommodation  that does not exceed the lesser of (i) the
  previously  established  legal   regulated   rent   for   such   housing
  accommodation,  as  adjusted  by  the  most recent applicable guidelines
  increases approved by a rent guidelines board  established  pursuant  to
  the  emergency  tenant  protection  act of nineteen seventy-four and any
  other increases authorized by law, regardless  of  when  the  previously
  established legal regulated rent was last charged, (ii) any rent charged
  to  and  paid by the tenant immediately prior to the commencement of the
  rental assistance that was less than the legal regulated rent  for  such
  housing  accommodation,  as  adjusted  by  such  most  recent applicable
  guidelines increases and any other  increases  authorized  by  law,  and
  (iii) any lower rent that is required by such regulatory agreement.
    2.  Any  rent  charged  pursuant to subdivision one of this section in
  excess of the legal regulated rent for a housing accommodation shall not
  be registered as the legal regulated  rent  pursuant  to  the  emergency
  tenant protection act of nineteen seventy-four or the rent stabilization
  law   of   nineteen  hundred  sixty-nine.  The  owner  of  such  housing
  accommodation shall continue to register the legal  regulated  rent  and
  any  preferential  rent  calculated  according  to applicable guidelines
  increases applied to the previously established legal regulated rent  or
  preferential rent, respectively, and separately register the actual rent
  charged to the tenant pursuant to subdivision one of this section.
    3.  Where  the owner of a housing accommodation charges and collects a
  rent  that  exceeds  the  legal  regulated   rent   for   such   housing
  accommodation  pursuant  to  subdivision one of this section, such owner
  shall provide every tenant of such housing accommodation with a  notice,
  attached  to  the  initial  lease  and  all renewal leases, advising the
  tenant in plain language that if  such  tenant  ceases  to  receive  the
  rental  assistance  described in subdivision one of this section for any
  reason, the rent for such  housing  accommodation  shall  be  the  legal


 regulated rent, or any lower rent as required by subdivision one of this
  section.  The  owner  shall disclose any applicable regulatory agreement
  and the applicability of this section in any  legal  proceeding  brought
  against a tenant whose rent is governed by this section.
    4. An owner of a housing accommodation who fails to adjust a rent upon
  the termination of any such rental assistance as required by subdivision
  one  of  this  section  shall  refund  to  the  tenant the amount of the
  overcharge and be liable for treble damages. The tenant shall  have  the
  right  to  recover  such  overcharges and damages from the date of their
  accrual, notwithstanding any statute of limitations  set  forth  in  the
  emergency  tenant  protection  act  of nineteen seventy-four or the rent
  stabilization law of nineteen hundred sixty-nine. The tenant  may  raise
  such  an  overcharge  as  a claim or defense in any court of appropriate
  jurisdiction, or  in  a  proceeding  at  the  division  of  housing  and
  community  renewal,  pursuant  to the emergency tenant protection act of
  nineteen seventy-four or the rent stabilization law of nineteen  hundred
  sixty-nine.
    5.  Where  a  regulatory  agreement  allows  an  owner  of  a  housing
  accommodation to charge and collect a rent for the housing accommodation
  that exceeds the legal regulated rent for such housing accommodation  in
  accordance  with subdivision one of this section, the state or municipal
  agency or public benefit corporation, or political  subdivision  of  the
  state,  that  has  executed  the  regulatory  agreement shall audit such
  owner's records at least once every three  years  to  verify  that  such
  owner is complying with the provisions of this section.




   §    611.   Rent   stabilization   and   regulatory   agreements.   1.
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, including the provisions of,
  or  any  regulation  promulgated  pursuant  to,  the  emergency   tenant
  protection act of nineteen seventy-four or the rent stabilization law of
  nineteen hundred sixty-nine, the state division of housing and community
  renewal, when supervising housing accommodations under provisions of law
  other  than the emergency tenant protection act of nineteen seventy-four
  or the rent stabilization law of nineteen hundred  sixty-nine,  the  New
  York  city  department  of housing preservation and development, the New
  York state urban development corporation, the  New  York  state  housing
  finance  agency, the New York state housing trust fund, and the New York
  city housing development corporation, or such other state  or  municipal
  agency,   political   subdivision,   public   benefit   corporation,  or
  instrumentality as the state division of housing and  community  renewal
  shall  identify, may, by agreement with an owner of a multiple dwelling,
  subject any housing accommodation  in  such  multiple  dwelling  to  the
  emergency  tenant  protection  act  of nineteen seventy-four or the rent
  stabilization law of nineteen hundred sixty-nine, or both, if applicable
  to the municipality. The requirements of such agreement shall supplement
  any requirements imposed on such housing accommodation pursuant  to  any
  other provisions of law.
    2.  Any  agreement  between  a  state  or  municipal agency, political
  subdivision, public benefit corporation, or instrumentality described in
  subdivision one of this section and an owner of a multiple dwelling that
  contains provisions that are consistent with  subdivision  one  of  this
  section  and  that is in effect as of the effective date of this section
  is and will remain valid and enforceable.




   §  612.  Compliance  monitoring.  1.  Any  supervising  agency and any
  corporate  governmental  agency  that  constitutes  a   public   benefit
  corporation  created  pursuant  to this chapter shall have the power to:
  (a) subpoena, require the attendance of and examine and  take  testimony
  under oath of such persons as it deems necessary to monitor, and enforce
  compliance with, a note, mortgage, other financing agreement, regulatory
  agreement,  deed,  land  disposition  agreement, or restrictive covenant
  with or approved by such agency  or  corporation  and  entered  into  in
  connection  with  an  action taken pursuant to this chapter, the general
  municipal law, the real property tax law, or the New  York  city  zoning
  resolution;  and  (b)  subpoena  and  require  the  production of books,
  accounts,  papers,  documents  and  other  evidence  related   to   such
  monitoring and enforcement.
    2. Any person who has been issued a subpoena, or any other requirement
  to  testify or produce books and records, pursuant to subdivision one of
  this section, shall be required to comply with such  subpoena  or  other
  requirement  within  a  reasonable  period  of  time  established by the
  supervising agency  or  public  benefit  corporation  that  issued  such
  subpoena. Each day in which a person fails to comply with such subpoena,
  or  with  any  other  such  requirement  to testify or produce books and
  records, shall constitute a separate  violation  of  this  section.  The
  civil penalty for each such violation shall be not more than two hundred
  fifty  dollars, provided that such penalty shall not apply to any period
  during which such subpoena or other requirement to  testify  or  produce
  books  and  records  is  the  subject  of  a pending judicial proceeding
  commenced prior to the expiration of the period of time  established  by
  such  supervising  agency  or  public benefit corporation for compliance
  with such subpoena or other requirement to testify or produce books  and
  records.
    3.  Any  such  supervising  agency  or  public benefit corporation may
  promulgate rules and regulations to carry out  the  provisions  of  this
  section.




   §  613.  Charges.  A municipality, or a supervising agency thereunder,
  may require the payment of charges by  an  owner  in  consideration  for
  financing,  regulation,  supervision  and audit of loans and grants made
  pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such charges shall  be  paid
  into the treasury of the municipality requiring the charges and shall be
  paid and deposited in the general fund of any such municipality.




   §  614.  Servicing  loans.  An agency may make provision in a note and
  loan agreement or by separate agreement for the performance of  loan  or
  grant  servicing  functions,  including,  but  not limited to, functions
  related to lending  or  providing  a  grant  for  construction,  as  may
  generally  be  performed by an institutional lender. Such agency may act
  in such capacity or appoint or consent to the appointment of a financial
  institution or other qualified entity, as determined by such agency,  to
  act  in  such  capacity  on behalf of such agency. Such agency may pay a
  reasonable and customary fee to  such  financial  institution  or  other
  qualified  entity appointed by such agency, or to whose appointment such
  agency provided consent, for the  performance  of  such  loan  or  grant
  servicing functions.




   §  650.  Short  title. This article shall be known and may be cited as
  the "New York city housing development corporation act."




   §  651.  Statement  of  legislative  findings  and  purpose.  1. There
  continues to exist in the city of New York a seriously inadequate supply
  of safe and sanitary dwelling accommodations within the financial  reach
  of  families  and  persons  of  low  income.  The ordinary operations of
  private  enterprise  cannot  provide  an   adequate   supply   of   such
  accommodations  at  rentals  and  carrying  charges  which  families and
  persons of low income can afford. In order to encourage  the  investment
  of  private  capital and provide such dwelling accommodations, provision
  should be made for mortgage loans  at  low  interest  rates  to  housing
  companies  which,  subject to regulation as to rents, profits, dividends
  and  disposition   of   their   property,   supply   multiple   dwelling
  accommodations,  and other facilities incidental or appurtenant thereto,
  to such families and persons. For that purpose there should be created a
  corporate governmental agency, to be known as the "New York city housing
  development corporation," which, through  the  issuance  of  its  bonds,
  notes  or other obligations to the private investing public, may attract
  a broad base of investment by the greatest number of the general  public
  and  obtain  the  funds  necessary to make or finance the making of such
  mortgage loans.
    2. There also exists in the  city  of  New  York  a  large  number  of
  multiple  dwellings which are inadequate, unsafe or insanitary and which
  can be made adequate, safe  and  sanitary  by  rehabilitation  or  other
  improvement.  Such  rehabilitation  or  improvement  cannot  readily  be
  provided by the ordinary operations of private enterprise without public
  aid in the form of low interest loans to the  owners  of  such  multiple
  dwellings.  In  order  to encourage the investment of private capital in
  such  rehabilitation  and  improvement,  the  agency  should   also   be
  empowered, through the issuance of its bonds, notes or other obligations
  to  the  private investing public, to obtain the funds necessary to make
  or finance the making of such low interest loans.
    The necessity in the public interest for  the  provisions  hereinafter
  enacted is hereby declared as a matter of legislative determination.




   §  652.  Definitions. As used or referred to in this article, unless a
  different meaning clearly appears from the context:
    1. "Corporation" shall mean the corporate governmental agency  created
  by section six hundred fifty-three of this article.
    2. "State" shall mean the state of New York.
    3. "City" shall mean the city of New York.
    4. "Mayor" shall mean the mayor of the city of New York
    5. "Comptroller" shall mean the comptroller of the city of New York.
    6. "Commissioner of finance" shall mean the commissioner of finance of
  the city of New York.
    7.  "Director  of  management  and  budget" shall mean the director of
  management and budget of the city of New York.
    8. "Department of housing preservation and development" shall mean the
  department of housing preservation and development of the  city  of  New
  York.
    9.   "Bonds"   and   "notes"   shall  mean  revenue  bonds  and  notes
  respectively, issued by the corporation pursuant to this article.
    10. "Revenues" shall mean the fees and charges made or received by the
  corporation, and all or any part of the moneys received  in  payment  of
  mortgage  loans  and  interest  thereon, including prepayments and other
  moneys received or to be received.
    11. "Operating expenses" shall mean all  costs  of  administering  the
  corporation,  including  but not limited to salaries and wages, expenses
  of administering staff  functions,  fees  of  professional  consultants,
  legal  fees,  charges  incurred  for  servicing of mortgage loans, money
  management,  office  rents,  utility   charges,   costs   of   supplies,
  furnishings,  equipment, machinery and apparatus, maintenance and repair
  of  property  and  other  expenses  incurred  in  connection  with   the
  foregoing.
    12.  "Maximum  capital reserve fund requirement" shall mean, as of any
  particular date of computation, an amount of money equal to the greatest
  of the respective amounts, for the then current  or  any  future  fiscal
  year of the corporation, of annual debt service of the corporation, such
  annual  debt service for any fiscal year being the amount of money equal
  to the aggregate of (a) all interest payable during such fiscal year  on
  all  bonds  of  the  corporation  secured by the capital reserve fund or
  funds for which such requirement is to be determined, other  than  bonds
  issued  pursuant  to subdivision two of section six hundred fifty-six of
  this article, outstanding on said date  of  computation,  plus  (b)  the
  principal  amount of all bonds of the corporation secured by the capital
  reserve fund or funds for which such requirement is  to  be  determined,
  other  than  bonds  issued  pursuant  to  subdivision two of section six
  hundred  fifty-six  of  this  article  outstanding  on  said   date   of
  computation  which  matures during such fiscal year, plus (c) the amount
  of all annual sinking fund payments payable during such fiscal year with
  respect to any bonds of the corporation secured by the  capital  reserve
  fund or funds for which such requirement is to be determined, other than
  bonds  issued  pursuant  to  subdivision  two  of  section  six  hundred
  fifty-six of this article, outstanding on said date of computation.
    13. "Annual sinking fund payment"  shall  mean  the  amount  of  money
  specified  in  the  resolution  authorizing term bonds as payable into a
  sinking fund during a particular fiscal year for the retirement of  term
  bonds  which  mature  after  such fiscal year, but shall not include any
  amount payable by reason only of the maturity of a bond.
    * 14. "Lending institution" shall mean any bank or  trust  company  or
  savings  bank,  or any corporation, association or other entity which is
  owned or controlled by any one or more such bank  or  trust  company  or
  savings bank, or any savings and loan association, credit union, federal


 national mortgage association approved mortgage banker, national banking
  association, federal savings and loan association, federal savings bank,
  public  pension  fund,  pension  fund  with  assets  over  fifty million
  dollars,  insurance  company,  federal  credit  union or other financial
  institution  or  governmental  agency  of  the   United   States   which
  customarily  makes,  purchases,  holds,  insures or services residential
  mortgages.
    * NB Effective until July 23, 2025
    * 14. "Lending institution" shall mean any bank or  trust  company  or
  savings  bank,  or any corporation, association or other entity which is
  owned or controlled by any one or more such bank  or  trust  company  or
  savings  bank,  or  any  savings  and loan association, industrial bank,
  credit union, federal national mortgage  association  approved  mortgage
  banker,   national   banking   association,  federal  savings  and  loan
  association, pension fund, insurance company, federal  credit  union  or
  other  financial institution or governmental agency of the United States
  which  customarily  makes,  purchases,  holds  or  services  residential
  mortgages.
    * NB Effective July 23, 2025




   §  653.  New  York  city  housing development corporation. 1. There is
  hereby created the "New York city housing development corporation".  The
  corporation  shall  be  a  corporate  governmental  agency, perpetual in
  duration, and shall constitute a public benefit  corporation.  It  shall
  consist  of seven members as follows: the commissioner of the department
  of housing preservation and development, who shall serve as chairperson,
  the commissioner of finance, the director of management and budget,  two
  public members to be appointed by the mayor and two public members to be
  appointed  by  the  governor.  The public members first appointed by the
  mayor or the governor, as may be the case, shall serve for terms  ending
  two  and  four years respectively from January first next succeeding the
  date of their appointment. Their successors shall  serve  for  terms  of
  four years each. Members shall continue in office until their successors
  have  been appointed and qualified. The mayor or the governor shall fill
  any vacancy which may occur by reason of death, resignation or otherwise
  in a manner consistent with the original appointment.  A  public  member
  may  be  removed  by the mayor or the governor, whichever appointed such
  member, for cause, but not without an opportunity to be heard in  person
  or  by  counsel,  in such member's defense, upon not less than ten days'
  notice.
    2. (a) The members, officers and employees of the corporation shall be
  subject to the conflicts of interest provisions of  chapter  sixty-eight
  of the New York city charter and the rules promulgated thereunder by the
  New  York  city  conflicts of interest board. Such members, officers and
  employees shall not be subject to the provisions of article eighteen  of
  the  general  municipal law or the provisions of sections seventy-three,
  seventy-three-a and seventy-four of the public officers law.
    (b) The members, officers and employees of the  corporation  shall  be
  subject  to  the provisions of section 12-110 of the administrative code
  of the city of New York pertaining to the filing  of  annual  disclosure
  reports with the New York city conflicts of interest board, and for such
  purpose  the  members  shall  be deemed to be compensated members of the
  corporation.
    (c) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this or  any  other
  general,  special  or local law, no officer or employee of the state, or
  of any civil division thereof, or of any public corporation, as  defined
  in  the  general  construction law, shall be deemed to have forfeited or
  shall forfeit  such  person's  office  or  employment  or  any  benefits
  provided  under  the  retirement  and  social  security law or under any
  public retirement system  maintained  by  the  state  or  by  the  civil
  divisions thereof by reason of such person's acceptance of membership on
  or  by  virtue of such person being an officer, employee or agent of the
  corporation. A member shall not receive a salary or  other  compensation
  for  services rendered pursuant to this article but shall be entitled to
  reimbursement for such member's actual and necessary  expenses  incurred
  in  the  performance of such services. The members may engage in private
  employment or in a profession or business, unless  otherwise  prohibited
  from doing so by virtue of holding another public office, subject to the
  provisions  of  chapter sixty-eight of the New York city charter and the
  rules promulgated thereunder by the New York city conflicts of  interest
  board.
    3.  The  powers of the corporation shall be vested in and exercised by
  no less than four of the members thereof then in office. The corporation
  may delegate to  one  or  more  of  its  members,  officers,  agents  or
  employees such powers and duties as it may deem proper.
    4.  The  corporation  and its corporate existence shall continue until
  terminated by law; provided, however, that no such law shall take effect
  so long as the corporation shall have notes, bonds, or other obligations


 outstanding. Upon termination of the existence of the corporation all of
  its rights and properties shall pass to and be vested in the city.




   §  654. Powers of the corporation. Except as otherwise limited by this
  article, the corporation shall have power:
    1. To sue and be sued;
    2. To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure;
    3. To make  and  alter  by-laws  for  its  organization  and  internal
  management  and,  subject to agreements with noteholders or bondholders,
  to make rules and regulations governing the  use  of  its  property  and
  facilities;
    4.  To  make and execute contracts and all other instruments necessary
  or convenient for the exercise of its powers and  functions  under  this
  article;
    5.  To  acquire, hold and dispose of real and/or personal property for
  its corporate purposes;
    6. To appoint officers, agents and employees, prescribe  their  duties
  and qualifications and fix their compensation, subject to the provisions
  of  the  civil service law and the rules of the civil service commission
  of the city;
    7. Subject to the provisions of  any  contract  with  noteholders  and
  bondholders,  to  make  mortgage  loans, to participate with the city or
  with one or more organizations mentioned  in  section  fifteen  of  this
  chapter  in  making  mortgage loans and to undertake commitments to make
  any such mortgage loans to housing companies, including  any  subsidiary
  of  the  corporation, on the same terms and otherwise in accordance with
  the provisions of article two of  this  chapter  governing  loans  by  a
  municipality;
    * 7-a.  Subject to the provisions of any contract with noteholders and
  bondholders, to make mortgage loans, to participate  with  the  city  or
  with one or more organizations set forth in section one hundred eleven-a
  of this chapter in making mortgage loans and to undertake commitments to
  make  any such mortgage loans to redevelopment companies organized under
  article five of this chapter;
    * NB (Effective until ruling by Internal Revenue Service)
    * 7-a. Subject to the provisions of any contract with noteholders  and
  bondholders,  to  make  mortgage  loans, to participate with the city or
  with one or more organizations set forth in sections eighty-one and  one
  hundred  eleven-a  of  this  chapter  in  making  mortgage  loans and to
  undertake   commitments   to   make   any   such   mortgage   loans   to
  limited-dividend  housing companies organized under article four of this
  chapter and to redevelopment companies organized under article  five  of
  this  chapter.  Such  mortgage loans may be made to limited-dividend and
  redevelopment companies for such purposes as  may  be  approved  by  the
  corporation  including,  but  not  limited  to,  the  refinancing of the
  existing mortgage indebtedness of such companies, to provide  funds  for
  the  replacement, improvement and rehabilitation of the properties owned
  by said companies, to provide funds  for  all  costs  incurred  by  such
  companies   relating   to  the  refinancing  of  the  existing  mortgage
  indebtedness including amounts required to  establish  escrow  accounts,
  reserves  and  working  capital as determined by the corporation and for
  such other purposes as are permitted by articles four and five  of  this
  chapter;  provided,  however,  such  purposes  must  be  approved by the
  Federal Internal Revenue Service for application of  the  tax  exemption
  for  housing  bonds.  Such mortgage loans may be made by the corporation
  without any requirement that all or any portion of the loan be  used  to
  create  new  or  rehabilitated housing facilities. In furtherance of its
  powers pursuant to this subdivision and, subject to  the  provisions  of
  any  contract  with  noteholders  and  bondholders,  the corporation may
  acquire and  contract  to  acquire,  by  assignment  or  otherwise,  any
  mortgage  securing  a  loan  and  any  related  bond  or  note made by a


 limited-dividend housing company or  a  redevelopment  company  and  may
  modify  or  satisfy  such  mortgage and accept or make a new mortgage or
  mortgages and execute such other instruments as the corporation deems to
  be necessary or proper.
    * NB (Effective pending ruling by Internal Revenue Service)
    8.  Subject  to  the  provisions  of any contract with noteholders and
  bondholders,  to  make  mortgage  loans  including   participation   and
  investment with the city or with one or more corporations, organizations
  or  individuals  of  the kind mentioned in section four hundred seven of
  this chapter in making mortgage loans and to  undertake  commitments  to
  make  mortgage loans to owners of existing multiple dwellings, including
  any subsidiary of the corporation, on the same terms  and  otherwise  in
  accordance  with the provisions of article eight of this chapter, except
  that such loans shall in all cases be secured by a first lien;
    8-a. Subject to the provisions of any  contract  with  noteholders  or
  bondholders,  to  participate  with  the  city  or  one  or more private
  investors as defined in section eight hundred one  of  this  chapter  or
  with  the city and one or more such private investors in making loans in
  accordance with the provisions of article fifteen of this chapter.
    9. Subject to the provisions of  any  contract  with  noteholders  and
  bondholders,  to  sell, at public or private sale, any mortgage or other
  obligation securing a mortgage loan made by the corporation;
    10. Subject to the provisions of any  contract  with  noteholders  and
  bondholders,  in  connection  with  the  making  of  mortgage  loans and
  commitments therefor,  to  make  and  collect  such  fees  and  charges,
  including  but not limited to reimbursement of all costs of financing by
  the  corporation,  service  charges  and  insurance  premiums,  as   the
  corporation shall determine to be reasonable;
    11.  Subject  to  the  provisions of any contract with noteholders and
  bondholders, to consent to the modification, with  respect  to  rate  of
  interest,  time  of payment of any installment of principal or interest,
  security, or any other term, of any mortgage,  mortgage  loan,  mortgage
  loan  commitment,  contract  or  agreement  of  any  kind  to  which the
  corporation is a party;
    12. To foreclose any mortgage in default or  commence  any  action  to
  protect  or  enforce  any  right conferred upon it by any law, mortgage,
  contract or other agreement, and to bid for and purchase  such  property
  at  any  foreclosure or at any other sale, or acquire or take possession
  of any such property; and in such event the  corporation  may  complete,
  administer,  pay  the  principal  of  and  interest  on  any obligations
  incurred in connection with such property,  dispose  of,  and  otherwise
  deal  with,  such  property,  in  such  manner  as  may  be necessary or
  desirable to protect the interests of the corporation therein;
    12-a. To create subsidiaries,  as  provided  in  section  six  hundred
  fifty-four-a of this chapter.
    13.  To  borrow  money and to issue negotiable notes or bonds or other
  obligations and to fund or refund the  same,  and  to  provide  for  the
  rights of the holders of its obligations;
    14.  To  invest  any  funds  held in reserves or sinking funds, or any
  funds not required for immediate use or disbursement, at the  discretion
  of  the  corporation,  in  obligations  of  the  city,  state or federal
  government,  obligations  the  principal  and  interest  of  which   are
  guaranteed  by  the  city,  state  or federal government, obligations of
  agencies of the federal government  which  may  from  time  to  time  be
  legally  purchased by savings banks of the state as investments of funds
  belonging  to  them  or  in  their  control  and  be  approved  by   the
  comptroller,  obligations  in  which the comptroller of the state of New
  York is authorized to invest pursuant to  section  ninety-eight  of  the


 state  finance  law,  obligations  of  the New York city municipal water
  finance authority, participation certificates of the federal  home  loan
  mortgage  corporation  or  mortgage-backed  securities  of  the  federal
  national mortgage association.
    15.  Subject  to  the  provisions of any contract with noteholders and
  bondholders and  subject  to  the  provisions  of  section  six  hundred
  fifty-five   of  this  article,  to  purchase  notes  or  bonds  of  the
  corporation;
    16. To procure insurance against  any  loss  in  connection  with  its
  property and other assets including mortgages and mortgage loans in such
  amounts and from such insurers as it deems desirable;
    17.  To  engage  the  services  of consultants on a contract basis for
  rendering professional and technical assistance and  advice;  and  where
  the  corporation  shall join with one or more organizations mentioned in
  section fifteen, one hundred eleven-a or  four  hundred  seven  of  this
  chapter  in  making  mortgage  loans,  to  make provision, either in the
  mortgage or mortgages or by separate agreement, for the  performance  of
  such  services  as  are generally performed by a banking organization or
  insurance company which itself owns and holds a mortgage or by a trustee
  under a trust mortgage, and to consent to the appointment of  a  banking
  organization to act in such capacity;
    18.  To  contract  for  and  to accept any gifts or grants or loans of
  funds or property or fees for administering any federal  rental  subsidy
  contract  or  financial  or  other  aid  in  any form, including but not
  limited to mortgage insurance, from the federal government or any agency
  or  instrumentality  thereof,  or  from  the  state  or  any  agency  or
  instrumentality thereof, or from any other source and to comply, subject
  to  the  provisions  of  this  article,  with  the  terms and conditions
  thereof;
    19. As security for the payment of the principal of  and  interest  on
  any  bonds so issued and any agreements made in connection therewith, to
  pledge all or any part of its revenues;
    20. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter  or  of  any  other
  law, general, special or local, whenever the corporation shall find that
  the  maximum  rentals  charged  tenants  of the dwellings in any project
  financed by the corporation in whole or in part shall not be sufficient,
  together with  all  other  income  of  the  mortgagor,  to  meet  within
  reasonable  limits all necessary payments to be made by the mortgagor of
  all expenses  including  fixed  charges,  sinking  funds,  reserves  and
  dividends,  to  request  the  mortgagor  to make application to vary the
  rental rate for such dwellings so as to secure  sufficient  income,  and
  upon  failure  of  the  mortgagor to take such action within thirty days
  after receipt of written request from  the  corporation  to  do  so,  to
  request  the  supervising  agency  to take action upon such agency's own
  motion so to vary such rental rate, and upon failure of the  supervising
  agency  either  upon application by the mortgagor or upon its own motion
  so to vary such rental rate within sixty days after receipt  of  written
  request  from  the  corporation  to  do  so, to vary such rental rate by
  action of the corporation;
    21. Subject to the provisions of any  contract  with  noteholders  and
  bondholders,  to  acquire  and  to contract to acquire, by assignment or
  otherwise, or to take as collateral security, any  mortgage  securing  a
  loan,  including  any construction loan, and any note or bond evidencing
  indebtedness thereon, made by the city of New York  in  accordance  with
  the  provisions  of  article  two  of  this  chapter and any contract or
  arrangement, including any subsidy contract or arrangement,  related  to
  such mortgage, and the receipts to be derived from any of the foregoing,
  and  to  assume  and  fulfill  and  contract  to  assume and fulfill the


 obligations of the mortgagee or lender thereunder, and to  reassign  and
  to contract to reassign to the city of New York any such mortgage, note,
  bond, contract or arrangement and the receipts to be derived therefrom.
    22.  Subject  to  the  provisions of any contract with noteholders and
  bondholders, to assign or pledge any  mortgage,  bond,  note,  contract,
  security,  or arrangement and the receipts to be derived from any of the
  foregoing, acquired pursuant to this section;
    22-a. Subject to the provisions of any contract with  noteholders  and
  bondholders,  to  acquire  and  to contract to acquire, by assignment or
  otherwise, any mortgage securing  a  loan,  including  any  construction
  loan,  and any note or bond evidencing indebtedness thereon, made by the
  city of New York in accordance with the provisions  of  article  two  of
  this  chapter  and  any  contract  or arrangement, including any subsidy
  contract or arrangement, related to such mortgage, and to modify  or  to
  satisfy such mortgage and accept or make a new mortgage or mortgages and
  other  instruments,  including mortgages to secure residual indebtedness
  and instruments to evidence residual receipts obligations as defined  in
  section  twelve of this law and to enter into amended subsidy contracts,
  and (i) to hold or to sell, assign or otherwise dispose of such mortgage
  or mortgages, including those  made  in  substitution  thereof  and  any
  related instruments, contracts and arrangements, or to issue obligations
  secured  by  such mortgage or mortgages, and pay to the city of New York
  the proceeds of such sale,  assignment  or  other  disposition  of  such
  mortgages  and  the proceeds from the issuance of such obligations, less
  legal and other fees, costs and  expenses  and  other  amounts  paid  or
  incurred  by the corporation, including discounts, costs incurred by the
  corporation related to the sale of such mortgages or to a sale, if  any,
  of  its  obligations, fees payable to other governmental units, the cost
  incurred  by  the  corporation  under  an  agreement  with  the  federal
  government pursuant to subdivision twenty-two-b of this section, amounts
  required  to  establish  escrow accounts or reserves for the issuance of
  mortgage  insurance,  the  cost  of  satisfying  such  minimum  property
  standards  or  of installing such life safety devices as may be required
  by the federal government which standards or devices are in addition  to
  any  requirement  imposed  by the city of New York as mortgagee, amounts
  loaned to the mortgagor to establish such escrow accounts or reserves or
  to satisfy such minimum property  standards  or  to  install  such  life
  safety  devices,  closing  and other costs related to obtaining mortgage
  insurance from the federal government such other costs  as  the  federal
  government  may  from  time  to  time impose, any amounts not previously
  advanced under mortgages modified or satisfied under this subdivision as
  determined by the supervising agency, and an amount not to exceed twenty
  million dollars at any one time, which shall  be  held  in  a  revolving
  account  for a period not to exceed eighteen months from the time of the
  first deposit therein, to pay any or all of the costs, fees and expenses
  and other amounts attributable to issuing obligations  secured  by  such
  mortgage  or  mortgages, or to making and insuring mortgages pursuant to
  this subdivision, and any balance remaining in  such  revolving  account
  shall  be  paid  to  the  city of New York no later than eighteen months
  after the time of the first deposit  therein,  and  (ii)  to  assign  or
  reassign  any  such  mortgage  or  mortgages,  instruments  and  related
  contract or arrangement to the city of  New  York.  If  the  corporation
  sells any such mortgages for an amount in excess of the principal amount
  thereof  at  the  time  of  such  sale,  or  if  the  corporation issues
  obligations secured  by  any  such  mortgages  and  the  yield  on  such
  mortgages  is  greater  than the yield on such obligations (the yield on
  such mortgages and obligations having been calculated in accordance with
  section one hundred three of the internal revenue  code  of  the  United


 States  and  regulations  thereunder),  the corporation shall pay to the
  city of New York such premium and any such differential, but only to the
  extent such differential is not paid  to  or  for  the  benefit  of  the
  holders  of  such obligations; and such premium and differential, to the
  extent so paid to such city, shall be used and credited by the  city  of
  New York in accordance with subdivision four-b of section twenty-three-a
  of  this  chapter as if such city had sold such mortgages or issued such
  obligations pursuant to section  twenty-three-a  of  this  chapter.  The
  corporation  shall  not  modify  or  satisfy a mortgage pursuant to this
  subdivision unless such modification or satisfaction is  first  approved
  by the supervising agency.
    22-b.  To  contract with the federal government for the sharing of any
  claim paid by the federal government on account of any  insurance  of  a
  mortgage,  provided that the corporation's share of any such claim shall
  not exceed fifty percent of the insurance benefits paid by  the  federal
  government,  and  further  provided that the corporation's share of such
  claims under any such contract shall not  exceed  five  percent  of  the
  outstanding  principal  amount  of all mortgage loans of the corporation
  insured by the federal government and included within such contract.
    23. To make loans secured by mortgages insured  or  coinsured  by  the
  federal  government  to the owners of multiple dwellings in such amounts
  as may be required for the rehabilitation of such multiple dwellings or,
  if such owner acquires the multiple dwelling for  the  purpose  of  such
  rehabilitation  or  owns the multiple dwelling subject to an outstanding
  indebtedness, in such amounts as may be required for the  cost  of  such
  acquisition or for the refinancing of such outstanding indebtedness, but
  in  no event in such amounts as would exceed the mortgage limits imposed
  by the federal government, and to regulate or restrict such owner as  to
  rents or sales, charges, capital structure, rate of return and method of
  operation and to make loans secured by mortgages insured or coinsured by
  the  federal government to the owners of projects in such amounts as may
  be required for the acquisition, construction  or  improvement  of  such
  projects,  but  in no event in such amounts as would exceed the mortgage
  limits imposed by the federal  government,  or  ninety  percent  of  the
  actual  cost of such acquisition, construction or improvement, whichever
  is less, and to regulate or restrict such owner as to  rents  or  sales,
  charges,  capital structure, rate of return and method of operation. The
  owner may, with the approval of the corporation, fix maximum rentals  to
  be  charged tenants of the dwellings in any multiple dwelling or project
  aided by a loan pursuant to this subdivision. The corporation, upon  its
  own  motion,  or  upon  application  by  the  owner  or  by  the federal
  government, may vary such rental rate from time to time so as to secure,
  together with all other income  of  the  multiple  dwelling,  sufficient
  income for it to meet within reasonable limits all necessary payments to
  be  made  by  the owner of all expenses; provided that no variation in a
  rental  rate  shall  be  effective  unless  approved  by   the   federal
  government.  The  corporation  or the department of housing preservation
  and development shall notify occupants  of  the  multiple  dwelling,  if
  there  be  any, of the contemplated rehabilitation and shall advise them
  of  the  expected  rental  increase   to   result   therefrom,   and   a
  representative   of   the  corporation  or  the  department  of  housing
  preservation and development shall meet or offer to meet at  least  once
  with  the  occupants.  The  corporation  shall promulgate such rules and
  regulations with respect to multiple  dwellings  and  projects  financed
  pursuant  to  this subdivision and the owners of such multiple dwellings
  and projects as may be necessary to carry out  the  provisions  of  this
  subdivision,  provided  that  such  rules  and regulations shall contain
  provisions as to income limitations relating to admission into occupancy


 of the dwelling units of  such  projects  to  the  same  effect  as  are
  contained  in  section  thirty-one  of this chapter and for the dwelling
  units of such other  multiple  dwellings  to  the  same  effect  as  are
  contained  in  subdivision  three  of  section  four hundred one of this
  chapter. As used in this subdivision, the term "multiple dwelling" shall
  include an existing building or structure which is to be converted  into
  a class A multiple dwelling.
    23-a.  Subject  to the provisions of any contract with noteholders and
  bondholders, (i) to make and contract for the making of  mortgage  loans
  for  the  construction  or rehabilitation of projects which the New York
  city housing authority has agreed to purchase  on  a  turnkey  basis  in
  accordance  with  a  federally  assisted  program  for the production of
  public housing as  authorized  by  the  United  States  housing  act  of
  nineteen  hundred  thirty-seven  as  amended to the date of enactment of
  this  subdivision  of  this  section,  upon  the  completion   of   such
  construction or rehabilitation, and (ii) to make and to contract for the
  making  of loans to, or to purchase loans from, banking or other lending
  institutions  for  the  purpose  of  financing  such   construction   or
  rehabilitation.
    23-b.  In  order  to  increase  the  availability of safe and sanitary
  dwelling accommodations within  the  financial  reach  of  families  and
  persons  of  low  income,  to  acquire  and  to  contract to acquire, by
  assignment  or  otherwise,  or  to  take  as  collateral  security,  any
  federally  guaranteed  security  evidencing  indebtedness  on a mortgage
  securing a loan, including any construction loan, and the receipts to be
  derived therefrom and to assign or reassign and to contract to assign or
  reassign any such security and the receipts  to  be  derived  therefrom,
  subject in each case, to the provisions of any contract with noteholders
  and bondholders;
    * 23-c. (1) Subject to the provisions of any contract with noteholders
  and bondholders (a) to make and contract for the making of loans for the
  acquisition,  construction  or  rehabilitation of housing accommodations
  containing five or more dwelling units (i) for the purpose of  providing
  housing  accommodations  for  occupancy by persons and families for whom
  the ordinary operations of private enterprise cannot provide an adequate
  supply of safe, sanitary and affordable housing accommodations  or  (ii)
  for  units located in an area designated as blighted pursuant to article
  fifteen or sixteen of the general municipal law, or as certified by  the
  New  York  city  department  of  housing preservation and development as
  being located in an area which is blighted,  and  (b)  to  make  and  to
  contract  for  the  making of loans to or to purchase loans from lending
  institutions for the  purpose  of  financing  mortgage  loans  for  such
  acquisition,  construction  or rehabilitation, and (c) to establish such
  regulatory requirements with regard to such  housing  accommodations  as
  may  be  deemed appropriate by the corporation to achieve the objectives
  of this article,  and  articles  fifteen  and  sixteen  of  the  general
  municipal  law  notwithstanding  any other provisions of this chapter to
  the contrary. Any notes and bonds issued pursuant  to  this  subdivision
  shall not be secured by any capital reserve fund established pursuant to
  section six hundred fifty-six of this article.
    (2)  With  regard  to  any  loan made pursuant to this subdivision and
  notwithstanding  the  provisions  of,  or  any  regulation   promulgated
  pursuant to, the emergency housing rent control law, the local emergency
  housing  rent  control  act,  or local law enacted pursuant thereto, the
  rent stablization law of nineteen hundred sixty-nine, or  the  emergency
  tenant  protection  act of nineteen seventy-four, the owner of a project
  otherwise subject to any such law or  act,  with  the  approval  of  the
  agency,  shall  establish the initial rent for each dwelling unit within


 the project. The corporation shall notify occupants of the  project,  if
  any,  of  any  such  proposed  rental establishment and offer to meet at
  least once with the occupants prior to its approval.
    (3)  The  powers  granted by this subdivision may be exercised only if
  (a) obligations of the corporation have been issued  to  fund  the  loan
  made  or purchased by the corporation and such obligations have received
  an investment grade rating from a recognized rating agency; (b) the loan
  made or purchased by the corporation is fully secured  as  to  principal
  and  interest by insurance or a commitment to insure by the state of New
  York mortgage agency or New York  city  residential  mortgage  insurance
  corporation  or  by  the  general credit of a bank, national bank, trust
  company, savings bank, savings and loan association, insurance  company,
  governmental agency of the United States, or any combination thereof; or
  (c)  obligations  of  the  corporation are purchased by a bank, national
  bank,  trust  company,  savings  bank,  savings  and  loan  association,
  insurance  company,  governmental agency of the United States, which for
  purposes of this subdivision, include the  federal  home  loan  mortgage
  corporation, the federal national mortgage association, the governmental
  national  mortgage  association,  and any successor of the foregoing, or
  any wholly-owned subsidiary or combination thereof.
    * NB Repealed July 23, 2025
    23-d. To and shall develop, promote and ensure that,  where  possible,
  minority  groups  which traditionally have been disadvantaged, and women
  are  afforded  equal  opportunity  for  contracts  in  connection   with
  development  and construction contracts for developments, facilities and
  projects financed by the issuance of bonds, notes and other  obligations
  of the corporation.
    23-e.  Subject  to the provisions of any contract with noteholders and
  bondholders, to refinance or acquire mortgage loans  made  for  multiple
  dwellings  by  private lenders pursuant to article eight-A or fifteen of
  this chapter; provided that  the  corporation  shall  not  be  permitted
  pursuant  to  this  subdivision  to acquire a mortgage loan, unless such
  acquisition is in connection with a  refinancing  of  the  property  for
  which such mortgage loan was made.
    23-f.  To  service  mortgage  loans  made  by  private or governmental
  lenders for multiple dwellings, provided that each  such  mortgage  loan
  shall  have  been  made  either (i) pursuant to this chapter, or (ii) in
  conjunction with another mortgage loan made by the city of New York.
    23-g. Subject to the provisions of any contract with  noteholders  and
  bondholders,  to  acquire  mortgage  loans  made by the city of New York
  pursuant to article eight-A of this chapter or section ninety-nine-h  or
  article   sixteen   of  the  general  municipal  law  or  to  acquire  a
  participation interest in such mortgage loans.
    23-h. Subject to the provisions of any contract with  noteholders  and
  bondholders   and   relating   to   the  purpose  of  providing  housing
  accommodations for occupancy  by  persons  and  families  for  whom  the
  ordinary  operations  of  private  enterprise cannot provide an adequate
  supply of safe, sanitary and affordable housing  accommodations  or  for
  units  located  in  an  area  designated as blighted pursuant to article
  fifteen or sixteen of the general municipal law, or as certified by  the
  New  York  city  department  of  housing preservation and development as
  being located in an area that is blighted,  the  corporation  is  hereby
  authorized to carry out, by loans or guaranties, the following purposes:
    (i)  to  preserve,  repair,  renovate,  upgrade,  improve,  modernize,
  rehabilitate  or  otherwise  prolong  the  useful   life   of   dwelling
  accommodations;
    (ii)   to   construct   dwelling  accommodations  and  undertake  site
  preparation related thereto;


   (iii) to restore abandoned, vacant or occupied city or privately-owned
  dwelling accommodations to habitable condition;
    (iv)  to  assist  in  the acquisition of buildings that contain or are
  expected to contain dwelling accommodations; and
    (v) to facilitate the disposition of city-owned buildings that contain
  or are expected to contain dwelling accommodations.
    24. To contract with any of its subsidiary corporations to render such
  services as such subsidiary corporation may request, including, but  not
  limited  to, the use of the premises, personnel and personal property of
  the corporation, and to provide for  reimbursement  to  the  corporation
  from  such  subsidiary corporation for any expenses necessarily incurred
  by the corporation in carrying out the terms of any such contract.
    25. To do any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out  its
  purposes  and  exercise  the  powers expressly given and granted in this
  article.




   §  654-a.  Subsidiaries; how created. 1. The corporation by resolution
  may direct any of its members,  officers  or  employees  to  organize  a
  subsidiary   corporation   whenever,  in  the  sole  discretion  of  the
  corporation, it has become necessary to acquire a project in the case of
  sale under foreclosure or in lieu of foreclosure and it is beneficial to
  effectuate the purpose of this chapter for the subsidiary to hold  title
  to the project.
    2.  Each  such  subsidiary  corporation  shall  be wholly owned by the
  corporation and shall be organized pursuant to the business  corporation
  law, the not-for-profit corporation law or article two or article eleven
  of this chapter.
    3.  The  corporation  may  transfer  to any subsidiary corporation any
  money, real or personal or mixed  property  or  may  convey  to  it  any
  project  in  order  to carry out the purposes of this article. Each such
  subsidiary corporation shall have all the  privileges,  immunities,  tax
  exemptions  and  other  exemptions  of the corporation to the extent the
  same are not inconsistent with the statute or statutes pursuant to which
  such subsidiary was incorporated. Except as may be inconsistent with the
  provisions of this article, such subsidiary, if  organized  pursuant  to
  article two or article eleven of this chapter, shall have all the rights
  and powers granted to housing companies by this chapter and by any other
  statute pursuant to which such subsidiary corporation was organized.
    4.  No  member  or  officer  of  the  corporation  shall  receive  any
  additional  compensation,  either  direct  or   indirect,   other   than
  reimbursement   for  actual  and  necessary  expenses  incurred  in  the
  performance of such person's duties, by reason of such person's  serving
  as a member, director, trustee or officer of any subsidiary corporation.




   §   654-b.   Housing   assistance  corporation.  1.  There  is  hereby
  established  a  public  benefit  corporation  known  as   the   "housing
  assistance corporation" as a subsidiary corporation of the corporation.
    2.  Such  subsidiary  corporation  may  (a)  receive  monies  from the
  corporation, the state, any public benefit corporation,  the  city,  the
  federal  government  or  any  other  source for the purpose of assisting
  rental developments to maintain rentals affordable to low  and  moderate
  income  persons  for  whom  the ordinary operation of private enterprise
  cannot supply safe, sanitary and affordable housing accommodations,  (b)
  transfer, lend, pledge or assign monies (i) to any rental development in
  order to assist such development in maintaining rents affordable to such
  low  and  moderate  income  tenants  or  (ii)  in  order  to  assist the
  corporation in financing such developments,  and  (c)  enter  into  such
  agreements  with  the  owners  of  such  developments  as  it  may  deem
  appropriate to further the objectives of this article.  Such  subsidiary
  corporation  shall  have  all the privileges, immunities, tax exemptions
  and other exemptions of the corporation to the extent the same  are  not
  inconsistent with this article.
    3.  The membership of such subsidiary corporation shall consist of the
  commissioner of the department of housing preservation and  development,
  who  shall serve as chairperson, and two public members appointed by and
  who serve at the pleasure of the mayor.   The powers of  the  subsidiary
  corporation  shall be vested in and exercised by no less than two of the
  members thereto then in office. The subsidiary corporation may  delegate
  to  one  or  more of its members, or its officers, agents and employees,
  such duties and powers as it may deem proper.
    4.  No  officer  or  member  of  the  corporation  shall  receive  any
  additional   compensation,   either   direct  or  indirect,  other  than
  reimbursement  for  actual  and  necessary  expenses  incurred  in   the
  performance  of such person's duties, by reason of such person's serving
  as a member or officer of such subsidiary corporation.
    5. The corporation may transfer to  such  subsidiary  corporation  any
  real,  personal  or mixed property in order to carry out the purposes of
  this section.
    6. The subsidiary corporation shall have the power to:
    (a) sue and be sued;
    (b) have a seal and alter the same at pleasure;
    (c)  make  and  alter  by-laws  for  its  organization  and   internal
  management  and  make  rules  and  regulations  governing the use of its
  property and facilities;
    (d) make and execute contracts and all other instruments necessary  or
  convenient  for  the  exercise  of  its  powers and functions under this
  section;
    (e) acquire, hold and dispose of real or  personal  property  for  its
  corporate purposes;
    (f) engage the services of private consultants on a contract basis for
  rendering professional and technical assistance and advice;
    (g)  procure  insurance  against  any  loss  in  connection  with  its
  activities, properties and other assets in such  amount  and  from  such
  insurers as it deems desirable;
    (h) appoint officers, agents and employees, prescribe their duties and
  qualifications  and  fix their compensation subject to the provisions of
  the civil service law and the rules of the civil service  commission  of
  the city;
    (i) invest any funds, or other monies under its custody and control in
  the same manner as the corporation; and


   (j)  to do any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out its
  purposes and exercise the powers expressly given  and  granted  in  this
  section.
    7.  The  subsidiary  corporation  and  its  corporate  existence shall
  continue until terminated by law. Upon termination of the  existence  of
  the  subsidiary  corporation all of its rights and properties shall pass
  to and be vested in the city. No such termination shall take  effect  as
  long as obligations of the subsidiary corporation remain outstanding.
    8.  The  city  and the corporation shall have the power to transfer to
  such subsidiary corporation agents, employees and facilities of the city
  or corporation to enable it to fulfill the purposes of this section.




   § 654-c. Housing New York corporation. 1. Definitions. As used in this
  section, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
    (a) "Housing New York program" shall mean the housing New York program
  established  pursuant  to  section  four of the housing New York program
  act.
    (b) "City"  shall  mean  the  city  of  New  York,  its  agencies  and
  instrumentalities  (other than the housing New York corporation) and the
  New York city housing development corporation.
    (c) "Residential housing facilities" shall mean one or more  works  or
  improvements   containing   one  or  more  residential  dwelling  units,
  including,  but  not  limited  to,  single  room  occupancy  units,  and
  including  the  real and personal property acquired, owned, constructed,
  equipped, improved, enlarged, rehabilitated or renovated to provide such
  accommodations and such incidental and appurtenant  commercial,  social,
  recreational  or  communal facilities, to be located without the Battery
  Park project area, as defined in the Battery Park  city  authority  act,
  and within the city.
    (d)  "Excess  revenues"  shall mean all revenues from the Battery Park
  project area, as defined in the Battery  Park  city  authority  act,  in
  excess  of  those  needed  (i) to satisfy bond and note covenants (other
  than as they relate to bonds and notes issued pursuant to  this  section
  and  section  one  thousand  nine  hundred  seventy-four-c of the public
  authorities law)  including  those  covenants  which  require  that  the
  Battery  Park  city authority maintain its revenues and reserve funds in
  an  amount  necessary  to  permit  it  to  discharge  its  debt  service
  obligations,  (ii)  to  fulfill its legal and financial commitments, and
  (iii) to pay its operating and maintenance expenses.
    2. There is hereby established a public benefit corporation  known  as
  the  "housing  New  York corporation" as a subsidiary corporation of the
  corporation solely for the purpose of borrowing money and granting  such
  moneys  to  the  city  for  the  purposes  and  in  accordance  with the
  provisions of the housing New York program.
    3. It is hereby found and declared that the legislature,  pursuant  to
  the  housing  New  York  program act, has established a housing New York
  program under which the city will cause the  acquisition,  construction,
  equipping,   improving,   rehabilitation   and  renovation  of  dwelling
  accommodations within the city of New York for persons and families  for
  whom  the  ordinary  operations of private enterprise cannot supply such
  accommodations; that such program is necessary in order to increase  the
  presently  inadequate supply of dwelling accommodations in such city for
  such persons and families; that such program shall require a substantial
  commitment of funds from public sources; and  that  the  need  for  such
  moneys  necessitates  that  the  subsidiary  corporation created by this
  section be granted the powers and be made subject to the requirements of
  this section. The  legislature  therefore  finds  that  such  subsidiary
  corporation,  subject  to  the  terms  and  conditions specified herein,
  should be given the power to borrow funds and grant such moneys  to  the
  city  of New York, and any agency or instrumentality thereof (other than
  such subsidiary corporation) or the corporation for use by  such  entity
  in  the  housing  New  York  program;  that the financing of residential
  housing facilities in accordance with the housing New York program is  a
  public  purpose  for  which  moneys  may be granted, and exemptions from
  taxation on the income of bonds or notes of such subsidiary  corporation
  and  on  such  subsidiary  corporation's income and property granted, as
  specified herein; and that the powers  and  duties  of  such  subsidiary
  corporation  as  recited  in  this  section are necessary and proper for
  achieving the ends herein recited. Therefore such subsidiary corporation
  is hereby authorized and empowered:


   (a) to borrow money by issuing bonds and notes for the purposes of (i)
  granting  such  moneys  to  the  city  to   finance   the   acquisition,
  construction,  equipping,  improvement,  enlargement, rehabilitation and
  renovation of residential housing facilities for  the  purposes  and  in
  accordance  with the provisions of the housing New York program and (ii)
  refunding any bonds or  notes  of  such  subsidiary  corporation  issued
  pursuant to this section;
    (b)  to  grant  moneys  to  the  city for the purpose of financing the
  acquisition,   construction,   equipping,   improvement,    enlargement,
  rehabilitation  and renovation of residential housing facilities for the
  purposes and in accordance with the provisions of the housing  New  York
  program  and to enter into any agreement specifying terms and conditions
  with respect thereto;
    (c) subject to the provisions of any contract with the holders of  any
  of  its  bonds  or  notes,  to  pledge  any  revenues  or assets of such
  subsidiary corporation,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  any  excess
  revenues  of the Battery Park city authority as shall be payable to such
  subsidiary corporation pursuant to an agreement between the Battery Park
  city authority  and  such  subsidiary  corporation  as  such  subsidiary
  corporation shall deem necessary, to secure any bonds or notes issued or
  any  agreements  entered  into  pursuant to this section; (d) to procure
  insurance, letters of credit or other credit enhancements  with  respect
  to  its  bonds  or  notes issued pursuant to this section and to pay the
  premiums and fees therefor;
    (e) to adopt, amend or rescind rules and  regulations  appropriate  to
  carry  out its corporate purposes and to establish such requirements and
  enter into such agreements to achieve the objectives  of  this  section;
  and
    (f)  to  exercise  any and all other powers authorized by this section
  and not inconsistent with the provisions of this section.
    4. In addition to the foregoing, such subsidiary corporation may:
    (a) receive  moneys  from  the  corporation,  the  Battery  Park  city
  authority,  any other public benefit corporation, the federal government
  or any other source for the purpose of  paying  its  obligations  issued
  pursuant  to  this  section  in  order  to  provide  residential housing
  facilities to low and moderate income  persons  for  whom  the  ordinary
  operation  of  private  enterprise  cannot  supply  safe,  sanitary  and
  affordable housing accommodations,
    (b) enter into agreements with the Battery Park city authority or  any
  other  entity  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  moneys  as described in
  paragraph (a) of this subdivision, and
    (c) transfer, lend, pledge or assign moneys to a trustee, fiduciary or
  similar entity for the purpose of securing obligations as referenced  in
  paragraph (a) of this subdivision.
    5.  The  membership  of  such  subsidiary corporation shall consist of
  seven members, five of whom shall be members of the  corporation  (other
  than members thereof appointed by the governor) and two of whom shall be
  appointed  by  the governor. Neither of the two members appointed by the
  governor shall be members or officers of the Battery Park city authority
  or any subsidiary corporation organized  pursuant  to  section  nineteen
  hundred  seventy-four-a  of  the public authorities law. The two members
  first appointed by the governor shall serve for terms of  two  and  four
  years  respectively from January first next succeeding the date of their
  appointment. Their successors shall serve for terms of four years  each.
  The  governor shall fill any vacancy which may occur by reason of death,
  resignation or otherwise of a member appointed  by  the  governor  in  a
  manner  consistent  with the original appointment. A member appointed by
  the governor (i) shall continue in office until such member's  successor


 has been appointed and qualified and (ii) may be removed by the governor
  for  cause,  but  not without an opportunity to be heard in person or by
  counsel, in such member's defense, upon not less than ten days'  notice.
  The   commissioner   of  the  department  of  housing  preservation  and
  development shall serve as chairperson of  the  subsidiary  corporation.
  The  powers  of  the  subsidiary  corporation  shall  be  vested  in and
  exercised by no less than four of the members thereof  then  in  office.
  The  subsidiary  corporation may delegate to one or more of its members,
  or its officers, agents and employees, such duties and powers as it  may
  deem proper.
    6.  Notwithstanding  any  inconsistent provisions of this or any other
  general, special or local law, no officer or employee of the city or the
  state,  or  of  any  public  corporation,  as  defined  in  the  general
  construction  law,  shall  be  deemed to have forfeited or shall forfeit
  such person's office or employment by reason of such person's acceptance
  of membership on or  by  virtue  of  such  person's  being  an  officer,
  employee or agent of the subsidiary corporation. No officer or member of
  the   corporation   shall   receive   any  additional  salary  or  other
  compensation, either direct or indirect, other  than  reimbursement  for
  actual  and  necessary  expenses  incurred  in  the  performance of such
  person's duties, by reason of such  person's  serving  as  a  member  or
  officer of such subsidiary corporation.
    7.  The  corporation  may  transfer to such subsidiary corporation any
  real, personal or mixed property in order to carry out the  purposes  of
  this section.
    8. The subsidiary corporation also shall have the power to:
    (a) sue and be sued;
    (b) have a seal and alter the same at pleasure;
    (c)   make  and  alter  by-laws  for  its  organization  and  internal
  management and make rules and  regulations  governing  the  use  of  its
  property and facilities;
    (d)  make and execute contracts and all other instruments necessary or
  convenient for the exercise of  its  powers  and  functions  under  this
  section;
    (e)  acquire,  hold  and  dispose of real or personal property for its
  corporate purposes;
    (f) engage the services of private consultants on a contract basis for
  rendering professional and technical assistance and advice;
    (g)  procure  insurance  against  any  loss  in  connection  with  its
  activities,  properties and assets in such amount and from such insurers
  as it deems desirable;
    (h) appoint officers, agents and employees, prescribe their duties and
  qualifications and fix their compensation subject to the  provisions  of
  the  civil  service law and the rules of the civil service commission of
  the city;
    (i) invest any funds, or other moneys under its custody and control in
  the same manner as the corporation; and
    (j) to do any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out  its
  purposes  and  exercise  the  powers expressly given and granted in this
  section.
    9. The  subsidiary  corporation  and  its  corporate  existence  shall
  continue  until  terminated  by  law;  provided,  however,  that no such
  termination shall take effect as long as obligations of  the  subsidiary
  corporation  remain outstanding, unless adequate provision has been made
  for the payment  thereof  in  the  documents  securing  the  same.  Upon
  termination  of  the  existence of the subsidiary corporation all of its
  rights and properties shall pass to and be vested in  the  city  of  New
  York.


   10.  The  city and the corporation shall have the power to transfer to
  such subsidiary corporation, agents, employees  and  facilities  of  the
  city  or  corporation  to  enable  it  to  fulfill  the purposes of this
  section.
    11.  (a)  Subject  to  the  provisions of this section, the subsidiary
  corporation shall have power and is hereby authorized to issue from time
  to time its notes and bonds in such principal amount as  the  subsidiary
  corporation  shall determine to be necessary to provide sufficient funds
  for achieving its corporate purposes, including the providing of  moneys
  to  the  city,  the  payment  of  interest  on  notes  and  bonds of the
  subsidiary corporation, the establishment of  reserves  to  secure  such
  notes  and  bonds,  and  the  payment  of all expenses of the subsidiary
  corporation incident thereto.
    (b) The subsidiary corporation shall have  the  power,  from  time  to
  time,  to  issue  (i)  notes to renew notes and (ii) bonds to pay notes,
  including  the  interest  thereon  and,  whenever  it  deems   refunding
  expedient, to refund any bonds by the issuance of new bonds, whether the
  bonds to be refunded have or have not matured, and to issue bonds partly
  to  refund  bonds  then  outstanding and partly for any of its corporate
  purposes. The refunding bonds may be  exchanged  for  the  bonds  to  be
  refunded or sold and the proceeds applied to the purchase, redemption or
  payment of such bonds.
    (c)  Except  as  may otherwise be expressly provided by the subsidiary
  corporation, every issue  of  its  notes  and  bonds  shall  be  general
  obligations of the subsidiary corporation payable out of any revenues of
  such  corporation,  subject  only  to any agreements with the holders of
  particular notes or bonds pledging any particular revenues.
    (d)  The  notes  and  bonds  shall  be  authorized  by  resolution  or
  resolutions of the subsidiary corporation, shall bear such date or dates
  and shall mature at such time or times as such resolution or resolutions
  may  provide,  except  that  no note or any renewal thereof shall mature
  more than nine years after the date of issue of the original note and no
  bond shall mature more than fifty years from the date of its  issue.  No
  refunding  bonds  shall  mature  later than fifty years from the date of
  original issuance of the bonds being refunded. The bonds may  be  issued
  as  serial bonds payable in annual installments or as term bonds or as a
  combination thereof. The notes and bonds shall  bear  interest  at  such
  rate  or rates, be in such denominations, be in such form, either coupon
  or registered, carry such registration privileges, be executed  in  such
  manner,  be  payable in such medium of payment, at such place or places,
  and be subject to  such  terms  of  redemption  as  such  resolution  or
  resolutions  may  provide.  The  notes  and  bonds  may  be  sold by the
  subsidiary corporation at public or  private  sale,  at  such  price  or
  prices as the subsidiary corporation shall determine; provided, however,
  that  the  subsidiary  corporation shall consult with the comptroller of
  the city of New York as to the timing of any sale; and provided  further
  that  no  notes  or bonds of the subsidiary corporation may be sold at a
  private sale unless such sale and the terms thereof have  been  approved
  in  writing  by  (a)  such  comptroller,  where such sale is not to such
  comptroller, or (b) the director of the budget of the city of New  York,
  where such sale is to such comptroller.
    (e)  Any  resolution  or resolutions authorizing any notes or bonds or
  any issue thereof may contain provisions, which shall be a part  of  the
  contract or contracts with the holders thereof, as to:
    (i)  pledging all or any part of the revenues to secure the payment of
  the notes or bonds or of any issue thereof, subject to  such  agreements
  with  noteholders or bondholders as may then exist; (ii) pledging all or
  any part of the assets of  the  subsidiary  corporation  to  secure  the


 payment of the notes or bonds or of any issue of notes or bonds, subject
  to such agreements with noteholders or bondholders as may then exist;
    (iii)  the  setting  aside  of  reserves  or  sinking  funds  and  the
  regulation and disposition thereof;
    (iv) limitations on the purpose to which the proceeds of sale of notes
  or bonds may be applied and pledging such proceeds to secure the payment
  of the notes or bonds or of any issue thereof;
    (v) limitations on the issuance of  additional  notes  or  bonds;  the
  terms  upon  which  additional notes or bonds may be issued and secured;
  and the refunding of outstanding or other notes or bonds;
    (vi) the procedure, if any, by which the terms of  any  contract  with
  noteholders  or  bondholders  may be amended or abrogated, the amount of
  notes or bonds the holders of which must consent thereto, and the manner
  in which such consent may be given;
    (vii) limitations on the amount  of  moneys  to  be  expended  by  the
  subsidiary   corporation   for  operating  expenses  of  the  subsidiary
  corporation;
    (viii) vesting in a trustee or trustees such property, rights,  powers
  and  duties  in trust as the subsidiary corporation may determine, which
  may include any or all of the rights, powers and duties of  the  trustee
  appointed  by  the  bondholders pursuant to this section and limiting or
  abrogating the right of the bondholders to appoint a trustee under  this
  section or limiting the rights, powers and duties of such trustee;
    (ix)  the acts or omissions to act which shall constitute a default in
  the obligations and duties of the subsidiary corporation to the  holders
  of  the  notes or bonds and providing for the rights and remedies of the
  holders of the notes or bonds in the event of  such  default,  including
  the  right  to  appointment of a receiver; providing, however, that such
  rights and remedies shall not be inconsistent with the general  laws  of
  the state and the other provisions of this section; and
    (x)  any  other  matters, of like or different character, which in any
  way affect the security or protection of the holders  of  the  notes  or
  bonds.
    (f)  Any  pledge made by the subsidiary corporation shall be valid and
  binding from the time when the pledge is made; the revenues or  property
  so  pledged  and thereafter received by the subsidiary corporation shall
  immediately be subject to the lien of such pledge without  any  physical
  delivery  thereof  or further act, and the lien of any such pledge shall
  be valid and binding as against all parties having claims of any kind in
  tort,  contract  or  otherwise  against  the   subsidiary   corporation,
  irrespective  of  whether  such parties have notice thereof. Neither the
  resolution nor any other instrument by which a pledge is created need be
  recorded.
    (g) Neither the members of the subsidiary corporation  nor  any  other
  person  executing  such  notes or bonds shall be subject to any personal
  liability or accountability by reason of the issuance thereof.
    (h) The  subsidiary  corporation,  subject  to  such  agreements  with
  noteholders  or  bondholders  as may then exist, shall have power out of
  any funds  available  therefor,  to  purchase  notes  or  bonds  of  the
  subsidiary corporation which shall thereupon be cancelled.
    (i)  In the discretion of the subsidiary corporation, the bonds may be
  secured by a trust indenture by and between the  subsidiary  corporation
  and  a  corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having
  the powers of a trust company in the state.  Such  trust  indenture  may
  contain  such  provisions  for  protecting  and enforcing the rights and
  remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and  not  in
  violation  of  law,  including covenants setting forth the duties of the
  subsidiary corporation in relation to  the  exercise  of  its  corporate


 powers  and the custody, safeguarding and application of all moneys. The
  subsidiary corporation may provide  by  such  trust  indenture  for  the
  payment  of  the  proceeds  of the bonds and the revenues to the trustee
  under  such  trust  indenture or other depository, and for the method of
  disbursement thereof, with such safeguards and restrictions  as  it  may
  determine.  If  the  bonds  shall  be  secured by a trust indenture, the
  bondholders shall have no authority to appoint  a  separate  trustee  to
  represent them.
    (j)  Whether or not the notes and bonds are of such form and character
  as  to  be  negotiable  instruments  under  the  terms  of  the  uniform
  commercial  code,  the  notes  and  bonds  are  hereby  made  negotiable
  instruments within the meaning of  and  for  all  the  purposes  of  the
  uniform commercial code, subject only to the provisions of the notes and
  bonds for registration.
    12.  No  moneys  may  be borrowed by issuing bonds or notes to finance
  residential housing facilities pursuant  to  this  section  unless  such
  subsidiary  corporation has entered into an agreement or agreements with
  the mayor on  behalf  of  the  city  and  with  the  Battery  Park  city
  authority, which provide, in addition to any other terms and conditions,
  that:
    (a)  such  residential  housing  facilities  are  to  provide dwelling
  accommodations which are to be occupied by persons and families for whom
  the ordinary operations of private enterprise cannot provide an adequate
  supply of safe, sanitary and affordable housing accommodations;
    (b) unless otherwise specifically provided by law, neither  the  state
  nor  the authority are to have any responsibility as to the financing of
  such residential housing facilities and neither the state, the authority
  nor the subsidiary corporation are to have any responsibility as to  the
  operation, maintenance, repair or use of such facilities;
    (c)  the  city  shall  use  the  moneys granted to it pursuant to this
  section to finance residential housing facilities in accordance with the
  provisions of the housing New York program and  shall  comply  with  the
  terms  and  conditions  of  the  housing  New  York program act and this
  section; and
    (d) the timing, amount, maturity schedule  and  all  other  terms  and
  conditions  of  any  issuance  of  bonds  or  notes  by  the  subsidiary
  corporation pursuant to this section, will provide for the Battery  Park
  city  authority's  requirements  as  to  the  development, management or
  operation of the project and the effect of such terms and conditions  on
  the  availability  of  excess  revenues  and  the  pledge  or assignment
  thereof.
    13. Commencing on or before  January  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred
  eighty-seven,  and  on  or  before  January  thirty-first  of  each year
  thereafter during which the city utilizes moneys which are  provided  to
  it  pursuant to this section, such subsidiary corporation shall, for the
  prior and current calendar year, submit a report to  the  governor,  the
  temporary  president  of  the  senate,  the speaker of the assembly, the
  minority leader of the senate, the minority leader of the assembly,  the
  mayor  and  the comptroller, which shall include, but not be limited to,
  the total principal amount of bonds and notes which have  been  and  are
  expected  to  be  issued  pursuant  to  this  section  and a copy of any
  agreement and any amendments thereto among such subsidiary  corporation,
  the  Battery  Park  city  authority and the city pursuant to subdivision
  twelve of this section. Such report may be a part of  any  other  report
  that such subsidiary corporation is required to make.
    14.  For  the  purposes  of  financing  the acquisition, construction,
  equipping, improvement, enlargement, rehabilitation  and  renovation  of
  residential housing facilities pursuant to this section, such subsidiary


 corporation  may  borrow money by issuing bonds or notes in an aggregate
  principal amount not exceeding  four  hundred  million  dollars  plus  a
  principal  amount  of bonds or notes issued (i) to fund any related debt
  service reserve fund, (ii) to provide capitalized interest, and (iii) to
  provide  fees  and  other  charges and expenses, including underwriters'
  discount, related to the  issuance  of  such  bonds  or  notes  and  the
  maintenance  of  such  reserves,  all  as  determined by such subsidiary
  corporation, excluding bonds or notes issued to refund outstanding bonds
  or notes issued pursuant to this section. Any bonds  or  notes  of  such
  subsidiary  corporation  shall  not be or be deemed to be obligations of
  the corporation or subject to or included in  any  authorization  of  or
  limitation on indebtedness of the corporation.
    In  computing the total principal amount of bonds or notes that may at
  any time be issued for any purpose under this section, the amount of the
  outstanding bonds or notes that constitutes interest  under  the  United
  States  Internal Revenue Code of nineteen hundred fifty-four, as amended
  to the effective date of this section, shall be excluded.
    15. The state does hereby pledge to and agree with the holders of  any
  bonds  or  notes issued under this section that the state will not limit
  or alter the rights hereby vested in such subsidiary corporation or  the
  Battery  Park city authority to fulfill the terms of any agreements made
  with or for the benefit of the said  holders  thereof,  or  in  any  way
  impair  the  rights  and  remedies  of  such holders until such bonds or
  notes, together with the interest thereon, with interest on  any  unpaid
  installments  of interest, and all costs and expenses in connection with
  any action or proceeding by or on behalf of such holders, are fully  met
  and  discharged.  Such  subsidiary  corporation is authorized to include
  this pledge and agreement of the state in any agreement with the holders
  of such bonds or notes.
    16. The bonds or notes of such subsidiary corporation shall not  be  a
  debt  of either the state of New York, the city of New York, the Battery
  Park city authority or the corporation, and neither the state, the  city
  of New York, such authority nor the corporation shall be liable thereon,
  nor  shall  they  be  payable  out of any funds other than those of such
  subsidiary corporation; and such bonds or notes  shall  contain  on  the
  face thereof a statement to such effect.
    17.  The  subsidiary  corporation established pursuant to this section
  shall have all the privileges,  immunities,  tax  exemptions  and  other
  exemptions   of   the  corporation  to  the  extent  the  same  are  not
  inconsistent with this section.




   §  654-d.  Residential mortgage insurance corporation. 1. Definitions.
  As used in this section, the following words and terms  shall  have  the
  following   meanings  unless  the  context  shall  indicate  another  or
  different meaning or intent:
    (a) "Cash equivalent". A letter of credit, insurance  policy,  surety,
  guarantee, indemnity or other security arrangement.
    (b)  "Financial  institution".  (i)  Any bank, trust company, national
  bank, state or federal savings bank, state or federal savings  and  loan
  association,  or  state  or  federal  credit  union,  insurance company,
  pension fund or retirement system of any corporation,  association,  any
  other  entity  which  is  owned  or controlled by any one or more of the
  above, provided such  bank,  trust  company,  national  bank,  state  or
  federal  savings bank, state or federal savings and loan association, or
  state or federal  credit  union,  insurance  company,  pension  fund  or
  retirement  system  of any corporation or association, and, if an entity
  which is owned by one or more of the above, such entity,  is  supervised
  by  or  responsible  to any agency of the federal government, the state,
  any department thereof or the  governing  body  of  any  city,  town  or
  village  of  the  state,  or  (ii)  any  other  entity  approved  by the
  subsidiary corporation, or (iii) any one  or  more  of  the  above  when
  lawfully  acting  as a trustee or otherwise in a fiduciary capacity. The
  term "financial institution" shall  also  include  the  New  York  state
  housing  finance  agency,  the  New  York  state medical care facilities
  finance agency, the state of New York  mortgage  agency,  the  New  York
  state  urban development corporation, the corporation, the New York city
  department  of  housing  preservation  and  development,  the  community
  preservation  corporation,  any governmental agency of the United States
  which customarily makes, purchases or holds  residential  mortgages  and
  any  person  who is approved as a mortgage lender by the federal housing
  administration for purposes of insurance issued by  such  administration
  or licensed by the state of New York as a mortgage banker.
    (c)  "Housing  accommodation".  Any existing building, structure, unit
  thereof (including  an  owner-occupied  unit  in  a  condominium  and  a
  lessee-occupied  dwelling unit in which the lessee retains a proprietary
  lease with respect to such dwelling unit and has an allocable  ownership
  interest  in  a  cooperative  housing  corporation)  or  unimproved real
  property, which is used or occupied,  or  is  intended  to  be  used  or
  occupied  as  the home or residence of one or more persons, a portion of
  which may also be used for commercial  and  other  community  facilities
  ancillary  to  such  residence provided that, in the case of any housing
  accommodation consisting of more than six dwelling units, the floor area
  of above-ground commercial facilities shall not  exceed  one-quarter  of
  the  above-ground floor area of such housing accommodation (inclusive of
  such commercial facilities).
    (d) "Housing insurance contracts". All contracts entered into  by  the
  subsidiary corporation to insure mortgages pursuant to this section, but
  not  including (i) any contracts to insure mortgages entered into by the
  predecessor corporation which  are  imposed  upon  and  assumed  by  the
  subsidiary  corporation  pursuant to paragraph (d) of subdivision two of
  this section, or (ii) any contracts to insure mortgages entered into  by
  the  subsidiary corporation with respect to which a commitment to insure
  was issued by the predecessor corporation.
    (e)  "Housing  insurance  fund".  The  housing   insurance   fund   as
  established pursuant to subdivision twelve of this section.
    (f) "Housing insurance fund requirement". As of any particular date of
  computation,  an  amount  equal  to the aggregate of (i) one hundred per
  centum of  the  insured  amounts  due  and  payable  by  the  subsidiary
  corporation  pursuant  to  housing insurance contracts, plus (ii) twenty


 per centum of the insured  amounts  under  housing  insurance  contracts
  other  than  insured  amounts  which are due and payable pursuant to (i)
  above, plus (iii) twenty per centum of the amounts to be  insured  under
  housing  insurance  contracts  pursuant  to the subsidiary corporation's
  commitments to insure.
    (g) "Mortgage". A first mortgage on real property located  within  the
  city of New York, securing a preservation loan or a rehabilitation loan,
  with  a  term  not  to  exceed  forty years, on real estate, held in fee
  simple or on a leasehold under a lease having a period of years  to  run
  at  the time a mortgage is insured under this section of at least twenty
  per centum greater duration than the remaining term  of  such  mortgage;
  the  term  "first mortgage" means such first liens as are commonly given
  to secure advances on, or the unpaid  purchase  price  of,  real  estate
  under  the  laws  of the state, together with the credit instruments, if
  any, secured thereby.
    (h) "Mortgage insurance contracts". All contracts to insure  mortgages
  entered  into  by  the predecessor corporation that are imposed upon and
  assumed by the subsidiary  corporation  pursuant  to  paragraph  (d)  of
  subdivision  two  of  this section and all contracts to insure mortgages
  entered into by the subsidiary  corporation  with  respect  to  which  a
  commitment to insure was issued by the predecessor corporation.
    (i)   "Mortgage  insurance  fund".  The  mortgage  insurance  fund  as
  established pursuant to subdivision twelve of this section.
    (j) "Mortgage insurance fund requirement". As of any  particular  date
  of  computation, an amount equal to the aggregate of (i) one hundred per
  centum of  the  insured  amounts  due  and  payable  by  the  subsidiary
  corporation  pursuant  to  mortgage  insurance  contracts,  plus (ii) an
  amount equal to the greater of (A) seven million five  hundred  thousand
  dollars  or  (B) twenty per centum of the insured amounts under mortgage
  insurance contracts other than insured amounts which are due and payable
  under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, plus (iii) twenty  per  centum
  of  the  amounts  to  be  insured  under  the  predecessor corporation's
  commitments to  insure;  provided,  however,  that  notwithstanding  the
  foregoing,  at  no  time  shall  the mortgage insurance fund requirement
  exceed the aggregate of (1) insured  amounts  due  and  payable  by  the
  subsidiary  corporation  pursuant  to mortgage insurance contracts, plus
  (2) one hundred  per  centum  of  the  insured  amounts  under  mortgage
  insurance contracts other than insured amounts which are due and payable
  under  clause  (1) of this paragraph, plus (3) one hundred per centum of
  the  amounts  to  be  insured  under   the   predecessor   corporation's
  commitments to insure.
    (k)  "Mortgagee".  The mortgage lender under a mortgage insured by the
  predecessor corporation or insured pursuant to subdivision ten  of  this
  section, and its successors and assigns.
    (l) "Mortgage loan". A mortgage loan secured by a mortgage.
    (m)  "Mortgagor".  The original borrower under a mortgage loan insured
  by the predecessor corporation or insured pursuant to subdivision ten of
  this section, and its successors and assigns.
    (n) "Multi-family housing accommodation". A housing accommodation with
  five or more dwelling units.
    (o) "Operating expenses". All costs of  administering  the  subsidiary
  corporation, including, but not limited to, salaries and wages, expenses
  of  administering  staff  functions,  fees  of professional consultants,
  legal fees, charges incurred for  servicing  of  mortgage  loans,  money
  management  fees,  office  rents,  utility  charges,  costs of supplies,
  furnishings, equipment, machinery and apparatus, maintenance and  repair
  of  property,  payment to the corporation for services rendered, amounts
  due and owing under contracts validly entered into  by  the  predecessor


 corporation or the subsidiary corporation, other than mortgage insurance
  contracts  and  housing  insurance  contracts,  respectively,  and other
  expenses incurred in connection with any of the foregoing.
    (p)  "Other  real  property".  Any  building,  structure or unimproved
  property which is used or  occupied,  or  is  intended  to  be  used  or
  occupied,  primarily  for  emergency, transitional or shelter housing, a
  portion of which may also be used for  commercial  and  other  community
  facilities  ancillary  to  such  use  provided  that,  the floor area of
  above-ground commercial facilities shall not exceed one-quarter  of  the
  above-ground  floor  area of such other real property (inclusive of such
  commercial facilities).
    (q)  "Predecessor  corporation".  The  New  York  city  rehabilitation
  mortgage  insurance  corporation  created by section one of chapter nine
  hundred twenty-four of  the  laws  of  nineteen  hundred  seventy-three,
  being,  prior to repeal, article fourteen of the private housing finance
  law.
    (r) "Preservation loan". A  mortgage  loan  extended  by  a  financial
  institution  with  a  term not to exceed forty years for the purposes of
  refinancing existing indebtedness secured by one or more mortgages on  a
  housing  accommodation or other real property located within the city of
  New York and/or financing the acquisition of a housing accommodation  or
  other  real  property  located  within  the  city  of New York and which
  otherwise  complies  with  the  conditions   established   pursuant   to
  subdivision ten of this section.
    (s)  "Rehabilitation".  Repairs,  alterations  or  improvements  of  a
  housing accommodation or other  real  property  designed  to  raise  the
  housing  standards  therein  or,  in  the  case  of other real property,
  designed to provide needed improvements  therein.  Rehabilitation  shall
  also  include  the construction of a housing accommodation or other real
  property.
    (t) "Rehabilitation loan". A mortgage loan  extended  by  a  financial
  institution  with a term not to exceed forty years which may include the
  refinancing of existing indebtedness, if any, secured  by  one  or  more
  mortgages  on  the  housing  accommodation  or other real property to be
  rehabilitated, or financing the acquisition of the housing accommodation
  or other real property to be rehabilitated, which housing  accommodation
  or  other real property shall be located within the city of New York and
  which otherwise complies with the  conditions  established  pursuant  to
  subdivision  ten of this section, provided, however, that a sum equal to
  at least twenty-five percent of the amount of the mortgage loan shall be
  used for the cost of rehabilitation of, or construction of  improvements
  on, a housing accommodation or other real property.
    2. New York city residential mortgage insurance corporation. (a) There
  is  hereby  established  a  public benefit corporation known as the "New
  York city residential mortgage insurance corporation"  as  a  subsidiary
  corporation   of   the  corporation.  The  purpose  of  such  subsidiary
  corporation shall be to insure mortgage loans in order  to  promote  the
  preservation  of neighborhoods which are blighted, are becoming blighted
  or may become blighted, to discourage disinvestment  and  encourage  the
  investment  of  mortgage  capital  in  such neighborhoods and to provide
  safe, sanitary and affordable  housing  accommodations  to  persons  and
  families  for  whom the ordinary operations of private enterprise cannot
  supply such accommodations.
    (b)  The  subsidiary  corporation  shall  be  the  successor  to   the
  predecessor corporation.
    (c) All property and rights of the predecessor corporation (other than
  moneys  of  the predecessor corporation) are hereby passed to and vested
  in the subsidiary corporation,  subject,  however,  to  all  outstanding


 contracts  of  insurance,  commitments  to  insure  mortgages,  and  all
  outstanding obligations of the predecessor corporation.  All  moneys  of
  the predecessor corporation (including, but not limited to, amounts held
  in  the  mortgage  insurance  fund established pursuant to section seven
  hundred nine of this chapter, prior to said section being repealed)  and
  all  moneys  held in the remic premium reserve fund established pursuant
  to said section seven hundred nine shall be  transferred  to  the  city;
  provided  that  as  a condition to said transfer, a like amount of money
  shall be transferred from the corporation to the subsidiary  corporation
  to  be deposited into the mortgage insurance fund, the housing insurance
  fund and the remic premium reserve fund  (all  established  pursuant  to
  subdivision  twelve  of  this  section)  in  such  amounts  as  shall be
  determined by the subsidiary corporation, subject to the  provisions  of
  paragraph (a) of subdivision twelve of this section.
    (d)  All  debts,  liabilities, obligations, contracts, agreements, and
  covenants of the predecessor corporation (including, but not limited to,
  contracts of insurance and commitments to insure mortgages)  are  hereby
  imposed  upon  and  shall  be assumed by the subsidiary corporation. All
  persons having claims under any contracts of insurance or commitments to
  insure mortgages entered  into  with  the  predecessor  corporation  may
  enforce  those  claims  against  the  subsidiary corporation in the same
  manner as they might have against the predecessor corporation,  and  the
  rights  and  remedies of such persons shall not be limited or restricted
  in any manner by this section. The foregoing notwithstanding, the debts,
  liabilities, obligations, contracts, agreements  and  covenants  of  the
  predecessor  corporation  shall not be imposed upon the corporation. All
  persons having claims under any contracts of insurance or commitments to
  insure mortgages entered into with  the  predecessor  corporation  shall
  have  no  right  to  enforce  those  claims  in  any  manner against the
  corporation.
    (e) In continuing  the  functions  and  carrying  out  the  contracts,
  obligations  and  duties  of the predecessor corporation, the subsidiary
  corporation is hereby authorized to act in its own name or in  the  name
  of the predecessor corporation as may be convenient or advisable.
    (f)  All  regulations of the predecessor corporation shall continue to
  be in effect as the regulations  of  the  subsidiary  corporation  until
  amended,  supplemented  or  rescinded  by  the subsidiary corporation in
  accordance with law.
    3. Assistance; privileges. (a) The subsidiary corporation may  receive
  moneys  from the corporation, the state, any public benefit corporation,
  the city, the federal government or any other source for public purposes
  set forth in this section.
    (b) The subsidiary corporation may contract for and accept  any  gifts
  or grants or loans of funds or property or financial or other aid in any
  form  from  the  federal  government  or  any  agency or instrumentality
  thereof, or from the state or any  agency  or  instrumentality  thereof,
  including the city and the corporation, or from any other source, public
  or  private,  and  to comply, subject to the provisions of this section,
  with the terms and conditions thereof.
    (c) The city and the corporation are each hereby  authorized  to,  but
  neither is required to, make gifts, grants or loans of funds or property
  or  financial or other aid in any form to the subsidiary corporation and
  to enter into any contracts or  other  agreements  with  the  subsidiary
  corporation,   on   such  terms  and  conditions  as  the  city  or  the
  corporation, as applicable, and the  subsidiary  corporation  may  agree
  upon,  all  in  furtherance  of  the  public  purposes set forth in this
  section.


   (d) All  domestic  corporations  or  associations  organized  for  the
  purpose   of   carrying  on  business  in  this  state,  public  benefit
  corporations, public employee  pension  funds  and  any  other  persons,
  corporations or associations are hereby authorized to make contributions
  to the subsidiary corporation.
    (e)   The  subsidiary  corporation  shall  have  all  the  privileges,
  immunities, tax exemptions and other exemptions of  the  corporation  to
  the extent the same are not inconsistent with this section.
    4.  Membership.  The  membership  of such subsidiary corporation shall
  consist of  nine  members,  seven  of  whom  shall  be  members  of  the
  corporation and two of whom shall be appointed by the mayor. The members
  who  are not members of the corporation shall serve for terms ending two
  and four years respectively from January first next succeeding the  date
  of  their appointment. The successors of the members who are not members
  of the corporation shall serve for terms of four years  each.  A  member
  who  is  not  a member of the corporation shall continue in office until
  his or her successor has been appointed and qualified. With  respect  to
  any  member who is not a member of the corporation, the mayor shall fill
  any vacancy which may occur by reason of death, resignation or otherwise
  for the remaining unexpired term of such member. A member who is  not  a
  member of the corporation may be removed by the mayor for cause, but not
  without  an  opportunity  to  be  heard in person or by counsel, in such
  member's defense, upon not less than ten days' notice. The powers of the
  subsidiary corporation shall be vested in and exercised by no less  than
  five  of  the members thereof then in office. The subsidiary corporation
  may delegate to one or more of its members, or its officers, agents  and
  employees,   such   duties  and  powers  as  it  may  deem  proper.  The
  commissioner of the department of housing preservation  and  development
  shall  serve as chairperson of the subsidiary corporation. The president
  of  the  corporation  shall  serve  as  president  of   the   subsidiary
  corporation.
    5.  Compensation.  Notwithstanding any inconsistent provisions of this
  or any other general, special or local law, no officer  or  employee  of
  the corporation, the city or the state, or of any public corporation, as
  defined  in  the  general  construction  law,  shall  be  deemed to have
  forfeited or shall forfeit such person's office  or  employment  or  any
  benefits  provided under the retirement and social security law or under
  any public retirement system maintained by the state  or  by  the  civil
  divisions thereof by reason of such person's acceptance of membership on
  or by virtue of such person's being an officer, employee or agent of the
  subsidiary  corporation. The members may engage in private employment or
  in a profession or business, unless otherwise prohibited from  doing  so
  by virtue of holding another public office, subject to the provisions of
  article  eighteen of the general municipal law. For the purposes of such
  article eighteen, the subsidiary corporation shall be  a  "municipality"
  and a member shall be a "municipal officer". No member of the subsidiary
  corporation  shall  receive  additional  compensation,  either direct or
  indirect, other than reimbursement for  actual  and  necessary  expenses
  incurred  in  the performance of such person's duties, by reason of such
  person serving as a member of the subsidiary corporation.
    6. Transfer of resources. The city and the corporation shall have  the
  power  to,  but  shall  not  be obligated to, transfer to the subsidiary
  corporation such agents, employees and facilities,  including  any  real
  and/or  personal  property,  in  order to carry out the purposes of this
  section.
    7. Termination. The subsidiary corporation and its corporate existence
  shall continue until terminated by law; provided, however, that no  such
  law  shall  take effect so long as the subsidiary corporation shall have


 contracts to insure mortgages (including  mortgage  insurance  contracts
  and  housing  insurance contracts), commitments to insure, notes, bonds,
  or other obligations outstanding, unless  adequate  provision  has  been
  made  for  the payment thereof. Upon termination of the existence of the
  subsidiary corporation all of its rights and properties  shall  pass  to
  and be vested in the corporation.
    8. Powers. The subsidiary corporation shall have the power:
    (a) To sue and be sued;
    (b) To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure;
    (c) To make and alter by-laws for its organization;
    (d)  To  adopt,  amend or rescind rules and regulations appropriate to
  carry out  its  corporate  purposes,  including  rules  and  regulations
  governing  the  use of its property and facilities and to establish such
  requirements and enter into such agreements to achieve the objectives of
  this section;
    (e) To make and execute contracts and all other instruments  necessary
  or  convenient  for  the exercise of its powers and functions under this
  section;
    (f) To acquire, hold and dispose of real and/or personal property  for
  its corporate purposes;
    (g)  To engage the services of private consultants on a contract basis
  for rendering professional and technical assistance and advice;
    (h) To appoint officers, agents and employees, prescribe their  duties
  and qualifications and fix their compensation;
    (i) To invest any funds, or other moneys under its custody and control
  in the same manner as the corporation;
    (j)  To  establish  and  levy  fees and charges in connection with the
  processing of  applications  for  mortgage  insurance  and  fix  premium
  charges for mortgage insurance;
    (k)  To  enter  into  commitments to insure mortgages and contracts of
  insurance and enter into any additional  agreements  as  the  subsidiary
  corporation deems appropriate to further the objectives of this section;
    (l)  To  fulfill  its  obligations  and  enforce  its rights under any
  contract of insurance, or commitment to insure so furnished as  provided
  in  this section and such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the
  subsidiary corporation;
    (m) To pay, pursue to final collection, compromise, waive  or  release
  any right, title, claim, lien or demand, however acquired, including any
  equity or right of redemption;
    (n)  To  foreclose  any  mortgage in default or commence any action to
  protect or enforce any right conferred upon it  by  any  law,  mortgage,
  contract  or  other agreement, and to bid for and purchase such property
  at any foreclosure or at any other sale, or otherwise to acquire or take
  possession of any such property;
    (o) To deal with, hold, administer, manage, rent,  repair,  insure  or
  sell, lease or otherwise dispose of any property conveyed to or acquired
  by  the  subsidiary  corporation  and  to enter into agreements with the
  state,  the  city,  or  any  person,  firm,   entity,   partnership   or
  corporation, either public or private, with regard thereto;
    (p)  To  procure  insurance  against  any  loss in connection with its
  property and other assets and to procure reinsurance in connection  with
  its  obligations, all in such amounts and from such insurers as it deems
  necessary or desirable;
    (q) To consent to the modification, with respect to rate of  interest,
  time of payment of any installment of principal or interest, security or
  any other term, of any mortgage, mortgage loan, contract or agreement of
  any  kind  which  the subsidiary corporation has insured or to which the
  subsidiary corporation is a party;


   (r) To sell,  at  public  or  private  sale,  any  mortgage,  mortgage
  participation or other obligation held by the subsidiary corporation;
    (s) To procure cash equivalents for deposit in its funds;
    (t)  To  enter into co-insurance agreements with any entity authorized
  by law to provide mortgage insurance with respect  to  property  located
  within  the city of New York, including, but not limited to the state of
  New York mortgage agency and the United States department of housing and
  urban development;
    (u) To do any and all things necessary or convenient to carry out  its
  purposes  and  exercise  the  powers expressly given and granted in this
  section.
    9.  Classification   of   housing   accommodations.   The   subsidiary
  corporation  may  classify  housing  accommodations  within the city and
  approve any of such classes as eligible for insurance pursuant  to  this
  section  and  enact  separate  guidelines dealing with the provision and
  extent of such insurance.
    10. Insurance of mortgage loans. (a)  The  subsidiary  corporation  is
  authorized,   subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  section,  to  make
  commitments to insure and to contract to insure mortgage loans  eligible
  for insurance hereunder.
    (b)  The  subsidiary  corporation  shall  limit  its  insurance  on  a
  rehabilitation or preservation loan to an amount not in excess of  fifty
  per centum of the outstanding principal indebtedness, provided, however,
  that  the  subsidiary  corporation may insure an amount not in excess of
  seventy-five per centum of the outstanding principal indebtedness  of  a
  rehabilitation  loan  if it shall find that the extent of rehabilitation
  is sufficient to justify such additional  insurance,  provided  further,
  however,  that  the  subsidiary  corporation may insure an amount not to
  exceed the full outstanding principal indebtedness of  a  rehabilitation
  or  preservation  loan when such mortgage loan has been made by a public
  benefit corporation of the  state  of  New  York  which  public  benefit
  corporation  has issued or will issue bonds or notes, some or all of the
  proceeds of which bonds or notes were used or will be used to make  such
  mortgage  loan,  or  when  the  mortgage  loan has been made by a public
  employee pension fund. The foregoing notwithstanding,  the  sum  of  the
  percentage  of  any  mortgage loan insured by the subsidiary corporation
  and the percentage of such loan insured or to be insured  by  any  other
  party  shall  not  exceed  one  hundred  per  centum  of the outstanding
  principal indebtedness of such mortgage loan.
    (c) The subsidiary corporation shall not issue a commitment to  insure
  or a housing insurance contract unless upon the issuance thereof amounts
  on deposit in the housing insurance fund will at least equal the housing
  insurance fund requirement.
    (d)  Except  for  mortgage insurance contracts and except as otherwise
  provided  in  paragraph  (e)  of  this   subdivision,   the   subsidiary
  corporation  shall  not issue a commitment to insure nor shall it insure
  any mortgage loan unless it shall first find (i) that the property which
  is the security for such mortgage loan  is  located  in  a  neighborhood
  within  the  city of New York characterized by a deficiency of available
  mortgage financing; (ii) that such deficiency has caused or threatens to
  cause  undermaintained  and  deteriorating  housing  accommodations  and
  substandard  and  unsanitary  neighborhoods;  (iii) that the granting of
  such mortgage loan will aid in the preservation or rehabilitation of the
  neighborhood in which such  property  is  located;  (iv)  that,  if  the
  property  which  is  the  security  for such mortgage loan is other real
  property, the granting of such mortgage loan will assist  in  preventing
  the  deterioration  of  residential housing in the neighborhood in which
  such property is located;  and  (v)  that  the  property  which  is  the


 security  for  such loan meets such other requirements as the subsidiary
  corporation may from time to time establish by guidelines adopted by the
  subsidiary  corporation.  Any  such  determination  by  the   subsidiary
  corporation  shall  be  conclusive and final and shall not be subject to
  review of any kind or nature or in any manner whatsoever and  shall  not
  give rise to any liability on the part of the subsidiary corporation.
    (e)  The  subsidiary  corporation may issue a commitment to insure and
  may insure any mortgage loans, notwithstanding the criteria set forth in
  subparagraph  (i),  (ii),  (iii)  or  (iv)  of  paragraph  (d)  of  this
  subdivision  provided  that  it  shall  find  the  property which is the
  security for such mortgage loan or mortgage loans is either: (i) located
  within the city of New York in an empire  zone  designated  pursuant  to
  article  eighteen-B  of  the general municipal law, or (ii) will provide
  safe, sanitary and affordable housing for persons and families for  whom
  the  ordinary  operations  of  private  enterprise  cannot  supply  such
  housing, or (iii) the entity providing the mortgage financing was or  is
  created  by  local,  state  or  federal legislation and certifies to the
  subsidiary corporation that the housing  accommodations  or  other  real
  property  are  located  within the city of New York and meet the program
  criteria  applicable  to  such  entity.  In  addition,  the   subsidiary
  corporation   may   enter   into   any   mortgage   insurance  contract,
  notwithstanding the criteria set forth in subparagraph (i), (ii),  (iii)
  or  (iv) of paragraph (d) of this subdivision provided that with respect
  to such mortgage insurance contract, a commitment to insure  shall  have
  been previously issued by the predecessor corporation.
    (f)  The  subsidiary  corporation may issue a commitment to insure and
  may insure an existing mortgage  loan,  when  an  application  for  such
  mortgage  insurance  has  been  submitted  prior  to  the making of such
  mortgage loan,  and  significant  circumstances  beyond  the  reasonable
  control  of  the  mortgagor  and mortgagee necessitate the making of the
  mortgage loan prior to the issuance of the commitment to insure and when
  it is determined by the subsidiary corporation that such  mortgage  loan
  would  not have been made except for the reasonable expectation that the
  subsidiary corporation would insure the mortgage loan.
    (g) To be eligible for insurance under this section, a  mortgage  loan
  shall  be  a preservation loan and/or a rehabilitation loan and (i) bear
  interest,  exclusive  of  premium  charges  fixed  by   the   subsidiary
  corporation,  at a rate not in excess of the rate of interest authorized
  by law and not in excess of a maximum rate of  interest  established  by
  the   subsidiary   corporation   from   time  to  time.  In  making  its
  determination of  appropriate  maximum  interest  rate,  the  subsidiary
  corporation  shall  take into account the rates of interest prevalent in
  the mortgage  market,  current  data  on  secondary  market  yields  and
  discount  and/or  premium levels; (ii) unless the subsidiary corporation
  in  its  sole  discretion  shall  otherwise   determine,   provide   for
  substantially  equal  and  constant  periodic  payments of principal and
  interest in amounts sufficient to  pay  all  interest  and  effect  full
  repayment  of  principal  within  the  term  of the mortgage loan; (iii)
  contain terms  with  respect  to  the  prepayment,  insurance,  repairs,
  alterations,  payment  of  taxes,  special assessments, service charges,
  default  reserves,   delinquency   charges,   foreclosure   proceedings,
  additional and secondary liens, and such other matters as the subsidiary
  corporation  may  in  its  discretion  prescribe; (iv) be accompanied by
  certificates, issued by such  officers  of  the  mortgagee,  independent
  appraisers  or  other persons as the subsidiary corporation may require,
  certifying that: (A) where appropriate, the annual income to be  derived
  from  the  property  equals not less than one hundred five per centum of
  the annual charges  and  expenses,  including  provision  for  reserves,


 satisfactory  to  the  subsidiary  corporation,  for the amortization of
  subordinate mortgage loans over the remaining  terms  of  such  mortgage
  loans regardless of whether the terms of such subordinate mortgage loans
  include  scheduled  amortization  of principal; (B) the remaining useful
  life of the property is greater than the term of the mortgage;  and  (C)
  the  housing  accommodation  or other real property does not contain any
  substantial violations of the housing maintenance code or  the  multiple
  dwelling  law,  except  that  in the case of a mortgage loan made to the
  owner of a housing accommodation or other real property  containing  any
  such  violations,  the  subsidiary  corporation  may insure or commit to
  insure such mortgage loan if the mortgagee and the owner have  submitted
  a  plan,  satisfactory  to  the subsidiary corporation to eliminate such
  violations; and (v) satisfy such additional terms and conditions as  the
  subsidiary corporation may prescribe.
    (h)  In addition to the conditions set forth in paragraphs (d) through
  (g) in this subdivision, the subsidiary corporation shall not insure nor
  issue a commitment to insure any rehabilitation  loan  unless  it  shall
  find  (i) that rehabilitation is necessary to upgrade the property, (ii)
  that rehabilitation will not necessitate more than a minimum  amount  of
  relocation  of the residents of any housing accommodation and (iii) that
  the rehabilitation undertaken with the proceeds  of  the  rehabilitation
  loan has been completed.
    (i)   A   financial  institution  may  request  insurance  by  written
  application to the subsidiary  corporation  in  such  form  and  manner,
  together   with  such  information  and  documents,  as  the  subsidiary
  corporation may prescribe. No application shall be complete  unless  and
  until  the financial institution has paid such processing fees and other
  charges  as  the  subsidiary  corporation  may  impose   in   connection
  therewith.  The  subsidiary  corporation shall signify its acceptance of
  such application for insurance by issuance of a commitment to insure  or
  a contract of insurance.
    (j)  The subsidiary corporation shall not issue a commitment to insure
  a mortgage loan extended by the corporation unless  such  commitment  to
  insure  is  approved  by at least two members of a committee composed of
  the chairperson of the subsidiary corporation and  the  members  of  the
  subsidiary corporation who are not members of the corporation.
    11.  Payment  of insurance. The subsidiary corporation shall establish
  procedures to be followed by a mortgagee in the event of a default under
  the terms  of  any  mortgage  insured  by  the  subsidiary  corporation,
  provided,  however,  any  modification to such procedures (other than to
  cure any ambiguity, defect or omission) shall apply  only  to  mortgages
  for  which commitments have been issued after the effective date of such
  modification. The subsidiary corporation may establish prerequisites for
  payment of an insurance claim, including, but not limited to,  requiring
  the mortgagee to take such actions with respect to the property securing
  the defaulted mortgage as may be specified by the subsidiary corporation
  to  be  satisfactory evidence of a continuing default, including but not
  limited to the following actions: (i) becoming lawfully the mortgagee in
  possession thereof; (ii) causing a receiver  to  be  appointed  of  such
  property;  (iii) obtaining voluntary conveyance of the mortgagor's right
  and title to such property; or (iv) obtaining by foreclosure  clear  and
  unencumbered  title  to  such  property,  all  in  such  manner  as  the
  subsidiary corporation may require.  Following  submission  of  a  valid
  claim,  the  subsidiary  corporation shall pay an amount which shall not
  exceed the lesser of: (A) the then outstanding principal amount  of  the
  mortgage multiplied by the per centum of such outstanding amount insured
  by  the  subsidiary  corporation plus that per centum of the mortgagee's
  cost arising from the default, inclusive of public liens and  delinquent


 and  unpaid interest, all as the subsidiary corporation may from time to
  time allow, which per centum shall not exceed  the  per  centum  of  the
  outstanding principal indebtedness insured by the subsidiary corporation
  or  (B) the insured amount of the mortgage loan at the date of execution
  of the contract of insurance or its latest  amendment,  if  any,  except
  that the subsidiary corporation shall pay the greater of the two amounts
  on  claims  by  a  public  employee  pension fund or by a public benefit
  corporation from mortgage loans financed by the sale of notes  or  bonds
  issued  by  said corporation and such amount payable may, if so provided
  in the contract of insurance, include accrued interest to  the  date  of
  redemption  for  such  bonds  or notes and any cost associated with such
  redemption, provided that no more than the actual loss suffered by  such
  public  benefit  corporation  or  public  employee pension fund shall be
  paid. Such payment may be made by the subsidiary corporation in  a  lump
  sum,  or  in  partial  payments  made within such period of time, not in
  excess of two  years,  as  may  be  agreed  to  between  the  subsidiary
  corporation  and  the mortgagee, all in accordance with procedures to be
  established by the subsidiary corporation.  The  subsidiary  corporation
  shall  have  the power to bid for and purchase the property securing the
  defaulted mortgage at any foreclosure or other sale of such property, or
  to otherwise acquire or take possession of such property  in  accordance
  with  other  provisions  of  law.  In  the  event  of any such purchase,
  acquisition, or taking of possession, the subsidiary  corporation  shall
  have  the power to complete, administer, sell, dispose of, and otherwise
  deal with such property, in such manner as may be necessary or desirable
  to protect the interests of the subsidiary corporation.
    12. Mortgage insurance fund, housing insurance fund and remic  premium
  reserve  fund. (a) The subsidiary corporation shall create and establish
  a fund to be known as the "mortgage insurance fund" which shall be  used
  as a revolving fund for carrying out the provisions of this section with
  respect  to  mortgage  insurance contracts and shall, upon its creation,
  pay into such fund moneys made available to the  subsidiary  corporation
  from  the  corporation in an amount equal to the mortgage insurance fund
  requirement as of such date for the purpose  of  such  fund,  and  shall
  thereafter,  pay  into  such  fund,  upon  receipt,  (i) such portion of
  mortgage insurance contract premium payments in an amount equal  to  the
  amount  necessary  to  be  transferred to the mortgage insurance fund in
  order that the amount on  deposit  therein  be  equal  to  the  mortgage
  insurance  fund requirement (or such lesser amount as may be available);
  (ii) such portion of the proceeds received by the subsidiary corporation
  in connection with the exercise of such subsidiary corporation's  rights
  under  any  mortgage insurance contract in an amount equal to the amount
  necessary to be transferred to the mortgage insurance fund in order that
  the amount on deposit therein be equal to the  mortgage  insurance  fund
  requirement  (or  such  lesser  amount  as  may be available); (iii) any
  moneys appropriated, paid or otherwise made available by the city or the
  corporation for the purpose of such fund;  and  (iv)  any  other  moneys
  which  may  be  made  available  to  the  subsidiary corporation for the
  purpose of such fund from any other  source.  All  moneys  held  in  the
  mortgage  insurance fund, except as hereinafter provided, shall be used,
  as required, solely for the  payment  of  the  subsidiary  corporation's
  liabilities   arising   from  mortgage  insurance  contracts;  provided,
  however, that moneys in such fund shall not be  withdrawn  therefrom  at
  any  time in such amount as would reduce the amount of such fund to less
  than the mortgage insurance fund requirement, except for the purposes of
  paying such liabilities, as the same become due and for the  payment  of
  which  other moneys of the subsidiary corporation are not available. Any
  income or interest earned by, or increment to,  the  mortgage  insurance


 fund  due  to  the  investment  thereof  or  any amount in excess of the
  mortgage insurance  fund  requirement  shall  be  transferred  at  least
  annually by the subsidiary corporation to the remic premium reserve fund
  or,  at the written direction of the chairperson, to such other funds or
  accounts of the subsidiary corporation to the extent it does not  reduce
  the  amount  of the mortgage insurance fund below the mortgage insurance
  fund requirement.
    (b) The subsidiary corporation shall create and establish a fund to be
  known as the "housing insurance fund" which shall be used as a revolving
  fund for carrying out the provisions of this  section  with  respect  to
  housing  insurance contracts and shall, upon its creation, pay into such
  fund any moneys or cash equivalents made  available  to  the  subsidiary
  corporation from the corporation for the purpose of such fund, and shall
  thereafter,  pay  into  such  fund,  upon  receipt,  (i) such portion of
  housing insurance contract premium payments in an amount  equal  to  the
  amount  necessary  to  be  transferred  to the housing insurance fund in
  order that the amount  on  deposit  therein  be  equal  to  the  housing
  insurance  fund requirement (or such lesser amount as may be available);
  (ii) such portion of the proceeds received by the subsidiary corporation
  in connection with the exercise of such subsidiary corporation's  rights
  under  any  housing  insurance contract in an amount equal to the amount
  necessary to be transferred to the housing insurance fund in order  that
  the  amount  on  deposit  therein be equal to the housing insurance fund
  requirement (or such lesser amount  as  may  be  available);  (iii)  any
  moneys   or  cash  equivalents  appropriated,  paid  or  otherwise  made
  available by the city, the federal government or the corporation for the
  purpose of such fund; and (iv) any  other  moneys  or  cash  equivalents
  which  may  be  made  available  to  the  subsidiary corporation for the
  purpose of  such  fund  from  any  other  source.  All  moneys  or  cash
  equivalents  held  in  the housing insurance fund, except as hereinafter
  provided, shall be used, as required, solely  for  the  payment  of  the
  subsidiary  corporation's  liabilities  arising  from  housing insurance
  contracts; provided, however, that moneys or cash  equivalents  in  such
  fund  shall  not  be  withdrawn  therefrom at any time in such amount as
  would reduce the amount of such fund to less than the housing  insurance
  fund  requirement, except for the purpose of paying such liabilities, as
  the same become due and for the payment of which  other  moneys  of  the
  subsidiary  corporation are not available. Any income or interest earned
  by, or increment to, the housing insurance fund due  to  the  investment
  thereof   or  any  amount  in  excess  of  the  housing  insurance  fund
  requirement shall be transferred at least  annually  by  the  subsidiary
  corporation  to  the  remic  premium  reserve  fund  or  at  the written
  direction of the chairperson, to such other funds  or  accounts  of  the
  subsidiary  corporation  to  the extent it does not reduce the amount of
  the housing insurance fund below the housing insurance fund requirement.
    (c)  The  subsidiary  corporation  shall  create  and  establish  such
  accounts  within  the  housing  insurance  fund  as  may be necessary or
  desirable for its corporate purposes.
    (d) The subsidiary corporation shall create and establish a fund to be
  known as the "remic premium reserve fund" for the purpose  of  providing
  for payment of the subsidiary corporation's liabilities arising from its
  operations,  its  mortgage insurance contracts and its housing insurance
  contracts and shall, upon its creation, pay into  such  fund  moneys  or
  cash  equivalents  made available to the subsidiary corporation from the
  corporation for the purpose of such fund, and shall thereafter, pay into
  such fund, upon receipt, (i) the balance of  the  premium  payments,  if
  any,  received  by  the  subsidiary corporation with respect to mortgage
  insurance contracts and housing insurance  contracts  after  making  the


 deposits described in subparagraph (i) of paragraph (a) and subparagraph
  (i) of paragraph (b) respectively, of this subdivision; (ii) the balance
  of  any  proceeds  received  by the subsidiary corporation in connection
  with  the  exercise  of  such  subsidiary corporation's rights under any
  mortgage insurance contract or housing insurance contract  after  making
  the  deposits  described  in  subparagraph  (ii)  of  paragraph  (a) and
  subparagraph (ii) of paragraph (b)  respectively  of  this  subdivision;
  (iii)  any  moneys  or  cash equivalents appropriated, paid or otherwise
  made available by the city, the federal government  or  the  corporation
  for  the  purpose  of  such  fund;  and  (iv)  any  other moneys or cash
  equivalents which may be made available to  the  subsidiary  corporation
  for the purpose of such fund from any other source.
    (e)  The  subsidiary  corporation  shall  create  and  establish  such
  accounts within the remic premium reserve fund as may be  necessary  for
  its corporate purposes.
    (f)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, all moneys received
  by the subsidiary corporation shall be deposited in  the  remic  premium
  reserve fund.
    (g)  If  the  remic premium reserve fund is funded in whole or in part
  with cash, the moneys in such fund shall be deposited  in  one  or  more
  banks  or  trust  companies  designated,  in  manner provided by law, as
  depositories of the funds of the subsidiary corporation. The  subsidiary
  corporation  may  invest  any  moneys in such fund in the same manner as
  moneys  of  the  corporation  may  be  invested,  provided   that   such
  obligations  shall  be  payable  within such time as the proceeds may be
  needed to meet expenditures estimated to be incurred by  the  subsidiary
  corporation.  Any  interest earned or capital gain realized on the money
  so deposited or invested shall accrue to and become part of  such  fund.
  The  separate  indentity  of  such  fund shall be maintained whether its
  assets consist of cash or investments or both.
    (h) The subsidiary corporation shall transfer from the  remic  premium
  reserve   fund  such  moneys  as  the  subsidiary  corporation,  by  its
  chairperson, shall certify are required for the  subsidiary  corporation
  to  pay  its operating expenses, to pay any liabilities arising from the
  subsidiary  corporation's  mortgage  insurance  contracts  and   housing
  insurance  contracts, and to restore the mortgage insurance fund and the
  housing insurance fund to the mortgage insurance  fund  requirement  and
  housing insurance fund requirement, respectively.
    (i)  The  subsidiary corporation shall keep a separate account for the
  remic premium reserve fund. Such account shall show  (i)  the  date  and
  amount  of  each sum paid into the fund, (ii) the interest earned by the
  fund, (iii) the capital gains or  losses  resulting  from  the  sale  of
  investments  of  the fund, (iv) the interest or capital gains which have
  accrued to the fund, (v) the amount and date of each withdrawal from the
  fund, and (vi) the assets  of  the  fund  indicating  the  cash  balance
  therein and a schedule of the amounts invested.
    (j)  In  computing  the  amount  of  the  mortgage insurance fund, the
  housing insurance fund and  the  remic  premium  reserve  fund  for  the
  purposes  of  this section, securities in which all or a portion of such
  funds shall be invested shall be valued at par, if purchased at par,  or
  if  purchased  at  other  than par, at amortized value. Amortized value,
  when used with respect to securities purchased at a premium above  or  a
  discount below par or if purchased at par, or if purchased at other than
  par,  shall mean the value as of any given date obtained by dividing the
  total premiums or discount at which such securities  were  purchased  by
  the number of interest payments remaining to maturity on such securities
  after  such  purchase and by multiplying the amount so calculated by the
  number of interest payment dates having passed since the  date  of  such


 purchase;  and  (i)  in the case of securities purchased at a premium by
  deducting the product thus obtained from the purchase price, and (ii) in
  the case of securities purchased at a discount  by  adding  the  product
  thus obtained to the purchase price.
    (k)  The  subsidiary corporation shall create and establish such other
  fund or funds as  may  be  necessary  or  desirable  for  its  corporate
  purposes.
    13.  Charges  and  fees.  (a)  The  subsidiary corporation shall fix a
  premium charge for its insurance of mortgages pursuant to  this  section
  which  shall  not  be  less  than  the  minimum amount nor more than the
  maximum amount that the state of New York mortgage agency  is  permitted
  to charge pursuant to applicable provisions of law.
    (b)  The  subsidiary  corporation  may  establish  and levy such other
  charges and fees in connection with applications for mortgage  insurance
  and insurance commitments as it may deem appropriate and necessary.
    (c)  Such  premium  charges  and other charges shall be payable by the
  mortgagor in cash in such manner as may be prescribed by the  subsidiary
  corporation.
    (d)  Such  premium  charges  and  other  charges and fees shall not be
  deemed to be interest for the purposes of section 5-501 of  the  general
  obligations law.
    14.   Assistance   by  the  corporation.  The  corporation  is  hereby
  authorized to perform such functions and services in connection with any
  lawful corporate purpose of  the  subsidiary  corporation  as  shall  be
  requested  by  the  subsidiary  corporation.  The subsidiary corporation
  shall  pay  to  the  corporation  from  any  moneys  of  the  subsidiary
  corporation available for such purposes such amounts as are necessary to
  pay  the  corporation  for  the  services  rendered  by  the corporation
  pursuant to this section.
    15.  Assistance  by  the  department  of  housing   preservation   and
  development.  The  commissioner  of housing preservation and development
  and the department of housing preservation and  development  are  hereby
  authorized to perform such functions and services in connection with any
  lawful  corporate  purpose  of  the  subsidiary  corporation as shall be
  requested by the  subsidiary  corporation.  The  subsidiary  corporation
  shall pay to the department of housing preservation and development from
  any  moneys  of  the  subsidiary corporation available for such purposes
  such amounts as are necessary to reimburse  the  department  of  housing
  preservation  and development for the services provided pursuant to this
  section.
    16. Annual report. The subsidiary  corporation  shall  submit  to  the
  mayor,  the  comptroller,  the director of management and budget and the
  corporation within ninety days after the  end  of  its  fiscal  year,  a
  complete  and  detailed  report  setting  forth:  (i) its operations and
  accomplishments; (ii) its receipts and expenditures during  such  fiscal
  year in accordance with the categories or classifications established by
  the   subsidiary  corporation  for  its  operating  and  capital  outlay
  purposes; and (iii) its assets and liabilities at the end of its  fiscal
  year,  including  a schedule of mortgages which have been insured during
  such year, the status of the mortgage insurance fund, housing  insurance
  fund  and  other  reserve or special funds established by the subsidiary
  corporation.
    17. Moneys of the  subsidiary  corporation.  (a)  All  moneys  of  the
  subsidiary  corporation,  except  as otherwise authorized or provided in
  this section, shall be deposited as soon as practicable  in  a  separate
  account or accounts in banks or trust companies organized under the laws
  of  the  state  or  national  banking  association,  in  each case doing
  business in the city. The moneys in such accounts shall be paid  out  on


 checks  signed by such officer or employee of the subsidiary corporation
  as the subsidiary corporation shall  authorize.  All  deposits  of  such
  moneys  shall,  if required by the subsidiary corporation, be secured by
  obligations  of  the  United  States or of the state or of the city of a
  market value equal at all times to the amount of  the  deposit  and  all
  banks  and trust companies are authorized to give such security for such
  deposits.
    (b) The subsidiary corporation shall prescribe a system of accounts.
    (c)  The  comptroller,  or  the   comptroller's   legally   authorized
  representative,  is hereby authorized and empowered from time to time to
  examine the books and accounts of the subsidiary  corporation  including
  its  receipts,  disbursements,  contracts, reserve funds, sinking funds,
  investments, and any other matters relating to its  financial  standing.
  Such  an examination shall be conducted by the comptroller at least once
  in every five years; the comptroller is authorized, however,  to  accept
  from  the  subsidiary  corporation,  in  lieu of such an examination, an
  external examination of its books and accounts made at  the  request  of
  the subsidiary corporation.
    (d)  The  subsidiary  corporation  shall  submit  to  the  mayor,  the
  comptroller and the  corporation  within  thirty  days  of  the  receipt
  thereof  by  the  subsidiary  corporation  a copy of the report of every
  external examination  of  the  books  and  accounts  of  the  subsidiary
  corporation  other  than copies of the reports of such examinations made
  by the comptroller.
    18. Rentals. Notwithstanding the  provisions  of,  or  any  regulation
  promulgated  pursuant  to,  the  emergency housing rent control law, the
  local emergency housing rent control act or local law  enacted  pursuant
  thereto, all dwelling units in a multiple dwelling the rehabilitation of
  which  commenced  after  July  first, nineteen hundred seventy-seven and
  which  is  financed  by  a  mortgage  loan  insured  by  the  subsidiary
  corporation  (including,  but  not  limited  to,  mortgage loans insured
  pursuant  to  mortgage  insurance  contracts   and   housing   insurance
  contracts), except for dwelling units occupied by reason of ownership of
  stock  in  a  cooperative  and except for dwelling units that constitute
  condominiums, shall be subject to the rent stabilization law of nineteen
  hundred  sixty-nine,  beginning  immediately  after  initial  rents,  as
  established  under  applicable  provisions of this chapter, section four
  hundred twenty-one-a of the real property tax law, section four  hundred
  eighty-nine  of  the  real  property  tax law and/or subparagraph (m) of
  paragraph one of subdivision g of section 26-405 of  the  administrative
  code of the city of New York for such dwelling units to become effective
  on  the  basis  of  such  rehabilitation,  provided that any occupant in
  possession of a dwelling unit that first becomes  subject  to  the  rent
  stabilization  law  of  nineteen  hundred  sixty-nine  pursuant  to this
  section shall be offered a two-year lease notwithstanding  any  contrary
  provisions   of,   or   regulations   adopted  pursuant  to,  such  rent
  stabilization law, at the initial rent  established  for  such  dwelling
  unit  and  provided  further  that such dwelling units, other than those
  dwelling units,  the  initial  rents  of  which  are  established  under
  subparagraph  (m) of paragraph one of subdivision g of section 26-405 of
  the administrative code of the city of New York, shall remain subject to
  the rent stabilization law in accordance with  the  provisions  of  this
  chapter,  section four hundred twenty-one-a of the real property tax law
  and/or section four hundred eighty-nine of the real property tax law  as
  the case may be. Except to the extent to which dwelling units, which are
  controlled  under  other  provisions  of law, become subject to the rent
  stabilization  law  of  nineteen  hundred  sixty-nine  pursuant  to  the
  preceding  sentence,  no  dwelling unit shall become subject to the rent


 stabilization law solely by reason of insurance of a  mortgage  loan  by
  the subsidiary corporation.
    19.  Employees  of the subsidiary corporation. (a) Notwithstanding any
  inconsistent provisions of this section, the appointment  and  promotion
  of  all employees of and for the subsidiary corporation shall be made in
  accordance with the provisions  of  the  civil  service  law  under  the
  jurisdiction  of  the city civil service commission and the compensation
  for such employees shall be fixed by the subsidiary corporation.
    (b) The city, the corporation and the  predecessor  corporation  shall
  have the power to provide for the transfer to the subsidiary corporation
  of  agents, employees and facilities of the city, the corporation or the
  predecessor corporation, as the case may be, to  enable  the  subsidiary
  corporation  to  fulfill  its corporate purposes. Employees of the city,
  the corporation or the predecessor corporation to be transferred to  the
  subsidiary  corporation  pursuant  to this section shall be eligible for
  such transfer and appointment to offices and positions of the subsidiary
  corporation without further examination, and all such employees who have
  been appointed to positions in  city  service  in  accordance  with  the
  provisions  of  the  civil service law under the rules of the city civil
  service commission shall have the same status with  respect  thereto  in
  the  service  of the subsidiary corporation as they had in city service.
  Employees who are members or beneficiaries of any  existing  pension  or
  retirement  system  shall  continue  to  have  such  rights, privileges,
  obligations or status with respect to such  system  or  systems  as  are
  prescribed  by  law  on the date this section takes effect, and all such
  employees who have been  appointed  to  positions  in  city  service  in
  accordance  with the provisions of the civil service law under the rules
  of the city civil service commission shall have  the  same  status  with
  respect  thereto  in  the service of the corporation as they had in city
  service.
    20. Subsidiaries; how  created.  (a)  The  subsidiary  corporation  by
  resolution  may  direct  any  of  its  members, officers or employees to
  organize a subsidiary of the subsidiary  corporation  whenever,  in  the
  sole  discretion  of the subsidiary corporation, it has become necessary
  to acquire one or more housing accommodations or other real property  in
  the  case  of sale under foreclosure or in lieu of foreclosure and it is
  beneficial to effectuate the purpose of this chapter for the  subsidiary
  of   the   subsidiary   corporation   to  hold  title  to  such  housing
  accommodations or other real property.
    (b) Each such subsidiary of the subsidiary corporation shall be wholly
  owned by the subsidiary corporation and shall be organized  pursuant  to
  the  business  corporation  law,  the  not-for-profit corporation law or
  article two or article eleven of this chapter.
    (c) The subsidiary corporation may transfer to any subsidiary  of  the
  subsidiary  corporation  any money, real and/or personal property or may
  convey to it any housing accommodation or other real property  in  order
  to  carry  out the purposes of this article. Each such subsidiary of the
  subsidiary corporation shall have all the  privileges,  immunities,  tax
  exemptions  and  other  exemptions  of the subsidiary corporation to the
  extent the same are  not  inconsistent  with  the  statute  or  statutes
  pursuant  to  which  such  subsidiary  of the subsidiary corporation was
  incorporated. Except as may be inconsistent with the provisions of  this
  article,  such  subsidiary,  if  organized  pursuant  to  article two or
  article eleven of this chapter, shall have all  the  rights  and  powers
  granted  to  housing  companies by this chapter and by any other statute
  pursuant to which such subsidiary  of  the  subsidiary  corporation  was
  organized.


   (d)  No  member or officer of the subsidiary corporation shall receive
  any additional compensation,  either  direct  or  indirect,  other  than
  reimbursement   for  actual  and  necessary  expenses  incurred  in  the
  performance of such person's duties, by reason of such person serving as
  a  member,  director,  trustee  or  officer  of  any  subsidiary  of the
  subsidiary corporation.




   §  655.  Notes  and  bonds  of  the corporation. 1. (a) Subject to the
  provisions of  section  six  hundred  fifty-six  of  this  article,  the
  corporation shall have power and is hereby authorized to issue from time
  to  time  its  negotiable  notes and bonds in conformity with applicable
  provisions of the uniform commercial code in such  principal  amount  as
  the  corporation  shall  determine to be necessary to provide sufficient
  funds for achieving its corporate  purposes,  including  the  making  of
  mortgage  loans,  the  payment  of  interest  on  notes and bonds of the
  corporation, the establishment of reserves  to  secure  such  notes  and
  bonds,  and  the  payment  of  all operating expenses of the corporation
  incident to or necessary  or  convenient  to  carry  out  its  corporate
  purposes and powers.
    (b)  The corporation shall have the power, from time to time, to issue
  (i) notes to renew notes and (ii) bonds  to  pay  notes,  including  the
  interest  thereon  and, whenever it deems refunding expedient, to refund
  any bonds by the issuance of new bonds, whether the bonds to be refunded
  have or have not matured, and to issue bonds partly to refund bonds then
  outstanding and partly for any of its corporate purposes. The  refunding
  bonds  may  be  exchanged  for  the bonds to be refunded or sold and the
  proceeds applied to the purchase, redemption or payment of such bonds.
    (c) Except as may otherwise be expressly provided by the  corporation,
  every  issue  of its notes and bonds shall be general obligations of the
  corporation payable out of any revenues of the corporation, subject only
  to any agreements with the holders of particular notes or bonds pledging
  any particular revenues.
    2.  The  notes  and  bonds  shall  be  authorized  by  resolution   or
  resolutions  of the corporation, shall bear such date or dates and shall
  mature at such time or times  as  such  resolution  or  resolutions  may
  provide,  except  that  no note or any renewal thereof shall mature more
  than five years, and in the case of any  note  or  any  renewal  thereof
  issued  for the purposes of making mortgage loans shall mature more than
  nine years, after the date of issue of the original  note  and  no  bond
  shall  mature  more  than  fifty  years from the date of its issue.  The
  bonds may be issued as serial bonds payable in annual installments or as
  term bonds or as a combination thereof. The notes and bonds  shall  bear
  interest  at  such  rate  or rates, be in such denominations, be in such
  form, either coupon or registered, carry such  registration  privileges,
  be  executed  in  such  manner, be payable in such medium of payment, at
  such place or places, and be subject to such terms of redemption as such
  resolution or resolutions may provide.  The notes and bonds may be  sold
  by the corporation at public or private sale, at such price or prices as
  the corporation shall determine; provided, however, that the corporation
  shall  consult  with  the  comptroller as to the timing of any sale; and
  provided further that no notes or bonds of the corporation may  be  sold
  at  a  private  sale  unless  such  sale and the terms thereof have been
  approved in writing by (a) the comptroller, where such sale  is  not  to
  the  comptroller,  or (b) the director of the budget, where such sale is
  to the comptroller.
    3. Any resolution or resolutions authorizing any notes or bonds or any
  issue thereof may contain provisions, which  shall  be  a  part  of  the
  contract or contracts with the holders thereof, as to:
    (a)  pledging all or any part of the revenues to secure the payment of
  the notes or bonds or of any issue thereof, subject to  such  agreements
  with noteholders or bondholders as may then exist;
    (b)  pledging  all  or  any  part  of  the  assets of the corporation,
  including mortgages and obligations securing the  same,  to  secure  the
  payment of the notes or bonds or of any issue of notes or bonds, subject
  to such agreements with noteholders or bondholders as may then exist;


   (c)  the  use and disposition of the gross income from mortgages owned
  by the corporation and payment of principal of mortgages  owned  by  the
  corporation;
    (d)  the setting aside of reserves or sinking funds and the regulation
  and disposition thereof;
    (e) limitations on the purpose to which the proceeds of sale of  notes
  or bonds may be applied and pledging such proceeds to secure the payment
  of the notes or bonds or of any issue thereof;
    (f)  limitations  on  the  issuance  of additional notes or bonds; the
  terms upon which additional notes or bonds may be  issued  and  secured;
  and the refunding of outstanding or other notes or bonds;
    (g)  the  procedure,  if  any, by which the terms of any contract with
  noteholders or bondholders may be amended or abrogated,  the  amount  of
  notes or bonds the holders of which must consent thereto, and the manner
  in which such consent may be given;
    (h)  limitations  on  the  amount  of  moneys  to  be  expended by the
  corporation for operating expenses of the corporation;
    (i) vesting in a trustee or trustees such property, rights, powers and
  duties in trust as the corporation may determine, which may include  any
  or  all of the rights, powers and duties of the trustee appointed by the
  bondholders pursuant to this article, and  limiting  or  abrogating  the
  right  of  the  bondholders  to  appoint a trustee under this article or
  limiting the rights, powers and duties of such trustee;
    (j) the acts or omissions to act which shall constitute a  default  in
  the  obligations  and  duties  of  the corporation to the holders of the
  notes or bonds and providing for the rights and remedies of the  holders
  of  the notes or bonds in the event of such default, including the right
  to appointment of a receiver; providing, however, that such  rights  and
  remedies  shall  not  be inconsistent with the general laws of the state
  and the other provisions of this article;
    (k) any other matters, of like or different character,  which  in  any
  way  affect  the  security  or protection of the holders of the notes or
  bonds.
    3-a. Any resolution or resolutions authorizing any notes or  bonds  or
  any issue thereof shall contain provisions, which shall be a part of the
  contract  or  contracts  with  the  holders  thereof,  ensuring  that no
  mortgage loan shall be made by the corporation from the proceeds of such
  notes or bonds or issue thereof unless the estimated revenues  from  the
  mortgaged  property,  including  any  subsidies,  shall be sufficient in
  amount to secure repayment of the loan and the interest thereon  and  to
  pay  all  other  necessary  expenses  of  the mortgagor relating to such
  property.
    4. Any pledge made by the corporation shall be valid and binding  from
  the  time  when  the pledge is made; the revenues or property so pledged
  and thereafter received by the corporation shall immediately be  subject
  to  the  lien  of  such  pledge without any physical delivery thereof or
  further act, and the lien of any such pledge shall be valid and  binding
  as  against  all  parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract or
  otherwise against the corporation, irrespective of whether such  parties
  have  notice thereof. Neither the resolution nor any other instrument by
  which a pledge is created need be recorded.
    5. Neither the  members  of  the  corporation  nor  any  other  person
  executing such notes or bonds shall be subject to any personal liability
  or accountability by reason of the issuance thereof.
    6.  The  corporation,  subject  to such agreements with noteholders or
  bondholders as may then  exist,  shall  have  power  out  of  any  funds
  available therefor, to purchase notes or bonds of the corporation, which
  shall thereupon be cancelled, at a price not exceeding


   (a)  if  the  notes or bonds are then redeemable, the redemption price
  then applicable plus accrued interest to the next interest payment  date
  thereon, or
    (b)  if  the  notes  or  bonds are not then redeemable, the redemption
  price applicable on the first date after such purchase  upon  which  the
  notes  or  bonds  become  subject to redemption plus accrued interest to
  such date.
    7. In the discretion of the corporation, the bonds may be secured by a
  trust indenture by and between the corporation and a corporate  trustee,
  which  may  be  any  trust  company or bank having the powers of a trust
  company in the state.  Such trust indenture may contain such  provisions
  for  protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders
  as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of  law,  including
  covenants setting forth the duties of the corporation in relation to the
  exercise  of  its  corporate  powers  and  the custody, safeguarding and
  application of all moneys. The corporation may  provide  by  such  trust
  indenture  for the payment of the proceeds of the bonds and the revenues
  to the trustee under such trust indenture or other depository,  and  for
  the   method   of   disbursement   thereof,  with  such  safeguards  and
  restrictions as it may determine.  All expenses incurred in carrying out
  such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the operating  expenses
  of  the corporation. If the bonds shall be secured by a trust indenture,
  the bondholders shall have no authority to appoint a separate trustee to
  represent them.
    8. Whether or not the notes and bonds are of such form  and  character
  as  to  be  negotiable  instruments  under  the  terms  of  the  uniform
  commercial  code,  the  notes  and  bonds  are  hereby  made  negotiable
  instruments  within  the  meaning  of  and  for  all the purposes of the
  uniform commercial code, subject only to the provisions of the notes and
  bonds for registration.




   §  655-a. Authorization of contracts for taxation by the United States
  of interest on obligations guaranteed thereby. The corporation is hereby
  authorized and empowered, from time to time and at  any  time  to  enter
  into  a contract or contracts with the United States, acting through any
  department, officer, agency, or instrumentality thereof, (a) pursuant to
  which the United States (i),  unconditionally  guarantees  the  payment,
  when  due,  of  the  interest on, and the principal of, bonds, notes, or
  other obligations issued or to be issued by the corporation or (ii) pays
  a portion of the  interest  payable  on  such  bonds,  notes,  or  other
  obligations  issued  or  to  be  issued  by  the  corporation and (b) in
  consideration of which the corporation covenants and consents  that  the
  interest  on such bonds, notes, or other obligations shall be includible
  under the internal revenue code of nineteen hundred  fifty-four  or  any
  subsequent  corresponding  internal  revenue law of the United States in
  the gross income of the holder or holders of such bonds, notes, or other
  obligations to the same extent and in the same manner that the  interest
  on  bills,  bonds,  notes  or  other obligations of the United States is
  includible in the gross income of the holder or  holders  thereof  under
  said  internal  revenue code or any such subsequent law. The corporation
  is hereby futher authorized and empowered  to  include  in  such  bonds,
  notes,  or  other  obligations  and  any  documents related thereto such
  reference to, or summary of, the  contract  or  contracts  as  shall  be
  satisfactory  to such department, officer, agency, or instrumentality of
  the United States. The powers herein conferred shall be in  addition  to
  the  powers  conferred  by  any  other  law and such powers shall not be
  subject to the limitations or restrictions of any other law, but nothing
  contained herein or in any such contract or contracts shall be construed
  to covenant or consent, or to authorize any covenant or consent, to  the
  application  of  any other provision of any other law, federal or state,
  to the corporation or to such bonds, notes, or other obligations, or  to
  the  elimination  or  modification  in  any  way  of any other exemption
  (including without limitation exemption from taxation under section  six
  hundred sixty-three of this article), privilege, or immunity thereof.




   §  656.  Reserve funds and appropriations. 1. a. The corporation shall
  create and establish  special  funds  (herein  referred  to  as  capital
  reserve  funds)  and  shall pay into such a capital reserve fund (1) any
  moneys appropriated and made available by the  state  or  city  for  the
  purpose of such fund, (2) any proceeds of sale of notes or bonds, to the
  extent  provided  in  the  resolution  or resolutions of the corporation
  authorizing the issuance thereof, and (3) any other moneys which may  be
  made  available to the corporation for the purpose of such fund from any
  other source or sources. All moneys held  in  a  capital  reserve  fund,
  except  as  hereinafter provided, shall be used, as required, solely for
  the payment of the principal of bonds as the same mature or  the  annual
  sinking  fund payments, the purchase or redemption of bonds, the payment
  of interest on bonds or the payment of any redemption  premium  required
  to  be  paid  when  such bonds are redeemed prior to maturity; provided,
  however, that moneys in such fund shall not be  withdrawn  therefrom  at
  any  time in such amount as would reduce the amount of such fund to less
  than the maximum  capital  reserve  fund  requirement,  except  for  the
  purposes  of  paying  interest  on  bonds, principal of bonds and annual
  sinking fund payments, as the same become due and  for  the  payment  of
  which  other  moneys of the corporation are not available. Any income or
  interest earned by, or increment to, a capital reserve fund due  to  the
  investment  thereof  or  any  amount  in  excess  of the maximum capital
  reserve fund requirement may be transferred by the corporation to  other
  funds  or  accounts  of the corporation to the extent it does not reduce
  the amount of such  capital  reserve  fund  below  the  maximum  capital
  reserve fund requirement.
    b.  The corporation shall not issue bonds at any time if upon issuance
  the amount in the capital reserve fund will be  less  than  the  maximum
  capital reserve fund requirement, unless the corporation, at the time of
  issuance  of such bonds, shall deposit in such fund from the proceeds of
  the bonds so to be issued, or otherwise, an amount which, together  with
  the  amount then in such fund, will not be less than the maximum capital
  reserve fund requirement.
    c. No bonds or notes of the corporation shall be issued if  upon  such
  issuance  the  aggregate  principal  amount  of  bonds  and notes of the
  corporation then outstanding exceeds  the  lesser  of  nineteen  billion
  dollars  or  such amount as would cause the maximum capital reserve fund
  requirement to exceed eighty-five million  dollars;  provided  that,  in
  determining such aggregate principal amounts there shall be deducted (i)
  all sums then available for the payment of such bonds or notes either at
  maturity  or through the operation of a sinking fund; (ii) the aggregate
  principal amount of outstanding bonds issued (a) to refund notes and (b)
  to refund bonds, theretofore issued and then outstanding; and (iii)  the
  aggregate  principal  amount  of outstanding notes issued to renew notes
  theretofore issued and then outstanding. The  provisions  of  the  prior
  sentence  notwithstanding, the corporation shall not issue bonds if such
  issuance shall cause the maximum  reserve  fund  requirement  to  exceed
  thirty  million  dollars  unless  prior  to such issuance the senate and
  assembly shall have adopted a concurrent resolution passed by the  votes
  of  a  majority  of  all  the  members  elected  to each such house and,
  subsequent  thereto,  the  governor  shall  evidence  in   writing   the
  governor's  agreement  with  such  resolution  to the chairperson of the
  corporation, which resolution shall be in full force and effect  on  the
  date  of  issuance  of the bonds, permitting the maximum capital reserve
  fund requirement to equal or exceed the amount of  the  maximum  capital
  reserve  fund  requirement which would be effective upon the issuance of
  the bonds in question, but in no event shall the maximum capital reserve
  fund requirement exceed eighty-five million dollars.


   d. In computing the amount of a capital reserve fund for the  purposes
  of this section, securities in which all or a portion of such fund shall
  be  invested  shall be valued at par if purchased at par or if purchased
  at other than par, at amortized value. Amortized value, when  used  with
  respect  to  securities purchased at a premium above or a discount below
  par, shall mean the value as of any given date obtained by dividing  the
  total premium or discount at which such securities were purchased by the
  number  of  interest  payments  remaining to maturity on such securities
  after such purchase and by multiplying the amount so calculated  by  the
  number  of  interest  payment dates having passed since the date of such
  purchase; and (i) in the case of securities purchased at  a  premium  by
  deducting the product thus obtained from the purchase price, and (ii) in
  the  case  of  securities  purchased at a discount by adding the product
  thus obtained to the purchase price.
    e. To assure the continued operation and solvency of  the  corporation
  for  the  carrying  out  of its corporate purposes, provision is made in
  paragraph a of this subdivision for the  accumulation  in  each  capital
  reserve  fund  of  an  amount  equal to the maximum capital reserve fund
  requirement. In order further to assure such maintenance of each capital
  reserve fund, there shall be paid by the city  to  the  corporation  for
  deposit  in  each  capital  reserve  fund  on or before the first day of
  April, in each year, such amount, if any,  needed  for  the  purpose  of
  restoring  each such capital reserve fund to the maximum capital reserve
  fund requirement for such fund, as shall be certified by the chairperson
  of the corporation to the mayor  and  the  director  of  management  and
  budget  on  or before the first day of December next preceding; provided
  that any such amount shall have been first appropriated by or on  behalf
  of the city for such purpose or shall have been otherwise made available
  from  the  proceeds  of notes or bonds of the city authorized and issued
  pursuant to the local finance law for  such  purpose,  which  is  hereby
  determined  to  be  a  specific  object  or  purpose  having a period of
  probable usefulness of five years.  In  the  event  of  the  failure  or
  inability  of  the  city  to pay over to the corporation, in full, on or
  before such first day of April the amount so certified  the  chairperson
  of  the  corporation  shall  forthwith certify to the comptroller of the
  state of New York the amount remaining unpaid and  thereupon  the  state
  comptroller  shall  pay  to  the  corporation,  out  of the first moneys
  available for the next succeeding payments of (i) state aid  apportioned
  to  the  city  of  New  York  as per capita aid for the support of local
  government pursuant to section fifty-four of the state  finance  law  or
  (ii)  such  other aid or assistance payable by the state to the city and
  not otherwise allocated as shall supersede or supplement such state  per
  capita  aid,  including  federal  moneys  apportioned to the city by the
  state, such amount remaining unpaid, after giving written notice to  the
  director  of management and budget of each amount to be paid out of such
  state aid, until the  amount  in  each  such  capital  reserve  fund  is
  restored  to  the  maximum  capital  reserve  fund  requirement thereof;
  provided, however, that prior to the issuance of any notes or  bonds  of
  the  corporation  pursuant to this article the city shall have enacted a
  local law authorizing payments from such sources into  such  a  fund  so
  long  as  any notes or bonds of the corporation shall be outstanding and
  unpaid, and provided further that moneys, if any, payable  to  the  city
  university  construction  fund  pursuant  to  the provisions of the city
  university construction fund act shall be paid, in full, to  such  fund,
  prior  to  any payments therefrom to the corporation. Any amount so paid
  over to  the  corporation  shall  be  deducted  from  the  corresponding
  apportionment of such per capita state aid otherwise payable to the city
  of  New  York,  and shall not obligate the state to make nor entitle the


 city to receive any additional apportionment or payment  of  per  capita
  state  aid. All amounts paid over to the corporation as provided in this
  paragraph, including amounts  paid  by  the  state  comptroller  out  of
  payments  of  such  state  aid, shall constitute and be accounted for as
  non-interest bearing loans by the city to the corporation and,  subject,
  subordinate  and  junior  to  the  rights of the holders of any notes or
  bonds of the corporation theretofore  or  thereafter  issued,  shall  be
  repaid  to  the  city  from  (i)  moneys in such capital reserve fund in
  excess of the maximum capital reserve fund requirement thereof  or  (ii)
  any  moneys  of  the  corporation  not  required  for  any  other of its
  corporate purposes.
    f. In the event the chairperson of the corporation  shall  certify  to
  the  mayor  and  director  of  management  and  budget  or  to the state
  comptroller any amount necessary to restore a capital  reserve  fund  to
  the  maximum  capital  reserve  fund  requirement  thereof  pursuant  to
  subdivision e of this  section,  the  chairperson  shall  simultaneously
  deliver  to  such  persons  a  statement  of the cause or causes of such
  capital reserve fund deficiency and the measures  to  be  taken  by  the
  corporation or the department of housing preservation and development to
  insure  repayment  of  any  loans  made  by the city to the corporation,
  including amounts paid by the state comptroller out of payments of state
  aid, for the purpose of restoring  such  capital  reserve  fund  to  the
  maximum  capital  reserve  fund  requirement  thereof and to prevent the
  recurrence of any such deficiency.
    2. Notwithstanding the  provisions  of  subdivision  one  hereof,  the
  corporation  may  issue bonds for any of its corporate purposes, without
  making any deposit in a capital  reserve  fund  and  the  provisions  of
  subdivision  one  of section six hundred fifty-six of this article shall
  not apply to such bonds and the principal of and interest on such  bonds
  shall not be payable from or secured by any capital reserve fund.
    3. The corporation shall create and establish such other fund or funds
  as may be necessary or desirable for its corporate purposes.




   §  657.  Agreement with the state. The state does hereby pledge to and
  agree with the holders of any notes or bonds issued under  this  article
  that  the  state will not limit or alter the rights hereby vested in the
  corporation to fulfill the terms of any agreements made  with  the  said
  holders  thereof,  or  in any way impair the rights and remedies of such
  holders until such notes and bonds, together with the interest  thereon,
  with  interest on any unpaid installments of interest, and all costs and
  expenses in connection with any action or proceeding by or on behalf  of
  such   holders,  are  fully  met  and  discharged.  The  corporation  is
  authorized to include this pledge and agreement  of  the  state  in  any
  agreement with the holders of such notes or bonds.




   §  658. State and city not liable on notes and bonds. The notes, bonds
  or other obligations of the corporation shall not be a  debt  of  either
  the  state of New York or of the city of New York, and neither the state
  nor the city shall be liable thereon, nor shall they be payable  out  of
  any  funds other than those of the corporation; and such notes and bonds
  shall contain on the face thereof a statement to such effect.




   §  659.  City's right to require redemption of bonds.  Notwithstanding
  and in addition to any provisions for the redemption of bonds which  may
  be  contained  in  any  contract with the holders of the bonds, the city
  may, upon furnishing sufficient funds therefor, require the  corporation
  to  redeem,  prior  to  maturity,  as a whole, any issue of bonds on any
  interest payment date not less than twenty years after the date  of  the
  bonds  of  such issue at one hundred five per centum of their face value
  and accrued interest or  at  such  lower  redemption  price  as  may  be
  provided  in  the  bonds in case of the redemption thereof as a whole on
  the redemption date. Notice of such redemption shall be published in  at
  least  two  newspapers published and circulating in the city of New York
  at least twice, the first publication to be at least thirty days  before
  the date of redemption.




   §  660.  Remedies of noteholders and bondholders. 1. In the event that
  the corporation shall default in the payment of principal of or interest
  on any issue of notes or bonds after the same shall become due,  whether
  at maturity or upon call for redemption, and such default shall continue
  for  a period of thirty days, or in the event that the corporation shall
  fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this article,  or  shall
  default  in any agreement made with the holders of any issue of notes or
  bonds, the holders of twenty-five  per  centum  in  aggregate  principal
  amount  of  the  notes  or  bonds  of  such  issue  then outstanding, by
  instrument or instruments filed in the office of the clerk of the county
  of New York and proved or acknowledged in the same manner as a  deed  to
  be  recorded,  may  appoint  a  trustee to represent the holders of such
  notes or bonds for the purposes herein provided.
    2. Such trustee may, and  upon  written  request  of  the  holders  of
  twenty-five  per  centum in principal amount of such notes or bonds then
  outstanding shall, in such trustee's own name:
    (a) by suit,  action  or  proceeding  in  accordance  with  the  civil
  practice  law  and  rules,  enforce  all  rights  of  the noteholders or
  bondholders, including the right to require the corporation to carry out
  any agreement with such holders and to perform  its  duties  under  this
  article;
    (b) bring suit upon such notes or bonds;
    (c)  by  action  or  suit, require the corporation to account as if it
  were the trustee of an express trust for the holders of  such  notes  or
  bonds;
    (d) by action or suit, enjoin any acts or things which may be unlawful
  or in violation of the rights of the holders of such notes or bonds;
    (e)  declare  all  such  notes  or  bonds  due and payable, and if all
  defaults shall be made good, then, with the consent of  the  holders  of
  twenty-five  per  centum  of the principal amount of such notes or bonds
  then outstanding, annul such declaration and its consequences.
    3. The supreme court shall have jurisdiction of any  suit,  action  or
  proceeding  by the trustee on behalf of such noteholders or bondholders.
  The venue of any such suit, action or proceeding shall be  laid  in  the
  county of New York.
    4.  Before  declaring the principal of notes or bonds due and payable,
  the trustee shall first give thirty  days'  notice  in  writing  to  the
  corporation.




   §  661.  Assistance  to  the  corporation.  The state or city may make
  grants of money or property  to  the  corporation  for  the  purpose  of
  enabling  it to carry out its corporate purposes and for the exercise of
  its powers, including, but not  limited  to,  deposits  to  the  reserve
  funds.  This section shall not be construed to limit any other power the
  state or city may have to make such grants to the corporation.




   §  662.  Notes  and bonds as legal investments. The notes and bonds of
  the corporation are hereby made securities in which all public  officers
  and   bodies   of  this  state  and  all  municipalities  and  municipal
  subdivisions, all insurance companies and associations and other persons
  carrying on an insurance business, all banks, bankers, trust  companies,
  savings  banks  and  savings  associations,  including  savings and loan
  associations, building and loan associations, investment  companies  and
  other  persons  carrying  on  a  banking  business,  all administrators,
  guardians, executors, trustees and  other  fiduciaries,  and  all  other
  persons  whatsoever who are now or may hereafter be authorized to invest
  in bonds or in other obligations of the state, may properly and  legally
  invest  funds, including capital, in their control or belonging to them.
  The notes and bonds  are  also  hereby  made  securities  which  may  be
  deposited  with and may be received by all public officers and bodies of
  the state and all municipalities and public corporations for any purpose
  for which the deposit of bonds or other obligations of the state is  now
  or may hereafter be authorized.


   § 663. Exemption from taxation. 1. The property of the corporation and
  its income and operations shall be exempt from taxation.
    2.  It is hereby determined that the creation of the corporation is in
  all respects for the benefit of the people of  the  state  and  for  the
  improvement  of their health, safety, welfare, comfort and security, and
  that said purposes are public purposes and that the corporation will  be
  performing  an  essential  governmental  function in the exercise of the
  powers conferred upon it by this article. The state covenants  with  the
  purchasers and all subsequent holders and transferees of notes and bonds
  issued  by  the  corporation,  in consideration of the acceptance of and
  payment for the notes and  bonds,  that  the  notes  and  bonds  of  the
  corporation issued pursuant to this article and the income therefrom and
  all  its  fees,  charges,  gifts,  grants, revenues, receipts, and other
  moneys received or to be received, pledged to pay or secure the  payment
  of  such notes or bonds shall at all times be free from taxation, except
  for estate and gift taxes and taxes on  transfers.  The  corporation  is
  authorized  to  include this covenant of the state in any agreement with
  the holders of such notes or bonds.




   §   664.   Employees   of  the  corporation.  1.  Notwithstanding  any
  inconsistent provisions of this act, the appointment  and  promotion  of
  all  employees  of  and  for the corporation shall be made in accordance
  with the provisions of the civil service law and the rules of  the  city
  civil  service  commission and the compensation for such employees shall
  be fixed by the corporation.
    2. The city and the corporation shall have the power  to  provide  for
  the  transfer  to the corporation of agents, employees and facilities of
  the city to enable the corporation to fulfill  its  corporate  purposes.
  Employees  of  the city to be transferred to the corporation pursuant to
  this article shall be eligible for such use in offices and positions  of
  the  corporation without further examination, and all such employees who
  have been appointed to positions in city service in accordance with  the
  provisions  of  the  civil service law under the rules of the city civil
  service commission shall have the same status with  respect  thereto  in
  the  service  of the corporation as they had in city service.  Employees
  who are members or beneficiaries of any existing pension  or  retirement
  system  shall  continue  to have such rights, privileges, obligations or
  status with respect to such system or systems as are prescribed  by  law
  on  the  date this article takes effect, and all such employees who have
  been appointed to positions in  city  service  in  accordance  with  the
  provisions  of  the  civil service law under the rules of the city civil
  service commission shall have the same status with  respect  thereto  in
  the service of the corporation as they had in city service.
    3.  The  predecessor  corporation,  as  defined  in subdivision one of
  section six hundred fifty-four-d of this  article  and  the  corporation
  shall  have  the power to provide for the transfer to the corporation of
  agents, employees and  facilities  of  the  predecessor  corporation  to
  enable   the   corporation  to  assist  the  subsidiary  corporation  in
  fulfilling  its  corporate  purposes.  Employees  of   the   predecessor
  corporation  to  be  transferred  to  the  corporation  pursuant to this
  article shall be eligible for such use in offices and positions  of  the
  corporation without further examination, and all such employees who have
  been  appointed  to  positions  in  predecessor  corporation  service in
  accordance with the provisions of the civil service law under the  rules
  of  the  city  civil  service commission shall have the same status with
  respect thereto in the  service  of  the  corporation  as  they  had  in
  predecessor   corporation   service.   Employees   who  are  members  or
  beneficiaries  of  any  existing  pension  or  retirement  system  shall
  continue  to  have  such  rights, privileges, obligations or status with
  respect to such system or systems as are prescribed by law on  the  date
  this  subdivision  takes  effect,  and  all such employees who have been
  appointed to positions in predecessor corporation service in  accordance
  with the provisions of the civil service law under the rules of the city
  civil service commission shall have the same status with respect thereto
  in the service of the corporation as they had in predecessor corporation
  service.




   §   665.   Assistance   by  department  of  housing  preservation  and
  development. The commissioner of housing  preservation  and  development
  and  the  department  of housing preservation and development are hereby
  designated to act for and in behalf  of  the  corporation  in  servicing
  mortgage  loans of the corporation, and shall perform such functions and
  services in connection with the making, servicing and collection of such
  loans as shall be requested by the corporation.  The  corporation  shall
  pay  to  the department of housing preservation and development from any
  moneys of the corporation available for such purposes  such  amounts  as
  are  necessary  to  reimburse the department of housing preservation and
  development for the reasonable cost of the  services  performed  by  the
  commissioner   of  housing  preservation  and  development  and  by  the
  department of housing preservation  and  development  pursuant  to  this
  section.






	   §  666.  Moneys  of the corporation. 1. All moneys of the corporation,
  except as otherwise authorized or provided in  this  article,  shall  be
  deposited  as  soon  as practicable in a separate account or accounts in
  banks or trust companies organized  under  the  laws  of  the  state  or
  national  banking  association doing business in the city. The moneys in
  such accounts shall be paid out on checks  signed  by  such  officer  or
  employee  of  the  corporation  as  the corporation shall authorize. All
  deposits of such moneys  shall,  if  required  by  the  corporation,  be
  secured  by  obligations  of the United States or of the state or of the
  city of a market value equal at all times to the amount of  the  deposit
  and  all  banks and trust companies are authorized to give such security
  for such deposits.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the corporation  shall
  have  power to contract with the holders of any of its notes or bonds as
  to the custody, collection, securing,  investment  and  payment  of  any
  moneys  of  the corporation and of any moneys held in trust or otherwise
  for the payment of notes or bonds,  and  to  carry  out  such  contract.
  Moneys  held  in trust or otherwise for the payment of notes or bonds or
  in any way to secure notes or bonds and deposits of such moneys  may  be
  secured  in  the same manner as moneys of the corporation, and all banks
  and trust companies are  authorized  to  give  such  security  for  such
  deposits.
    2.  Subject  to  the  provisions  of any contract with noteholders and
  bondholders and the approval of the comptroller, the  corporation  shall
  prescribe a system of accounts.
    3.  The  comptroller,  or  his  legally  authorized representative, is
  hereby authorized and empowered from time to time to examine  the  books
  and  accounts  of the corporation including its receipts, disbursements,
  contracts, reserve funds, sinking  funds,  investments,  and  any  other
  matters relating to its financial standing. Such an examination shall be
  conducted  by  the  comptroller  at  least once in every five years; the
  comptroller is authorized, however, to accept from the  corporation,  in
  lieu  of  such  an examination, an external examination of its books and
  accounts made at the request of the corporation.
    4. The corporation shall submit  to  the  mayor  and  the  comptroller
  within  thirty  days of the receipt thereof by the corporation a copy of
  the report of every external examination of the books  and  accounts  of
  the  corporation  other  than copies of the reports of such examinations
  made by the comptroller.




   § 667. Actions. 1. Except in an action for wrongful death, in any case
  founded  upon  tort  a  notice of claim shall be required as a condition
  precedent to the commencement of an action or special proceeding against
  the corporation, any of its subsidiary  corporations,  or  any  officer,
  appointee  or employee thereof, and the provisions of section fifty-e of
  the general municipal law shall govern the giving  of  such  notice.  An
  action  for  wrongful  death  shall  be commenced in accordance with the
  notice of claim and  time  limitation  provisions  of  title  eleven  of
  article nine of the public authorities law. Any other action against the
  corporation,  any  of its subsidiary corporations, or any other officer,
  appointee or employee thereof  for  damages  for  injuries  to  real  or
  personal  property,  or  for  the  destruction  thereof, or for personal
  injuries, alleged to have been sustained, shall not  be  commenced  more
  than  one  year and ninety days after the cause of action therefor shall
  have accrued.
    2. Except as may otherwise be expressly provided by  the  corporation,
  the  corporation  shall  not  be  liable  for  any  debts,  liabilities,
  obligations, agreements, contracts or covenants of any of its subsidiary
  corporations. No action or special proceeding of any kind may be brought
  against the corporation by any person having claims against or contracts
  with any of  its  subsidiary  corporations  (including  any  predecessor
  corporation  of  any  of its subsidiary corporations) if the corporation
  was not a party to the matter giving rise to such claims or contracts.






   §  668.  Annual report. The corporation shall submit to the mayor, the
  comptroller and the director of management and budget within ninety days
  after the end of its fiscal year, a complete and detailed report setting
  forth: (1) its operations and  accomplishments;  (2)  its  receipts  and
  expenditures  during  such fiscal year in accordance with the categories
  or classifications established by the corporation for its operating  and
  capital  outlay purposes, including a listing of all private consultants
  engaged by the corporation on a contract basis and a  statement  of  the
  total  amount  paid  to each such private consultant; (3) its assets and
  liabilities at the end of its fiscal year, including a schedule  of  its
  mortgage  loans  and  commitments  and the status of reserve, special or
  other funds; and (4) a schedule of its notes and  bonds  outstanding  at
  the  end  of  its  fiscal year, together with a statement of the amounts
  redeemed and incurred during such fiscal year.




   §  669.  Article  not  affected  if  in  part unconstitutional. If any
  section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or provision  of  this
  article  shall  be unconstitutional or ineffective, in whole or in part,
  to the extent that it is not unconstitutional or ineffective it shall be
  valid and  effective  and  no  other  section,  subdivision,  paragraph,
  sentence, clause or provision shall on account thereof be deemed invalid
  or ineffective.




   §  670.  Inconsistent provisions in other laws superseded.  Insofar as
  the provisions of this article are inconsistent with the  provisions  of
  any other law, general, special or local, the provisions of this article
  shall be controlling.




   § 800. Policy and purposes of article. It is hereby declared and found
  that  there  exists  in  municipalities  in  this  state substandard and
  insanitary areas and neighborhoods characterized by undermaintained  and
  deteriorating  housing accommodations and under-utilized non-residential
  buildings and under-utilized vacant land. It is further found that there
  exists in such municipalities a  diminishing  and  seriously  inadequate
  supply  of  safe  and sanitary dwelling accommodations, particularly for
  persons of low income; that the loss of housing accommodations is caused
  by  the  inability  of  the  ordinary  unaided  operations  of   private
  enterprise  to make loans for rehabilitation or construction purposes or
  for conversion  which  accelerates  the  process  of  deterioration  and
  abandonment,  turning  active  and  viable  neighborhoods into slums and
  blighted areas; and  that  the  prevention  of  deterioration  and  loss
  through   abandonment  can  only  be  achieved  by  the  elimination  of
  conditions which are unsafe or detrimental to health, the replacement of
  antiquated  heating,  plumbing,  and  electrical  systems   and,   where
  necessary, the overall rehabilitation of certain housing accommodations,
  the  construction  of  new housing accommodations on vacant land and the
  conversion of under-utilized  non-residential  property  to  residential
  use,  and  that  the  unavailability  of  funds  for  the  conversion of
  under-utilized property to residential use,  for  the  preservation  and
  rehabilitation of housing accommodations and for the construction of new
  housing  accommodations  on  vacant  land  constitutes  a  threat to the
  health, safety and well-being of the persons who occupy them and  denies
  to  others  the  possibility  of  living  in  safe  and sanitary housing
  accommodations.
    In order to  promote  the  preservation  and  rehabilitation  of  such
  housing  accommodations,  the  creation of new housing accommodations by
  the conversion of under-utilized non-residential property into  multiple
  dwellings  and  the construction of new housing accommodations on vacant
  land in such areas and to encourage the investment of private capital in
  such areas, provision should be  made  for  a  municipality  to  attract
  private  investment  for  such  purposes  by  utilizing funds, which are
  available from the federal government through specific or  discretionary
  grants,  or  are  available  from  other  financing  sources,  for joint
  participation loans with private investors, or loans or  grants  by  the
  municipality,  to  effect  the  required construction, rehabilitation or
  conversion.
    The necessity in the public interest for  the  provisions  hereinafter
  enacted is hereby declared as a matter of legislative determination.




   §  801. Definitions. As used in this article the following terms shall
  have the following meanings unless a different meaning  clearly  appears
  from the context:
    1.  "Agency"  shall  mean  the  office  or  agency  of  a municipality
  authorized to administer the  expenditure  of  grants  from  the  United
  States  of  America  to  assist  community  development  activities  and
  programs  for  the  construction,  rehabilitation  or  conservation   of
  multiple  dwellings  and housing accommodations or for the conversion of
  under-utilized non-residential property into multiple dwellings  or,  in
  the absence of such an office or agency, the comptroller or chief fiscal
  officer  of  such  municipality;  except that in the city of New York it
  shall be the department of housing preservation and development  or  any
  successor  thereto  and  shall  include,  except for purposes of section
  eight  hundred  four  of  this  article,  the  New  York  city   housing
  development  corporation  with respect to any participation in a loan by
  such corporation pursuant to section eight hundred five of this article.
    1-a. "Construction"  shall  mean  the  construction  of  new  multiple
  dwellings upon vacant land.
    2.   "Conversion"   shall   mean   the  conversion  of  under-utilized
  non-residential property into a multiple dwelling.
    3. "Federal grant funds" shall  mean  any  grants  received  from  the
  United States of America for community development activities or for the
  construction,  rehabilitation  or  conservation of multiple dwellings or
  for the  conversion  of  under-utilized  non-residential  property  into
  multiple dwellings.
    4.  "Non-residential  property" shall mean any property which is not a
  multiple dwelling, and which is intended to be converted into a multiple
  dwelling, and which is  under-utilized  for  commercial,  industrial  or
  other non-residential purposes.
    5. "Owner" shall mean an individual, partnership, corporation or other
  entity,  including  a non-profit company, a mutual company, or a housing
  development fund company, which holds record or beneficial title in  fee
  simple  to  the  existing  multiple  dwelling to be rehabilitated or the
  non-residential property to be converted into a  multiple  dwelling  and
  the  real property upon which it is situate or to vacant land upon which
  the new multiple dwelling is to be constructed, or is the lessee of  any
  such real property having an unexpired term of at least thirty years.
    5-a.  "Participation  loan" and the municipality's "participation" in,
  "portion" of, or "investment" in a loan, or words  of  similar  meaning,
  shall  mean  any  loan or grant made by the municipality or the New York
  city housing development corporation pursuant  to  this  article  either
  with  or  without a private investor, provided, however, that provisions
  of this article concerning the repayment or forgiveness of, or  security
  for, a loan shall not apply to any grant made pursuant to this article.
    6.  "Private  investor"  shall mean one or more banking organizations,
  foundations,  labor  unions,  credit  unions,  employers'  associations,
  veterans'    organizations,    colleges,    universities,    educational
  institutions,  child  care  institutions,  hospitals,  medical  research
  institutes,  insurance  companies,  trustees or fiduciaries, trustees of
  pension and retirement funds and  systems,  corporations,  partnerships,
  individuals  or  other entities or any combination of the foregoing, and
  shall include the United States of America and the state of New York and
  any agency, office or public benefit corporation  thereof.  As  used  in
  this  subdivision,  the terms "trustees" and "fiduciaries" shall include
  any fiduciary or fiduciaries holding funds for investment, and the  term
  "banking  organizations"  shall  have the same meaning as in subdivision
  eleven of section two of the banking law.


   7. "Rehabilitation" shall mean the installation, replacement or repair
  of heating, plumbing, electrical and related systems, or elimination  of
  conditions  dangerous  to human life or detrimental to health, including
  nuisances as defined in section  three  hundred  nine  of  the  multiple
  dwelling  law,  or  other  rehabilitation  or  improvement  of  existing
  multiple dwellings.
    8. "Value" shall mean the "as  is"  value  of  the  existing  multiple
  dwelling,  or  in  the  case of non-residential property to be converted
  into a multiple dwelling, the "as  is"  value  of  such  non-residential
  property,  and the land upon which it is situate prior to rehabilitation
  or conversion or, in the case of the  construction  of  a  new  multiple
  dwelling,   the  "as  is"  value  of  the  vacant  land  prior  to  such
  construction plus  the  total  of  all  costs  of  such  rehabilitation,
  conversion  or construction, including, but not limited to, the costs of
  any or all undertakings necessary for the  planning,  financing,  tenant
  relocation,  acquisition,  satisfaction of tax liens and other municipal
  liens and  encumbrances,  construction,  equipment  and  development  in
  connection therewith.
    9.  "State  grant funds" shall mean any grants received from the state
  or any public benefit corporation for community  development  activities
  for   the  construction,  rehabilitation  or  conservation  of  multiple
  dwellings.




   §  801-a.  Application  to  certain  garden-type  maisonette  dwelling
  projects. For purposes of this article  an  existing  multiple  dwelling
  shall  be  deemed to include any garden-type maisonette dwelling project
  consisting of a series of dwelling units which  together  and  in  their
  aggregate  were arranged or designed to provide three or more apartments
  and are provided as a group collectively  with  all  essential  services
  such  as,  but  not limited to, water supply, house sewers and heat, and
  which are in existence and operated as a unit under single ownership  on
  the  date  upon which an application for a loan pursuant to this article
  is received by the municipality, notwithstanding  that  certificates  of
  occupancy were issued for portions thereof as private dwellings.




   §  802.  Participation  loans  to owners.   1. (a) Notwithstanding the
  provisions of any general, special or local law,  one  or  more  private
  investors  and a municipality, acting through its agency, shall have the
  power to participate and  invest  in  making  loans  to  the  owners  of
  existing multiple dwellings or to the owners of non-residential property
  or  to  the  owners  of  vacant  land  subject  to  the  limitations  of
  subdivisions two through seven of this section, in such amounts as shall
  be required  for  (i)  the  rehabilitation  of  such  existing  multiple
  dwellings  or for the conversion of such non-residential property or for
  the construction of new multiple dwellings on such vacant land, provided
  that such rehabilitation, conversion or construction may include climate
  resiliency improvements, and if any such  owner  acquires  the  existing
  multiple dwelling or the non-residential property or the vacant land for
  the  purpose  of such rehabilitation, conversion or construction or owns
  the existing multiple dwelling or the non-residential  property  or  the
  vacant  land  subject  to an outstanding indebtedness, such loans may be
  made exclusively for or may include such amounts as may be required  for
  the  cost of such acquisition or for the refinancing of such outstanding
  indebtedness, (ii) providing site improvements located on  the  property
  on  which  such  existing  multiple  dwellings  are  located  or on such
  non-residential property or vacant land or  in  a  public  right-of-way,
  incidental   or   appurtenant  to  such  rehabilitation,  conversion  or
  construction, including, but not limited to, water and sewer facilities,
  sidewalks, landscaping, parks  and  open  space,  social,  recreational,
  communal   and  other  non-residential  facilities  and  the  outfitting
  thereof, the curing of problems  caused  by  abnormal  site  conditions,
  excavation  and  construction  of  footings  and  foundations  and other
  improvements associated with the provision of infrastructure for housing
  accommodations, or (iii) providing for other costs of developing housing
  accommodations, and  such  private  investors  and  a  municipality  may
  jointly  participate  or  invest  in  the  making  of temporary loans or
  advances to such owners in anticipation of the  permanent  participation
  loans for such purposes.
    (b)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions of any general, special or local
  law, and  in  addition  to  the  power  to  make  or  contract  to  make
  participation  loans  granted  by paragraph (a) of this subdivision, the
  municipality, acting through its agency, and the New York  city  housing
  development corporation shall each have the power to make or contract to
  make  loans  or  grants  to any owner described in paragraph (a) of this
  subdivision without the participation of a private investor, on the same
  terms as permitted under such paragraph for a participation loan.
    2. A municipality may utilize federal grant funds or state grant funds
  or any municipal funds to finance its participation or investment  in  a
  loan  pursuant  to this article. This subdivision shall not apply to any
  participation in a  loan  by  the  New  York  city  housing  development
  corporation pursuant to section eight hundred five of this article.
    3.  Each  participation  loan  shall  be secured by a bond or note and
  single  participating  mortgage  or  by  separate  bonds  or  notes  and
  mortgages  upon  the  existing  multiple dwelling or the non-residential
  property and the land upon which it is situated or, in the case  of  the
  construction  of  a  new multiple dwelling, upon the vacant land and the
  multiple dwelling to be constructed, or,  in  the  case  of  a  multiple
  dwelling  held in the condominium form of ownership, a note and mortgage
  upon the condominium units rehabilitated with such  participation  loan,
  provided  that a participation loan to an owner who is a lessee shall be
  secured by a leasehold interest in such property, and provided, further,
  that each such loan shall be made upon such terms and conditions as  may
  be approved by the agency, including but not limited to, provisions that


 (a)  priority  may  be  given  to  the  payment  of the principal of and
  interest on that portion of the mortgage  indebtedness  attributable  to
  participation  in  the  loan  by  one or more private investors, (b) the
  interest  of  the  municipality  created  as  a  result of making such a
  mortgage loan may be subordinated to the interest that one  or  more  of
  such  private  investors  may  have  upon  such  participation,  (c) the
  interest of each upon such participation need not be of  equal  priority
  as  to  lien  nor  be  equal  as  to  interest  rate,  time  or  rate of
  amortization of principal or time of payment of interest, or  otherwise,
  (d)  the  bond  or note and mortgage may provide that the municipality's
  portion of a participation loan made to an owner  shall  be  reduced  to
  zero commencing in the fifteenth year after the execution of the bond or
  note  and mortgage, provided that, as of the date of any such reduction,
  such multiple dwelling has been and continues to be owned  and  operated
  in   a   manner   consistent   with  a  regulatory  agreement  with  the
  municipality. Notwithstanding such provision as contained in the bond or
  note and mortgage, the municipality's  portion  of  the  loan  shall  be
  reduced  to  zero  only  if, prior to or simultaneously with delivery of
  such bond or note and mortgage, the agency made a written  determination
  that   such  reduction  would  be  necessary  to  ensure  the  continued
  affordability or economic  viability  of  the  multiple  dwelling.  Such
  written  determination  shall document the basis upon which the loan was
  determined to be eligible for evaporation.
    4. Each such bond or note and mortgage or bonds or notes and mortgages
  shall be repaid over or within a period of forty  years,  provided  that
  such  period  may  be  extended as the agency may determine necessary to
  ensure the continued affordability or economic viability of the multiple
  dwelling, in such manner as may be provided in such  bond  or  note  and
  mortgage or bonds or notes and mortgages. Such bond or note and mortgage
  or bonds or notes and mortgages and any contract in connection with such
  permanent   and  temporary  loans  may  contain  such  other  terms  and
  provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this article  as  the
  local  legislative body or the agency may deem necessary or desirable to
  secure repayment of the loan, the interest thereon and other charges  in
  connection  therewith  and  to  carry out the purposes and provisions of
  this article.
    5. The bond or note or the bonds or notes issued by the owner and  the
  mortgage  or  mortgages  relating thereto may authorize such owner, with
  the consent of the agency  and  the  private  investor,  to  prepay  the
  principal  of  the  loan subject to such terms and conditions as therein
  provided. Such bond or note and mortgage or bonds or notes and mortgages
  may contain such other  clauses  and  provisions  as  the  agency  shall
  require.
    6.  Where  a  municipality joins with one or more private investors in
  making a participation loan secured by a single  participating  mortgage
  or  by  separate mortgages, the agency may make provision, either in the
  mortgage or mortgages or by separate agreement, for the performances  of
  such  services  as  are  generally performed by a banking institution or
  insurance company which itself owns and holds a mortgage or by a trustee
  under a trust mortgage and for the imposition  of  reasonable  fees  for
  financing,  regulation, supervision and audit of such multiple dwelling.
  The agency is hereby authorized to act as trustee or to consent  to  the
  appointment of a banking institution or any subsidiary thereof to act in
  such capacity and to provide such services as are generally performed by
  any  such  bank  itself  or  its  subsidiary  owning  and holding such a
  mortgage.


   7. Banking organizations and insurance  companies  may  exercise  such
  power  only to the extent and on such conditions as may be authorized by
  the state superintendent of financial services.
    8. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, a savings bank may
  invest  to an amount not exceeding ninety per centum of the value of any
  real property when jointly participating or investing in a loan pursuant
  to the provisions of this  article  or  not  exceeding  ninety-five  per
  centum  of  the value of any real property when jointly participating or
  investing in a loan pursuant to the provisions of  article  fourteen  of
  this chapter.




   § 803. Conditions precedent to making such loans. A municipality shall
  not  participate  in  a  loan pursuant to this article unless the agency
  finds  that  the  area  in  which  the   existing   multiple   dwelling,
  non-residential  property  or  vacant  land  is  situated is a blighted,
  deteriorated or deteriorating area, or has a blighting influence on  the
  surrounding  area, or is in danger of becoming a slum or a blighted area
  because of the existence of substandard,  insanitary,  deteriorating  or
  deteriorated  conditions,  an  aged  housing  stock,  or  under-utilized
  non-residential property, or other factors indicating  an  inability  of
  the  private  sector unaided to cause such rehabilitation, conversion or
  construction to be made and unless the agency has notified occupants  of
  the  existing  multiple  dwelling of the contemplated rehabilitation and
  has advised them of the expected rental increase to result therefrom and
  a representative of the agency has met or has offered to meet  at  least
  once with the occupants.




   §  804.  Rentals. Notwithstanding the provisions of, or any regulation
  promulgated pursuant to, the emergency housing  rent  control  law,  the
  local  emergency  housing rent control act or local law enacted pursuant
  thereto, upon completion of the rehabilitation of an  existing  multiple
  dwelling,  the construction of a new multiple dwelling or the conversion
  of  non-residential  property  into  a  multiple  dwelling  aided  by  a
  participation  loan  made  pursuant  to  this  article, the agency shall
  establish  the  initial  rent  for  each  dwelling   unit   within   the
  rehabilitated,  newly  constructed or converted multiple dwelling. Where
  the  city  of  New  York  or  the  New  York  city  housing  development
  corporation  has  participated  or  invested  in a loan pursuant to this
  article, all dwelling units within the multiple dwelling  subsequent  to
  the establishment of initial rents by the agency shall be subject to the
  rent stabilization law of nineteen hundred sixty-nine provided, that the
  occupant  in possession of a dwelling unit when the multiple dwelling is
  made  subject  to  the  rent  stabilization  law  of  nineteen   hundred
  sixty-nine  shall  be  offered  a  two  year  lease  notwithstanding any
  contrary provisions of, or regulations adopted  pursuant  to,  the  rent
  stabilization  law  of  nineteen hundred sixty-nine at such initial rent
  set for such dwelling unit by the agency.






   § 805. Participation of New York city housing development corporation.
  The  New  York city housing development corporation may participate with
  one or more private investors or with the city of New York or with  both
  in  making a loan pursuant to the provisions of this article. Where such
  corporation participates in making such a loan, the term municipality as
  used in this article shall include such corporation with respect to such
  participation.




   §  806. Regulations. The agency may promulgate supplementary rules and
  regulations to carry out the provisions of this article.




   §  901.  Declaration  of  legislative findings. The legislature hereby
  finds and declares that there has developed in recent years, in  various
  municipalities  of the state, a growth of community-based not-for-profit
  organizations, originating for the most part  within  and  organized  by
  residents  of neighborhoods which are characterized by a predominance of
  residents of low income and a residential housing stock which is largely
  old, deteriorating and substandard.
    The legislature further finds that the involvement of the residents of
  various  municipalities  of  the  state  in  neighborhood   preservation
  activities  in  their  respective  neighborhoods,  through  the media of
  locally-based, not-for-profit organizations responsive to the  needs  of
  the  residents, is in the public interest and may be expected to produce
  increased renovation and rehabilitation of  existing  but  deteriorating
  housing  accommodations, improvement in housing code enforcement and the
  correction, removal  and  repair  of  substandard  housing  and  housing
  conditions  dangerous  to  life,  safety  or health. Such involvement in
  neighborhood preservation activities may also  be  expected  to  produce
  reduced  abandonment  of  housing,  which  the  legislature  finds to be
  increasing in many neighborhoods of the state and to  be  continuing  to
  cause  shortages  of  housing accommodations for persons and families of
  low income and the relocation of such  families  from  neighborhoods  to
  which   they  have  developed  strong  emotional  as  well  as  economic
  attachments.
    The legislature further finds that many municipalities throughout  the
  state  are  now receiving or will receive monies under federal programs,
  that such funds may be used and applied by such municipalities  for  the
  neighborhood  preservation  activities  referred  to in this article and
  that an efficient and  effective  use  of  such  funds  and  the  public
  interest   will  be  promoted  by  the  active  involvement  of  various
  not-for-profit organizations.
    The   legislature   further   finds   that   numerous   not-for-profit
  organizations  which  have  arisen  throughout  the  state  are  heavily
  dependent upon voluntary services of neighborhood residents;  that  such
  organizations  are  dependent  in  part  for  operating  funds upon fees
  generated  by  the  management  of  housing  accommodations;  that  such
  organizations  are dependent for the remainder of their operating funds,
  to a significant extent, upon gifts and grants from private individuals,
  corporations  and  foundations;  that  such  financial   assistance   is
  inherently  uncertain  and  covers  expenses  only over short periods of
  time, thereby causing such organizations to  be  inadequately  financed,
  unable  to plan any long range housing activities and unable to attract,
  employ or contract with needed experts and technicians for assistance to
  implementing neighborhood preservation programs; and that it is a proper
  and necessary public purpose and activity of the  state  to  assure  the
  adequate  funding  of  not-for-profit  organizations which are active in
  neighborhood preservation activities.
    The necessity in the public interest for  the  provisions  hereinafter
  enacted is hereby declared as a matter of legislative determination.




   §  902.  Definitions. As used in this article, the following words and
  phrases shall have the following meanings:
    1. "Commissioner" shall mean the commissioner of the state division of
  housing and community renewal.
    2. "Division" shall mean the state division of housing  and  community
  renewal.
    3.  "Municipality"  shall  mean  any  city, town or village within the
  state.
    4.  "Neighborhood  preservation  company"  shall  mean  a  corporation
  organized  under  the  provisions  of the not-for-profit corporation law
  which has been engaged primarily in one  or  more  of  the  neighborhood
  preservation activities specified in subdivision five of this section.
    5.   "Neighborhood  preservation  activities"  shall  mean  activities
  engaged  in  by   a   neighborhood   preservation   company   within   a
  geographically   defined   neighborhood  of  a  municipality,  provided,
  however, that the division may fund a neighborhood preservation  company
  to  engage  in  such activities in unserved and underserved areas of the
  municipality lying outside  of  its  initially  designated  neighborhood
  area,  that  are  designed (a) to construct, maintain, preserve, repair,
  renovate, upgrade, improve, modernize, rehabilitate or otherwise prolong
  the useful life and to  manage  and  coordinate  the  rehabilitation  of
  residential dwelling accommodations within such neighborhood, to restore
  abandoned  and  vacant  as  well  as  occupied housing accommodations to
  habitable condition; to  demolish  structurally  unsound  or  unsafe  or
  otherwise unsightly or unhealthy structures which no longer serve or can
  economically   be  made  to  serve  a  useful  purpose  consistent  with
  stabilizing or improving a neighborhood; to seal and maintain vacant but
  structurally sound structures which are capable of  being  rehabilitated
  at  a  future  time  and  used  for  housing purposes; to acquire, where
  appropriate,  buildings  which  contain   housing   accommodations;   to
  facilitate    the    disposition   of   buildings   containing   housing
  accommodations to individual occupants thereof or to cooperative  groups
  whose  members  shall  be occupants thereof; to assist owners, occupants
  and tenants of housing accommodations  to  obtain  improvements  in  the
  physical  conditions  thereof  and  in  the  maintenance  and management
  thereof; to administer landlord training classes; and to manage  housing
  accommodations  as  agents  for  the owners thereof or administrators or
  receivers appointed or designated pursuant to any law of the state;  and
  (b)  to  accomplish similar purposes and meet similar needs with respect
  to retail and service  establishments  within  such  neighborhoods  when
  carried  out  in  connection with and incidental to a program of housing
  related activities.
    6. "Persons of low income" shall mean individuals and  families  whose
  annual incomes do not exceed ninety per cent of the median annual income
  for all residents of the municipality within which they reside.
    7.  "Merged  company"  shall  mean a neighborhood preservation company
  maintaining a contract pursuant to section nine hundred  three  of  this
  article  that has undergone a merger with one or more other neighborhood
  preservation companies, which is also maintaining a contract pursuant to
  section nine hundred three of this article,  that  has  led  the  merged
  companies  to  reduce  the number of contracts being maintained with the
  division pursuant to section nine hundred three of  this  article  to  a
  total of one.
    8.  "Unmerged  company" shall mean a neighborhood preservation company
  that is not a merged company.




   §  903.  Contracts  with  neighborhood  preservation companies. 1. The
  commissioner may enter into  contracts  with  neighborhood  preservation
  companies  for  the performance of neighborhood preservation activities.
  Such contracts shall be entered into, however,  only  after  appropriate
  findings  by  the  commissioner  and shall be subject to the limitations
  hereinafter set forth.
    2. Prior to entering into a contract with a neighborhood  preservation
  company,   the   commissioner   shall  have  made  a  finding  that  the
  neighborhood in which  the  activities  are  proposed  to  be  conducted
  contains  a  significant  amount of deteriorating or substandard housing
  which is not being adequately repaired, renovated, upgraded,  modernized
  or  rehabilitated under existing programs so as to provide sound housing
  at costs which the residents of such neighborhoods can afford; that  the
  neighborhood  preservation  company  which proposes to contract with the
  commissioner is a bona  fide  organization  which  shall  have  been  in
  existence  either  as  a  corporation or as an unincorporated, organized
  group and performing significant  neighborhood  preservation  activities
  for  at least one full year prior to entering into any contract with the
  commissioner and which shall have demonstrated by its immediate past and
  current  activities  that  it  has  the  ability  to  preserve,  repair,
  maintain,    renovate,   rehabilitate,   manage   or   operate   housing
  accommodations  or  to  engage  in   other   neighborhood   preservation
  activities  in  such  neighborhood;  that  the neighborhood preservation
  activities which are to be performed pursuant to the  proposed  contract
  are  needed  by the neighborhood; and that the neighborhood preservation
  company possesses or will acquire or gain access to the requisite staff,
  office facilities within such neighborhood, equipment and  expertise  to
  enable  it  to  perform  the  activities  which it proposes to undertake
  pursuant to such contract; provided,  however,  that  merged  companies'
  office  facilities  may be located outside such neighborhood if they are
  located in a municipality wholly contained within the merged  companies'
  neighborhood,  and provided further, however, that it shall not be a bar
  to the  commissioner's  contracting  with  a  neighborhood  preservation
  company  that  one  or  more organizations, whether pursuant to contract
  with the commissioner or not, are conducting  neighborhood  preservation
  activities wholly or partially within the same neighborhood.
    3.  In  determining  to  enter  into  a  contract  with a neighborhood
  preservation company pursuant to this article,  the  commissioner  shall
  investigate, to the extent which he shall deem necessary or appropriate,
  and determine;
    (a)  that the geographic boundaries proposed by the applicant for such
  a contract define a  recognized  or  established  neighborhood  or  area
  within the municipality;
    (b)  that  the  demographic and other relevant data pertaining to such
  neighborhood indicate  that  the  neighborhood  has  sustained  physical
  deterioration,  decay,  neglect  or  disinvestment,  that  a substantial
  proportion  of  the  residential  population   that   the   neighborhood
  preservation company proposes to assist through its activities is of low
  income  and  that such neighborhood is in need of active intervention to
  effect its preservation, stabilization or improvement;
    (c) that the activities proposed to be conducted by  the  neighborhood
  preservation company are reasonably calculated to have a positive effect
  on the preservation, stabilization or improvement of the neighborhood;
    (d)  that  the neighborhood preservation company's officers, directors
  and members  are  fairly  representative  of  the  residents  and  other
  legitimate  interests of the neighborhood, that they will carry out such
  a contract in a  responsible  manner  and  that  at  least  thirty-three


 percent  of  the  directors of the neighborhood preservation company are
  residents of the neighborhood;
    (f)  that  the  fees  received  or  proposed  to  be  received  by the
  neighborhood  preservation  company  from  the  management  of   housing
  accommodations are fair and reasonable;
    (g)  that  the plan submitted by the neighborhood preservation company
  demonstrates that such  company  will,  to  the  extent  possible,  give
  priority  when hiring new employees to residents of the neighborhood who
  are either unemployed or not fully employed;
    (h)  that  the  neighborhood  preservation  company  has  a  plan   to
  facilitate,  to  the  maximum  extent  feasible,  the disposition of any
  buildings containing housing accommodations  owned  by  the  company  to
  individual  occupants  thereof  or  to  cooperative groups whose members
  shall be occupants thereof; and
    (i) that the  interests  of  occupants  of  any  buildings  containing
  housing  accommodations  owned  by the neighborhood preservation company
  are adequately represented.
    4. Contracts entered into  hereunder  with  neighborhood  preservation
  companies  shall  be limited in duration to periods of one year, but may
  thereafter be renewed, extended or succeeded by new contracts from  year
  to  year  in  the discretion of the commissioner; they shall define with
  particularity the neighborhood  or  portion  thereof  within  which  the
  neighborhood  preservation  activities  shall  be  performed; they shall
  specify the nature of the  neighborhood  preservation  activities  which
  shall  be  performed  including  the  approximate  number  of buildings,
  residential dwelling units and local retail and  service  establishments
  which  shall  be  affected; they shall locate and describe, with as much
  particularity as is reasonably possible, the buildings with  respect  to
  which  such  activities shall be performed during the contract term; and
  they  shall  specify  the  number  of  persons,  salaries  or  rates  of
  compensation  and  a description of duties of those who shall be engaged
  by the neighborhood  preservation  company  to  perform  the  activities
  embraced  by  the contract together with a schedule of other anticipated
  expenses.
    5. Prior to renewing or extending a contract or entering a  succeeding
  contract  with  a  neighborhood  preservation company the division shall
  determine that:
    (a) the company shall have substantially  completed  the  neighborhood
  preservation  activities  specified  in  the  contract  to  be  renewed,
  extended, or succeeded;
    (b) the company shall have received  the  sums,  services,  and  funds
  specified  in  subdivision  four  of  section  nine hundred four of this
  article; and
    (c) the activities carried out by the company pursuant to its contract
  shall have  had  a  significant  impact  on  the  community's  needs  as
  specified in the contract.
    6.  Prior to terminating, not renewing or not extending a contract the
  division shall:
    (a) determine that the company  is  in  violation  of  the  terms  and
  conditions  of  the  contract  or  that  funds  provided pursuant to the
  contract are being expended in a manner not consistent with the terms of
  the contract or the provisions of this article; or
    (b) determine that necessary and appropriate technical assistance  has
  been  provided  without significant improvement in the activities of the
  company; and
    (c) provide the company with written notice, at least forty-five  days
  in  advance,  of  its  intent  to terminate, not renew or not extend the
  contract and provide the company with an opportunity to  appear  and  be


 heard  before the division with respect to the reasons for such proposed
  termination, non-renewal or non-extension.  At  the  same  time  that  a
  company  is notified of the division's intent to terminate, not renew or
  not  extend  the contract, the division shall likewise inform the senate
  and  assembly  members  who  represent  areas  within   such   company's
  geographic boundaries.
    7. The division shall establish, for renewal of contracts, a procedure
  which  provides  the company with at least forty-five days notice of the
  company's obligations and rights in that process, informs the company of
  the amount of the renewal contract, and facilitates the timely execution
  of the contract and disbursement of funds.
    8. The division may temporarily withhold payments and may elect not to
  renew or extend a contract or  enter  a  succeeding  contract  with  any
  neighborhood  preservation  company  if the company is not in compliance
  with its contract, has without good cause failed to submit documentation
  required under its contract or requested by the  division  to  make  the
  determinations  required  under  subdivision five of this section or has
  not satisfied any other conditions  consistent  with  this  article  for
  renewing or extending a contract or entering a succeeding contract.






	

   §   904.   Payments   to   neighborhood   preservation  companies  for
  neighborhood preservation activities. 1. Each contract entered into with
  a neighborhood preservation company shall provide  for  payment  to  the
  neighborhood   preservation   company   for   neighborhood  preservation
  activities to be performed by it.
    2. Payment to neighborhood preservation  companies  pursuant  to  this
  article shall be restricted to sums required for the payment of salaries
  and  wages  to  employees of such companies who are engaged in rendering
  neighborhood  preservation   activities,   fees   to   consultants   and
  professionals   retained  by  them  for  planning  and  performing  such
  activities and  other  costs  and  expenses  directly  related  to  such
  employees, consultants and professionals.
    3.  In  no  event shall any contract or payment be made, nor shall any
  payments be used, to defray  the  costs  of  the  construction,  repair,
  renovation,  rehabilitation, operation, demolition, clearance or sealing
  of any building or other structure, except that such funds may  be  used
  for   planning   any   such  activity  and  for  renovating,  repairing,
  furnishing, equipping and operating an office facility  to  be  used  in
  connection  with  the conduct of neighborhood preservation activities by
  the neighborhood preservation company. Payments shall  be  made  by  the
  division  to  the neighborhood preservation company, not less frequently
  than semi-annually, at or prior to the commencement of  each  such  time
  period,  to  compensate  such  company for the neighborhood preservation
  activities which it shall  undertake  to  perform  provided,  that  with
  respect  to  contracts entered into on or after June thirtieth, nineteen
  hundred ninety-seven the  first  such  payment  shall  be  made  by  the
  division  beginning  on or after July first of the fiscal year for which
  an appropriation in support  of  such  payment  was  made  and  provided
  further  that  the  final  such payment to the neighborhood preservation
  company shall be made no later than March thirty-first  of  such  fiscal
  year,  unless  such  payment  has  been withheld pursuant to subdivision
  eight of section nine hundred three of this article.
    4. In negotiating each contract, the division shall consider and  take
  into  account any and all other sums available or anticipated to be made
  available to the neighborhood preservation  company  from  any  and  all
  sources  which  may  be  used  to  defray  the costs of the neighborhood
  preservation activities set forth in the  contract,  including,  without
  limitation,  fees generated by the management of housing accommodations,
  contributions  from  private  foundations,   corporations,   firms   and
  individuals  and  funds  received under grants and contracts pursuant to
  any program or programs operated or  administered  by  any  governmental
  agency  or  instrumentality and shall make a determination that the sums
  available or anticipated to  be  made  available  for  the  neighborhood
  preservation company from such other sources, together with the value of
  services to be rendered for the benefit of the neighborhood preservation
  company  for  which  payment is not required to be made by such company,
  amount to at least thirty-three and one-third percent of the  amount  of
  such contract.
    5.  When disbursing funds for contracts with neighborhood preservation
  companies, pursuant to section nine hundred three of this  article,  the
  division  shall  use  the  following  criteria,  formulas  and tables to
  determine the distribution of funds:
    (a)(i) The total unmerged company  funding  shall  equal  the  current
  number of unmerged company contracts multiplied by the per group award.
    (ii) The unmerged company funding shall equal the per group award.
    (iii)  The merged company funding shall equal the funding modification
  multiplied by the per group award.


   (b) Merged company funding shall be determined on an individual  basis
  for  each  neighborhood  preservation company. The following tables show
  the funding modification to be used:
    (i) In the case of two companies merging, the following table shall be
  used:
            Years since    Funding
            merger         modification
              1              200%
              2              190%
              3              180%
              4              170%
              5              160%
              6              150%
    (ii) In the case of three companies merging, the following table shall
  be used:
            Years since    Funding
            merger         modification
              1              300%
              2              290%
              3              280%
              4              270%
              5              260%
              6              250%
              7              240%
              8              230%
              9              220%
              10             210%
              11             200%
    (iii)  In  the  case  of four or more companies merging, the following
  table shall be used:
            Years since      Funding
              merger       modification
                1              400%
                2              390%
                3              380%
                4              370%
                5              360%
                6              350%
                7              340%
                8              330%
                9              320%
               10              310%
               11              300%
               12              290%
               13              280%
               14              270%
               15              260%
               16              250%
    (c) If a neighborhood preservation company that has undergone a merger
  continues to renew their contract beyond the timeframes  listed  in  the
  above  tables,  it  shall  have  its  funding  determined using the last
  funding modification listed.
    (d) The merged company savings shall be determined  on  an  individual
  basis for each merged company. It shall be calculated by subtracting the
  amount  of  such  company's  merged  company funding from the amount the
  merged companies would have received if  they  had  maintained  separate
  contracts.


   (e)  The per group award shall equal the total funding available minus
  the  amount  for  the  contract  with  the   neighborhood   preservation
  coalition, which shall equal the total unmerged company funding plus the
  sum  of  the  merged  company funding plus the sum of the merged company
  savings.




   §  905.  Periodic  review  of  contract performance; renegotiation and
  termination of  contract.  1.  The  division  shall,  by  regulation  as
  hereinafter  provided,  provide for formal evaluation of the performance
  of a company to determine  its  progress  in  achieving  the  objectives
  outlined  in  the annual neighborhood preservation plan contained in its
  contract with the division. Such evaluation shall include  a  review  of
  the efforts of the company to execute each of the components of its plan
  and  a  consultation  between the company and the division regarding the
  findings of the division relative to  performance.  The  division  shall
  provide  or  cause  to be provided technical assistance determined to be
  necessary by the division to improve  the  ability  of  the  company  to
  execute  each  of  the  components  of  its  plan.  Such  evaluation and
  determination of the need for technical assistance  shall  consider  the
  financial  and  staff  resources of the company for the period evaluated
  and  any  special  considerations  which  may  have  had  an  impact  on
  performance during the period.
    2.  If  the division determines that a company has not made sufficient
  progress toward achieving the  objectives  of  its  annual  neighborhood
  preservation  plan  the  division  shall  conduct a site visit to review
  these findings and, if warranted, shall place the company on probation.
    3. The division shall terminate or not renew or not extend a  contract
  in accordance with provisions of subdivision six of section nine hundred
  three   of   this  article  if  the  commissioner  determines  that  the
  performance  of  a  company  is  not  sufficient  to   merit   continued
  participation in the program.
    4.  Notwithstanding  the foregoing, the commissioner may terminate any
  contract  upon  a  finding  of  substantial  non-compliance   or   other
  substantial breach of the contract.




   §  906. Technical services and assistance to neighborhood preservation
  companies.  1.  The  division  is  hereby  authorized   to   render   to
  neighborhood   preservation   companies   such  technical  services  and
  assistance as it may possess or as may be available to it to enable such
  companies to comply with the intent and provisions of this article.  The
  division  is further authorized to take all steps necessary to encourage
  the formation, organization and growth of new neighborhood  preservation
  companies.  The  division  may  also,  from  funds  appropriated for the
  purposes of this article,  contract  with  municipal  and  other  public
  agencies  and  with  private  persons,  firms  and  corporations for the
  provision of such technical services and assistance which  may  include:
  preparation and submission of proposals for entering into contracts with
  the  commissioner;  preparation and submission of reports required under
  such contracts or  regulations  issued  by  the  commissioner;  internal
  organization  and management of the neighborhood preservation companies;
  recruitment and training of personnel of the  neighborhood  preservation
  companies;  preparation of plans and projects, negotiation of agreements
  and compliance with  requirements  of  programs  in  which  neighborhood
  preservation  companies  may  become  engaged  in  the  course  of their
  neighborhood preservation activities;  and  other  technical  advice  or
  assistance  relating  to  the  performance  or rendition of neighborhood
  preservation activities.
    2.  The  affordable  housing  corporation,  the  housing  trust   fund
  corporation  or  their  designee  as  the  case may be, shall provide an
  incentive grant to each company that is awarded a contract  pursuant  to
  article eighteen or nineteen of this chapter. Such incentive grant shall
  consist  of  the  payment  of  an additional sum of money equal to three
  percent of the amount payable to such company pursuant to each  contract
  provided,  however,  that such payment  shall not be counted against the
  per dwelling unit total imposed by subdivision  one  of  section  eleven
  hundred  two of this chapter or the per dwelling unit limitation imposed
  by subdivision one of section eleven hundred twelve of this chapter, and
  provided further that such additional  amount  shall  not  exceed  forty
  thousand  dollars  per  contract. Such incentive grant shall be utilized
  either for purposes consistent with the provisions of  this  article  or
  for  the  cost  of  neighborhood preservation activities related to such
  contract and shall not be subject to the limitation  on  the  amount  of
  funds  which  may be received by companies contained in subdivision four
  of section nine hundred three of  this  article.  Such  incentive  grant
  shall  be  added  to  and  considered  a  payment under the contract for
  purposes of allocating funds to any single municipality.




   §  907.  Rules  and regulations to be promulgated by the commissioner.
  The commissioner shall issue and promulgate rules  and  regulations  for
  the  administration  of  this article, which rules and regulations shall
  include  provisions  concerning  requirements  as  to  eligibility   for
  contracting   with  the  commissioner;  the  form  of  applications  for
  contracts;  supervision  and  evaluation  of  neighborhood  preservation
  companies  including  standards  and performance criteria for continued,
  increased  or  decreased  funding  to  insure  the  companies  meet  the
  objectives  of  this  article  and  the  objectives  outlined  in  their
  neighborhood preservation plans; reporting, budgeting and record keeping
  requirements; provisions for renegotiation,  modification,  termination,
  extension  and  renewal of contracts, which provisions shall include the
  bases for funding increases from the preceding contract  including,  but
  not  be  limited  to,  performance  which  exceeds  minimum  performance
  criteria and provisions  for  probationary  periods  where  appropriate;
  provisions   for  technical  services  and  assistance  to  neighborhood
  preservation  companies  within  the  limits   of   available   funding;
  protection  of the interests of tenants in buildings owned or managed by
  neighborhood  preservation  companies;  and  such  other   matters   not
  inconsistent  with  the  purposes  and provisions of this article as the
  commissioner shall deem necessary, proper or appropriate. Such rules and
  regulations  shall  prohibit  any  neighborhood   preservation   company
  receiving  funds  under  contracts entered into pursuant to this article
  (i) from engaging in any activities promoting any political candidate or
  party or (ii) from expending any such funds in activities the purpose of
  which is to influence legislation.




   §  908.  Applicability  of  other  laws  to  neighborhood preservation
  companies.   Nothing contained  in  this  article  shall  be  deemed  or
  construed  to  prevent  or deny to any neighborhood preservation company
  the opportunity to qualify as  a  developer,  sponsor,  owner  or  other
  participant  in  accordance  with  the provisions of any article of this
  chapter, or pursuant to any other law of the state or  to  deny  to  any
  such  company  the  privileges  or immunities of any other provisions of
  this chapter or other  law,  nor  shall  any  neighborhood  preservation
  company  be precluded from organizing or causing to be organized or from
  acquiring any  other  corporation  for  the  purpose  of  conducting  or
  carrying  out  any  project, program or service authorized by any law of
  the state.




   §  909.  Annual  report. The commissioner shall, on or before December
  thirty-first in each year submit a report  to  the  legislature  on  the
  implementation  of  this  article. Such report shall include, but not be
  limited to, for each company receiving payments under  this  article:  a
  description  of such company's contract amount and cumulative total; the
  specific neighborhood preservation activities performed by such company;
  the findings required by  the  commissioner  under  subdivision  two  of
  section  nine  hundred  three  of  this  article;  the amounts of monies
  received by the company from sources other than payments  made  pursuant
  to  this  article; the value of services rendered for the benefit of the
  company for which payment is not required to be  made;  and  such  other
  information as the commissioner deems appropriate.




   §  910.  Merged company savings fund. The division shall create a fund
  to hold and shall transfer all funds determined  to  be  merged  company
  savings  pursuant  to  paragraph (d) of subdivision five of section nine
  hundred four of this article into such fund. The division shall use such
  funds, as available,  for  entering  into  new  contracts,  pursuant  to
  section   nine   hundred   three  of  this  article,  with  neighborhood
  preservation companies located in areas of the state that are  currently
  unserved by a neighborhood preservation company.




   §  920. Statement of legislative findings and purpose. The legislature
  hereby finds and declares that there exists in New York state a  serious
  need  for  the  restoration and improvement of housing, local commercial
  areas and public facilities in distressed urban neighborhoods  and  that
  the  state  should  encourage  the revitalization of such neighborhoods;
  that  not-for-profit  community-based   organizations   and   charitable
  organizations  that  have  a  direct  interest  in improving the health,
  safety and economic viability of a  distressed  urban  neighborhood  can
  play  a  crucial  role in such revitalization; the legislature therefore
  finds that a  program  should  be  established  to  fund  not-for-profit
  community-based  organizations  and  charitable organizations to improve
  distressed urban neighborhoods by  preserving  existing  housing  units,
  generating new housing units, upgrading commercial and retail areas, and
  by   creating   innovative  approaches  to  neighborhood  and  community
  revitalization which  improve  cultural  and  community  facilities  and
  spirit.




   § 921. Definitions. As used in this article:
    1. "Commissioner" shall mean the commissioner of the state division of
  housing and community renewal.
    2.  "Division"  shall  mean  the  division  of  housing  and community
  renewal.
    3. "Eligible applicant" shall mean  a  not-for-profit  corporation  or
  charitable  organization,  organized  for a period of one or more years,
  which is either incorporated under the  not-for-profit  corporation  law
  (or   such   law   together  with  any  other  applicable  law)  or,  if
  unincorporated, is not organized for the private profit  or  benefit  of
  its  members  and  has  been engaged primarily in community preservation
  activities.
    4. "Municipality" shall mean any unit of local government  within  the
  state with a population of more than twenty thousand persons.
    5.   "Neighborhood"   shall  mean  an  area  within  the  municipality
  identified by recognized or established  boundaries  consistent  with  a
  determination  of neighborhood eligibility under article sixteen of this
  chapter.
    6. "Urban initiatives projects" or "projects" shall  mean  a  specific
  work  or  series  of  works  for the revitalization and improvement of a
  neighborhood  through   creation,   preservation   or   improvement   of
  residential   housing   units;  preservation  or  improvement  of  local
  commercial facilities and public facilities or other aspects of the area
  environment  which  include  as  part  of  its  project  the   creation,
  preservation or improvement of residential housing units.
    7. "Persons of low income" shall mean those persons and families whose
  incomes  do  not  exceed  eighty  percent  of  the median income for the
  metropolitan statistical area in which a project is located.
    8.  "Corporation"  shall  mean  the  housing  trust  fund  corporation
  established in section forty-five-a of this chapter.
    9.  "Division  urban  initiatives  program"  shall  mean  the  program
  heretofore administered by the division pursuant to  appropriations  and
  reappropriations for the purposes of urban initiatives programs.




   §  922.  Urban  initiative  contracts.  1.  Within  the limit of funds
  available in the urban initiative program,  the  corporation  is  hereby
  authorized  to  enter into contracts with eligible applicants to provide
  state financial assistance for the project costs attributable  to  urban
  initiatives   projects   within   neighborhoods.   The  state  financial
  assistance shall be either in the form of payments, grants or loans,  as
  the corporation shall determine. No more than fifty percent of the total
  amount appropriated pursuant to this article in any fiscal year shall be
  allocated  to  urban  initiatives  projects  located  within  any single
  municipality.
    2. The total state payment pursuant to  any  one  contract  shall  not
  exceed  two  hundred thousand dollars and the contract shall provide for
  completion of the project  within  a  reasonable  period,  as  specified
  therein  which  shall  not  in  any  event  exceed  two  years  from its
  commencement. Up to ten percent of the project cost may be used for  the
  eligible  applicant's  operating  expenses including expenses related to
  organization operating support and administration of the contract.
    3. The corporation shall require  that,  in  order  to  receive  funds
  pursuant  to  this  article,  the  eligible  applicant  must  submit  an
  operating plan which  shall  include  but  not  be  limited  to  project
  feasibility,  leveraging, impact on the community, group capability, and
  affirmative action and minority business participation. Such plan  shall
  be  submitted  pursuant  to  a  request  for  proposals  issued  by  the
  corporation.
    4.  The  eligible  applicant  which  proposes  to  contract  with  the
  corporation   shall   be   a  bona  fide  organization  or  a  successor
  organization with appropriate  experience  in  community  revitalization
  activities  and  shall  demonstrate  by  its  immediate past and current
  activities that it has, or shows that it can acquire, the capability and
  expertise to successfully complete the proposed  project.  The  eligible
  applicant's  officers,  directors  and members must be representative of
  the residents and other legitimate interests of the neighborhood.
    5. Occupant selection procedures shall be  established  which  provide
  that  any lawful occupants who live in a project prior to rehabilitation
  shall not be displaced as a result of such  rehabilitation,  other  than
  temporarily,  in  which  case  suitable relocation arrangements shall be
  provided, and that any additional occupants who move into a project  are
  persons  of  low  income.  Preference  in  selection  of such additional
  occupants (i) shall be given to persons  or  families  with  the  lowest
  incomes possible, given the income requirements of the project; and (ii)
  shall  also  be given to persons or families whose current housing fails
  to meet basic standards  of  health  and  safety  and  who  have  little
  prospect  of improving the condition of their housing except by residing
  in a project receiving payments, grants or loans under this article.
    6. For any application for such a contract  under  this  article,  the
  corporation  shall  provide the applicant with a list of conditions that
  must be met prior to entering into a contract pursuant to this  article.
  Within  fifteen  working  days  of  receipt  by  the  corporation of all
  documents in satisfaction of the list, the corporation shall notify  the
  applicant  of  the  sufficiency or insufficiency of the documents. After
  satisfaction  by  the  applicant  of  all  conditions  required  by  the
  corporation  prior  to  entering  into  a contract the corporation shall
  enter into the contract within forty-five working days  of  satisfaction
  of such conditions.




   § 923. General and administrative provisions. 1. The corporation shall
  issue  and  promulgate  rules  and regulations for the administration of
  this  article.  The  rules  and  regulations  shall  include  provisions
  concerning  the eligibility of applicants for payments, grants and loans
  under this article;  funding  criteria  and  the  funding  determination
  process;   supervision   and   evaluation   of  contracting  applicants;
  reporting, budgeting and  record-keeping  requirements;  provisions  for
  modification  and  termination  of contracts; and such other matters not
  inconsistent with the purposes and provisions of  this  article  as  the
  corporation shall deem necessary or appropriate.
    2.   The  corporation  shall  provide  for  the  review,  at  periodic
  intervals, of the performance of  the  not-for-profit  corporations  and
  charitable organizations receiving financial assistance pursuant to this
  article.  Such  review shall, among other things, be for the purposes of
  ascertaining  conformity  to  contractual  provisions,   the   financial
  integrity  and efficiency of the organizations and the evaluation of the
  project.




   § 924. Transfer of authority, administration and appropriations. 1. On
  and  after  the  effective  date of this article, all obligations of the
  division with respect to the division urban  initiatives  program  shall
  become  the  obligations of the corporation and the corporation shall be
  responsible for the administration of  the  division  urban  initiatives
  program.  The  division  shall  provide  for the orderly transfer of all
  matters, records and things relating to such program to the corporation.
    2. Notwithstanding the provisions of any general or special  law,  the
  director  of  the  budget  is  authorized to transfer to the corporation
  funds otherwise appropriated or reappropriated for the purposes  of  the
  division  urban  initiatives  program  from  the division of housing and
  community renewal.
    3. All rules, regulations, acts, determinations and decisions  of  the
  division  or  the commissioner with respect to the administration of the
  division urban initiatives program in force on  the  effective  date  of
  this  section  shall continue in force and effect as rules, regulations,
  acts,  determinations  and  decisions  of  the  corporation  until  duly
  modified or rescinded by the corporation.




   §  1001. Legislative findings and statement of policy. The legislature
  hereby finds and declares that there exist in certain rural areas of the
  state significant unmet housing needs of persons and families of low  or
  moderate  income,  numerous  housing units which are deteriorating or in
  need of rehabilitation or improvement, and related factors demonstrating
  a need for increased attention to  housing  preservation  and  community
  revitalization in such areas.  Meeting the housing and community renewal
  needs of rural areas entails special problems arising from the dispersal
  of population over wide areas, the existence of substandard areas in the
  form  of  small,  often isolated, pockets of poverty rather than massive
  concentrations, the extremely limited resources of the  small  units  of
  local government involved, and other characteristics of these areas.
    Locally  based not-for-profit organizations can play a crucial role in
  housing preservation and community revitalization. The public policy  of
  support  for  such  organizations  embodied  in  article sixteen of this
  chapter, and the legislative findings set forth  in  such  article,  are
  hereby reaffirmed. The legislature further finds and determines that the
  needs  of  rural  areas  and  of  existing  and potential not-for-profit
  organizations serving such areas will  be  best  met  by  a  program  of
  support  for  such organizations and their activities similar to that in
  article  sixteen  of  this  chapter  but  recognizing  the   distinctive
  characteristics  of  such  areas.  It  is the purpose of this article to
  establish such a program within the division of  housing  and  community
  renewal.
    It  is  further declared to be the public policy of the state that all
  programs  of  housing  and  community  assistance  administered  by  the
  division  of  housing  and community renewal or other agencies should be
  carried out with due regard for the special conditions in and  needs  of
  the rural areas of the state.




   §  1002.  Definitions.  As  used  in this article, the following terms
  shall have the following meanings:
    1. "Commissioner" shall mean the commissioner of the state division of
  housing and community renewal.
    2. "Division" shall mean the state division of housing  and  community
  renewal.
    3.  "Rural  area  of  the state" shall mean cities, towns and villages
  having a population of less than twenty-five thousand.
    4. "Region" shall mean those portions of the rural area of the  state,
  as  specified  in  the  contract  entered into pursuant to this article,
  within which housing and community renewal  activities  funded  in  part
  pursuant to this article are to be carried out.
    5. "Housing preservation and community renewal activities" include (a)
  the  new  construction  or  the  acquisition, maintenance, preservation,
  repair, rehabilitation  or  other  improvement  of  vacant  or  occupied
  housing accommodations; demolition or sealing of vacant structures where
  necessary  or  appropriate;  disposition  of  housing  accommodations to
  present or potential occupants or co-operative  organizations;  training
  or  other  forms  of  assistance to occupants of housing accommodations;
  administration of landlord training classes; and management  of  housing
  accommodations  as  agent  for  the owners, receivers, administrators or
  municipalities; (b) activities, similar to those specified in  paragraph
  (a)  of  this  subdivision,  aimed at accomplishing similar purposes and
  meeting similar needs with respect to retail and service  establishments
  within  a region when carried out in connection with and incidental to a
  program of housing related activities.
    6. "Persons of low income" shall mean individuals and  families  whose
  annual incomes do not exceed ninety per cent of the median annual income
  for  all  residents  of  the region within which they reside or a larger
  area encompassing such region for which  median  annual  income  can  be
  determined.
    7.  "Merged  corporation"  shall  mean  a  not-for-profit  corporation
  maintaining a contract pursuant to section one thousand  three  of  this
  article   that   has   undergone   a  merger  with  one  or  more  other
  not-for-profit  corporation,  which  is  also  maintaining  a   contract
  pursuant to section one thousand three of this article, that has led the
  merged  corporations  to reduce the number of contracts being maintained
  with the division pursuant to section one thousand three of this article
  to a total of one.
    8. "Unmerged corporation" shall mean a not-for-profit corporation that
  is not a merged corporation.




   §   1003.  Contracts  with  not-for-profit  corporations  for  housing
  preservation and community renewal activities. 1. The  commissioner  may
  enter  into  contracts  with  corporations  incorporated pursuant to the
  not-for-profit corporation law (or such  law  together  with  any  other
  applicable   law)  for  the  performance  of  housing  preservation  and
  community renewal activities within a region, subject to the  provisions
  of this article.
    2.  Prior  to  entering  into  a  contract  with  a  corporation,  the
  commissioner shall have made a finding that  the  region  in  which  the
  activities are proposed to be conducted contains a significant amount of
  deteriorating  or  substandard  housing  which  is  not being adequately
  repaired,  renovated,  upgraded,  modernized  or   rehabilitated   under
  existing  programs  so  as  to  provide sound housing at costs which the
  residents of such region can afford; that the corporation which proposes
  to contract with the commissioner is  a  bona  fide  organization  which
  shall  have  been  in  existence  either  as  a  corporation  or  as  an
  unincorporated,  organized  group  and  performing  significant  housing
  preservation and community renewal activities for at least one full year
  prior  to  entering  into  any  contract with the commissioner and which
  shall have demonstrated by its immediate  past  and  current  activities
  that  it  has  the  ability  to  preserve,  repair,  maintain, renovate,
  rehabilitate, manage or operate housing accommodations or to  engage  in
  other  housing  preservation  and  community  renewal activities in such
  region; that the housing preservation and community  renewal  activities
  which  are  to be performed pursuant to the proposed contract are needed
  by the region; and that the corporation possesses  or  will  acquire  or
  gain access to the requisite staff, office facilities with direct access
  to  such  region,  equipment  and  expertise to enable it to perform the
  activities which it proposes to undertake  pursuant  to  such  contract;
  provided,  however,  that  merged corporations' office facilities may be
  located outside such region if they are located in a municipality wholly
  contained within the merged corporations' region, and provided  further,
  however,  that  it  shall not be a bar to the commissioner's contracting
  with a corporation that one or more other organizations, are  conducting
  housing   preservation   and  community  renewal  activities  wholly  or
  partially within the same region whether or  not  pursuant  to  contract
  with the commissioner.
    3. The commissioner may enter into a contract pursuant to this section
  only if he determines:
    (a)  that  the  region  proposed  to  be served by the applicant is an
  appropriate portion of the rural area of the state for  the  performance
  of activities pursuant to this article by a corporation;
    (b)  that  such  region  contains  significant  unmet housing needs of
  persons of low income, that a  substantial  portion  of  its  population
  consists  of  such  persons,  and  that the housing stock in the region,
  because  of  its  age,  deterioration,  or   other   factors,   requires
  improvement in order to preserve the communities within the region;
    (c)  that the particular activities to be performed by the corporation
  will meet one or more needs of the region and are reasonably  calculated
  to  have  a  positive  effect on regional preservation, stabilization or
  improvement;
    (d) that the corporation's officers, directors and members are  fairly
  representative  of  the  residents and other legitimate interests of the
  region, that they may be  expected  to  carry  out  the  contract  in  a
  responsible  manner,  and  that  a  majority  of  the  directors  of the
  corporation are residents of the region;


   (f) that  any  fees  received  or  proposed  to  be  received  by  the
  corporation  in  connection with its activities pursuant to the contract
  are fair and reasonable;
    (g) that the corporation will, to the extent possible, give preference
  in   hiring   to   residents   of  the  region  who  are  unemployed  or
  underemployed;
    (h) that the corporation will, to the maximum extent feasible, dispose
  of residential buildings owned or to be acquired by it to the  occupants
  thereof  or  to  cooperative  groups  whose  members  shall be occupants
  thereof; and
    (i) that due consideration will be given to the interests of occupants
  of properties owned or to be acquired by the corporation.
    4. Contracts pursuant to this section shall be for a period of no more
  than one year, but may be renewed or extended from year  to  year;  they
  shall  define  with  particularity  the region or portion thereof within
  which the housing preservation and community renewal activities shall be
  performed; they shall specify the nature of the housing preservation and
  community renewal activities which  shall  be  performed  including  the
  approximate  number  of  buildings, residential dwelling units and local
  retail and service establishments which shall be  affected;  they  shall
  locate  and  describe,  with  as  much  particularity  as  is reasonably
  possible, the buildings with respect to which such activities  shall  be
  performed during the contract term; and they shall specify the number of
  persons,  salaries  or rates of compensation and a description of duties
  of those who  shall  be  engaged  by  the  corporation  to  perform  the
  activities  embraced  by  the contract together with a schedule of other
  anticipated expenses.
    5. Prior to renewing or extending a contract or entering a  succeeding
  contract with a corporation the division shall determine that:
    (a)  the  corporation  shall  have substantially completed the housing
  preservation and community renewal activities specified in the  contract
  to be renewed, extended, or succeeded;
    (b)  the corporation shall have received the sums, services, and funds
  specified in subdivision four of  section  one  thousand  four  of  this
  article; and
    (c)  the  activities  carried  out  by the corporation pursuant to its
  contract shall have had a significant impact on the community's needs as
  specified in the contract.
    6. Prior to terminating, not renewing or not extending a contract  the
  division shall:
    (a)  determine  that  the corporation is in violation of the terms and
  conditions of the contract  or  that  funds  provided  pursuant  to  the
  contract are being expended in a manner not consistent with the terms of
  the contract or the provisions of this article; or
    (b)  determine that necessary and appropriate technical assistance has
  been provided without significant improvement in the activities  of  the
  corporation; and
    (c)  provide  the corporation with written notice, at least forty-five
  days in advance, of its intent to terminate, not renew or not extend the
  contract and provide the corporation with an opportunity to  appear  and
  be  heard  before  the  division  with  respect  to the reasons for such
  proposed termination, non-renewal or non-extension.  At  the  same  time
  that  the corporation is notified of the division's intent to terminate,
  not renew or not extend the contract, the division shall likewise inform
  the  senate  and  assembly  members  who  represent  areas  within  such
  corporation's geographic boundaries.
    7. The division shall establish, for renewal of contracts, a procedure
  which  provides  the corporation with at least forty-five days notice of


 the corporation's obligations and rights in that  process,  informs  the
  corporation  of  the amount of the renewal contract, and facilitates the
  timely execution of the contract and disbursement of funds.
    8. The division may temporarily withhold payments and may elect not to
  renew  or  extend  a  contract  or  enter a succeeding contract with any
  not-for-profit corporation if the corporation is not in compliance  with
  its  contract,  has  without  good  cause failed to submit documentation
  required under contract  or  requested  by  the  division  to  make  the
  determinations  required  under  subdivision five of this section or has
  not satisfied any other conditions  consistent  with  this  article  for
  renewing or extending a contract or entering a succeeding contract.




   §  1004. Payments pursuant to contracts. 1. Each contract entered into
  pursuant to this article shall provide for payment  to  the  corporation
  for  the  housing  preservation  and  community renewal activities to be
  performed by it.
    2. Payments pursuant to this  section  shall  be  restricted  to  sums
  required  for  the  compensation of persons employed by, and consultants
  retained by, the corporation  for  the  performance  of  the  activities
  covered by the contract and other costs and expenses directly related to
  such employees and consultants.
    3.  No part of any such payment shall be used to defray in whole or in
  part the cost of acquisition, improvement, rehabilitation, operation  or
  demolition  of any building or other structure, but this provision shall
  not prohibit the use of such funds for planning any such activity or for
  the  expenses  of  providing  office  and  related  facilities  for  the
  corporation  for  use  in  carrying  out  its activities pursuant to the
  contract. Payments shall be made by the division to the  corporation  at
  such  periods,  not  less  frequently  than  semi-annually,  as shall be
  provided in the contract. Such payments shall be made at or prior to the
  commencement of each such time period, to compensate the corporation for
  the activities which are to be  carried  out  during  such  time  period
  provided,  that  with respect to contracts entered into on or after June
  thirtieth, nineteen hundred ninety-seven the first such payment shall be
  made by the division beginning on or after July first of the fiscal year
  for which an appropriation in support  of  such  payment  was  made  and
  provided further that the final such payment to the corporation shall be
  made  no  later than March thirty-first of such fiscal year, unless such
  payment has been withheld pursuant to subdivision eight of  section  one
  thousand three of this article.
    4.  In negotiating each contract, the division shall consider and take
  into account any and all other sums available or anticipated to be  made
  available  to the corporation from any and all sources which may be used
  to defray the costs of the housing preservation  and  community  renewal
  activities  set  forth  in  the contract, including, without limitation,
  fees  generated   by   the   management   of   housing   accommodations,
  contributions   from   private   foundations,  corporations,  firms  and
  individuals and funds received under grants and  contracts  pursuant  to
  any  program  or  programs  operated or administered by any governmental
  agency or instrumentality and shall make a determination that  the  sums
  available  or  anticipated to be made available for the corporation from
  such other sources, together with the value of services to  be  rendered
  for  the benefit of the corporation for which payment is not required to
  be made by  such  corporation,  amount  to  at  least  thirty-three  and
  one-third percent of the amount of such contract.
    5.   When   disbursing   funds   for   contracts  with  not-for-profit
  corporations, pursuant to section one thousand three  of  this  article,
  the  division  shall  use the following criteria, formulas and tables to
  determine the distribution of funds:
    (a) (i) The total unmerged corporation funding shall equal the current
  number of unmerged corporation contracts multiplied  by  the  per  group
  award.
    (ii) The unmerged corporation funding shall equal the per group award.
    (iii)   The   merged  corporation  funding  shall  equal  the  funding
  modification multiplied by the per group award.
    (b) Merged corporation funding shall be determined  on  an  individual
  basis for each not-for-profit corporation. The following tables show the
  funding modification to be used:
    (i)  In  the  case  of  two  not-for-profit  corporations merging, the
  following table shall be used:


           Years since      Funding
              merger       modification
                1              200%
                2              190%
                3              180%
                4              170%
                5              160%
                6              150%
    (ii)  In  the  case  of three not-for-profit corporations merging, the
  following table shall be used:
            Years since      Funding
               merger      modification
                1             300%
                2             290%
                3             280%
                4             270%
                5             260%
                6             250%
                7             240%
                8             230%
                9             220%
               10             210%
               11             200%
    (iii) In the case of four or more not-for-profit corporations merging,
  the following table shall be used:
            Years since      Funding
               merger      modification
                1             400%
                2             390%
                3             380%
                4             370%
                5             360%
                6             350%
                7             340%
                8             330%
                9             320%
               10             310%
               11             300%
               12             290%
               13             280%
               14             270%
               15             260%
               16             250%
    (c) If a  not-for-profit  corporation  that  has  undergone  a  merger
  continues  to  renew  their contract beyond the timeframes listed in the
  above tables, it shall  have  its  funding  determined  using  the  last
  funding modification listed.
    (d)   The  merged  corporation  savings  shall  be  determined  on  an
  individual basis for each merged corporation. It shall be calculated  by
  subtracting  the amount of such corporation's merged corporation funding
  from the amount the merged corporations would have received if they  had
  maintained separate contracts.
    (e)  The per group award shall equal the total funding available minus
  the amount for the contract with the rural preservation coalition  which
  shall  equal  the  total  unmerged  company  funding plus the sum of the
  merged company funding.




   §  1005.  Enforcement  of  standards for contract performance. 1.  The
  division shall by  regulation  provide  for  formal  evaluation  of  the
  performance  of a corporation to determine its progress in achieving the
  objectives outlined in the annual  housing  preservation  and  community
  renewal   plan  contained  in  its  contract  with  the  division.  Such
  evaluation shall include a review of the efforts of the  corporation  to
  execute  each  of  the components of its plan and a consultation between
  the corporation and the division regarding the findings of the  division
  relative  to  performance.  The  division  shall  provide or cause to be
  provided technical assistance determined to be necessary by the division
  to improve the ability  of  the  corporation  to  execute  each  of  the
  components  of  its  plan. Such evaluation and determination of the need
  for  technical  assistance  shall  consider  the  financial  and   staff
  resources  of  the  corporation for the period evaluated and any special
  considerations which may have had an impact on  performance  during  the
  period.
    2.  If  the  division  determines  that  a  corporation  has  not made
  sufficient progress  toward  achieving  the  objectives  of  its  annual
  housing  preservation  and  community  renewal  plan  the division shall
  conduct a site visit to review these findings and, if  warranted,  shall
  place the corporation on probation.
    3.  The division shall terminate or not renew or not extend a contract
  in accordance with  provisions  of  subdivision  seven  of  section  one
  thousand  three  of this article if the commissioner determines that the
  performance of a  corporation  is  not  sufficient  to  merit  continued
  participation in the program.
    4.  Notwithstanding  the foregoing, the commissioner may terminate any
  contract  upon  a  finding  of  substantial  non-compliance   or   other
  substantial breach of the contract.




   §  1006.  Technical  services and assistance to corporations and rural
  areas. 1. In accordance with the policy of this  article,  the  division
  shall  encourage  the  creation,  development  and  strengthening of new
  not-for-profit  corporations  to  perform   housing   preservation   and
  community  renewal  activities  in  the rural areas of the state, and is
  authorized to take all steps necessary to that end. The  division  shall
  provide technical services and assistance to not-for-profit corporations
  seeking  to serve the housing or community renewal needs of rural areas,
  to better enable such corporations to  meet  the  requirements  of,  and
  obtain  funding  under this article or any other program of governmental
  assistance, federal, state or local, to  carry  out  their  present  and
  proposed activities, and otherwise to further the purposes and policy of
  this  article.  Such services and assistance may be provided through the
  division's own personnel and facilities, through  contractual  services,
  or otherwise.
    2.  The  affordable  housing  corporation  or  the  housing trust fund
  corporation, as the case may be, shall provide  an  incentive  grant  to
  each corporation that is awarded a contract pursuant to article eighteen
  or  nineteen of this chapter. Such incentive grants shall consist of the
  payment of an additional sum of money equal  to  three  percent  of  the
  amount  payable  to such corporation pursuant to each contract provided,
  however, that such payment shall not be counted against the per dwelling
  unit total imposed by subdivision one of section eleven hundred  two  of
  this  chapter or the per dwelling unit limitation imposed by subdivision
  one of section eleven hundred  twelve  of  this  chapter,  and  provided
  further  that  such  additional  amount  shall not exceed forty thousand
  dollars per contract. Such incentive grant shall be utilized either  for
  purposes  consistent with the provisions of this article or for the cost
  of housing preservation and community renewal activities related to such
  contract and shall not be subject to the limitation  on  the  amount  of
  funds  which  may  be  received by corporations contained in subdivision
  four of section one thousand three of this article. Such incentive grant
  shall be added to and  considered  a  payment  under  the  contract  for
  purposes of allocating funds to any single municipality.




   §  1007. Rules and regulations. The commissioner shall issue rules and
  regulations for the administration  of  this  article.  Such  rules  and
  regulations  shall  include  provisions  concerning  requirements  as to
  eligibility  for  contracting  with  the  commissioner;  the   form   of
  applications  for  contracts; supervision and evaluation of corporations
  which contract with the commissioner including standards and performance
  criteria for continued, increased or decreased  funding  to  insure  the
  corporations  meet  the  objectives  of  this article and the objectives
  outlined in their housing  preservation  and  community  renewal  plans;
  reporting,  budgeting  and  record  keeping requirements; provisions for
  renegotiation,  modification,  termination,  extension  and  renewal  of
  contracts,   which  provisions  shall  include  the  bases  for  funding
  increases from the preceding contract including, but not be limited  to,
  performance  which  exceeds  minimum performance criteria and provisions
  for probationary periods where  appropriate;  provisions  for  technical
  services  and  assistance  to  such  corporations  within  the limits of
  available funding; protection of the interests of tenants  in  buildings
  owned  or  managed by such corporations; and may include any provisions,
  not inconsistent with the provisions of this article or other applicable
  law, which the commissioner deems necessary or appropriate to carry  out
  the  policy  and  purposes  of  this article. Such rules and regulations
  shall prohibit any corporation receiving funds under  contracts  entered
  into  pursuant  to  this  article  (i)  from  engaging in any activities
  promoting any political candidate or party or (ii)  from  expending  any
  such   funds  in  activities  the  purpose  of  which  is  to  influence
  legislation.




   §  1008.  Relationship to other laws. Nothing in this article shall be
  deemed to deny or limit the right of any corporation to seek or  receive
  assistance  under,  or  otherwise  participate  in,  any  other  program
  pursuant to this chapter, or any other governmental program relating  to
  housing or community renewal. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to
  deny  or  limit the right of any corporation to carry out any program or
  service through a subsidiary corporation or other instrumentality.




   §  1009.  Annual report. The commissioner shall, on or before December
  thirty-first in each year submit a report  to  the  legislature  on  the
  implementation  of  this  article. Such report shall include, but not be
  limited to, for each company receiving payments under  this  article:  a
  description  of such company's contract amount and cumulative total; the
  specific housing and community preservation activities  in  rural  areas
  performed  by  such  company;  the findings required by the commissioner
  under subdivision two of section one thousand three of this article; the
  amounts of monies received  by  the  company  from  sources  other  than
  payments  made  pursuant to this article; the value of services rendered
  for the benefit of the company for which payment is not required  to  be
  made; and such other information as the commissioner deems appropriate.




   §  1010.  Rural  aging  services.  Housing  preservation and community
  renewal activities which are otherwise eligible under  subdivision  five
  of  section one thousand two of this article, but which are or have been
  funded under the rural aging services program operated  jointly  by  the
  division and the state office for the aging, shall not be subject to the
  limitation  on the amount of funds which may be received by corporations
  contained in subdivision four of section  one  thousand  three  of  this
  article.  All  provisions  otherwise  applicable to funds received under
  section one thousand three of this article shall  also  apply  to  funds
  received under this section.




   §  1011. Merged company savings fund. The division shall create a fund
  to hold and shall transfer all funds determined to be merged corporation
  savings pursuant to paragraph (d) of subdivision  five  of  section  one
  thousand  four  of  this  article into such fund. The division shall use
  such funds, as available, for entering into new contracts,  pursuant  to
  section   one  thousand  three  of  this  article,  with  not-for-profit
  corporations located in areas of the state that are  currently  unserved
  by  a not-for-profit corporation that is maintaining a contract pursuant
  to section one thousand three of this article.




   §  1020. Legislative findings and statement of policy. The legislature
  hereby finds that in  certain  rural  areas  of  the  state  significant
  numbers of low income residents are unable to obtain decent housing. The
  normal operation of the private market has not addressed their needs.
    The  elderly  and  families  are  especially  affected  by the lack of
  housing in rural areas. Elderly persons are frequently forced to  choose
  between  continuing to live in homes which have become too large to care
  for and use  well  or  leaving  their  communities  to  live  elsewhere.
  Families, particularly those just beginning, are often faced with either
  substandard,  unsafe  housing,  living  with  relatives  in  overcrowded
  conditions,  or  leaving  their  communities.  The  ensuing  social  and
  economic   disruption  has  profoundly  adverse  effects  on  the  rural
  communities as well as the residents.
    Numerous  housing  programs  have  been  initiated  by   the   federal
  government  to  provide  housing  for  those of low income. For the most
  part, these programs have  worked  best  in  areas  of  high  population
  density,  thus effectively, although unintentionally, failing to fulfill
  their intent in rural areas.
    The legislature further finds that locally based housing providers can
  effectively serve the needs of low and moderate income persons in  rural
  areas.  Their  efforts  have  been  severely  limited,  however,  by the
  contemporary high cost of financing, inflation and massive  retrenchment
  in federal housing assistance programs.
    The  legislature  further  finds it to be in the best interests of the
  people of New York state to assist local housing  providers  in  meeting
  the  needs  of  low  income  occupants  in  rural areas by supplementing
  federal assistance programs with a program of  state  rental  assistance
  payments similar to the federal Farmer's Home Administration Program.






	   §  1021.  Definitions.  As  used  in this article, any term defined in
  article seventeen of this chapter shall have the same meaning herein  as
  set  forth  therein  and  the  following  terms shall have the following
  meanings:
    1. "Federal  assistance"  means  assistance  from  the  Farmer's  Home
  Administration  pursuant  to title five of the United States Housing Act
  of 1949.
    2. "Eligible sponsor" means either a corporation organized pursuant to
  the not-for-profit  corporation  law,  a  public  housing  authority  as
  defined  pursuant  to  subdivision  two  of  section three of the public
  housing law, or an eligible borrower as defined in Title V of the United
  States Housing Act of 1949.
    3. "Eligible project" means a housing project located in a rural  area
  which  is  to  be owned or operated by an eligible sponsor and which has
  received (or which the sponsor has demonstrated to the  satisfaction  of
  the commissioner will receive) federal assistance.




   §  1023.  Rural  housing assistance contracts. 1. The commissioner may
  enter into contracts  with  eligible  sponsors  for  the  provision,  in
  eligible  projects, of housing for persons of low income. Such contracts
  shall provide for the payment by the division to the sponsor of periodic
  rental assistance payments with respect to  the  housing  accommodations
  occupied by such persons.
    2.  Such  contracts  may, subject to the availability of moneys in the
  rural housing assistance fund, commit the division to make such payments
  for a period of up to five years from the  date  of  completion  of  the
  eligible project. Any such contract shall provide that the sponsor shall
  not  withdraw the project, or any units therein, from the program during
  such period except for good cause as provided  therein.  Notwithstanding
  any  provision of this chapter, all contracts shall terminate after five
  years or when the actual dollar amount as stipulated in the contract has
  been expended, whichever is sooner.  For  any  application  for  such  a
  contract  under  this  article, the division shall provide the applicant
  with a list of conditions that must be met  prior  to  entering  into  a
  contract  pursuant  to  this  article.  Within  fifteen  working days of
  receipt by the division of all documents in satisfaction  of  the  list,
  the   division   shall  notify  the  applicant  of  the  sufficiency  or
  insufficiency of the documents. After satisfaction by the  applicant  of
  all  conditions  required  by  the  division  prior  to  entering into a
  contract the division shall enter into the  contract  within  forty-five
  working days of satisfaction of such conditions.




   §  1024.  Payments  pursuant  to  contracts. 1. Payments shall be made
  monthly or on such other periodic  basis  as  may  be  provided  in  the
  contract.  Each  such  payment shall equal, for each unit in the project
  covered by  the  contract,  the  difference  between  the  project  rent
  established  pursuant  to subdivision two of this section and the tenant
  rent payment established pursuant to subdivision three of this section.
    2. The project rent shall be: (a) in the case  of  a  housing  company
  regulated  by  the  state  pursuant to this chapter, the current maximum
  lawful rent for the unit; (b) in the case of a housing company regulated
  by a municipality pursuant to this chapter, the current  maximum  lawful
  rent for the unit, subject to such additional limitations and conditions
  as the commissioner may prescribe by contract; or (c) in the case of any
  other  sponsor,  the rent established or approved by the commissioner as
  prescribed in the contract.
    3. The tenant rent payment shall be an amount computed pursuant to the
  regulations of the commissioner, which  regulations  shall  prescribe  a
  formula  substantially  similar  to  that currently provided pursuant to
  title five of the United States Housing Act of 1949, as amended.






   §  1025. Administrative provisions. 1. The commissioner shall provide,
  by regulations,  for  the  administration  of  the  provisions  of  this
  article.  Such  regulations  shall  include, but need not be limited to,
  provisions for operation of the project  by  the  sponsor  in  a  manner
  consistent with the intent of this article.
    2. Every contract entered into pursuant to this article shall obligate
  the  sponsor  not to charge or collect from any tenant of a unit covered
  by such contract a rent higher than the tenant rent payment  established
  pursuant to section one thousand twenty-four of this article.
    3.  Rental assistance payments pursuant to this article may be pledged
  by the sponsor in connection with the  financing  or  refinancing  of  a
  project,  subject to any conditions prescribed in the housing assistance
  contract, but no such pledge shall create any obligation or liability on
  the part of the state or any agency  or  instrumentality  thereof  other
  than that prescribed in the contract.
    4.  Nothing  in this article shall prevent any sponsor from seeking or
  accepting any other form of governmental subsidy or assistance, but  any
  contract   pursuant  to  this  article  shall  provide  for  appropriate
  adjustments in the rental assistance  payments  to  reflect  such  other
  subsidy or assistance.




   §  1051. Legislative findings and statement of policy. The legislature
  hereby finds and declares that there exists  in  many  portions  of  the
  rural  areas  of  the  state  substantial  needs  for revitalization and
  improvement of housing and of local commercial and  service  facilities,
  and  for related community renewal activities. The findings set forth in
  article seventeen of this chapter, with respect to the special needs and
  problems of such areas and the significant  potential  role  of  locally
  based  not-for-profit  organizations  in helping to meet such needs, are
  hereby reaffirmed. The legislature hereby determines that,  in  addition
  to the program of state support to help meet the administrative expenses
  of  such  organizations  under  article seventeen, a further public need
  exists for  state  funding  of  a  portion  of  the  costs  of  specific
  revitalization  projects  carried  out  by such groups and similar local
  organizations. It is the purpose of this article to encourage  community
  preservation  and  improvement  in  the  rural  area  of  the  state  by
  establishing a program of such funding.




   § 1052. Definitions. As used in this article:
    (a)  all terms defined in article seventeen of this chapter shall have
  the same meanings herein as specified therein; and
    (b) the following terms shall have the following meanings:
    (1) "rural area revitalization  project"  means  a  specific  work  or
  series  of  works  for the revitalization and improvement of a region of
  the  rural  area  of  the  state  through  creation,   preservation   or
  improvement  of housing resources; creation, preservation or improvement
  of local commercial facilities; restoration  or  improvement  of  public
  facilities  or  other aspects of the area environment; related community
  preservation or renewal activities; or any combination of the above.
    (2) "qualified applicant" means  a  not-for-profit  corporation  under
  contract  pursuant  to  article  seventeen  of this chapter or any other
  locally based  organization  which  is  either  incorporated  under  the
  not-for-profit  corporation  law  (or  such  law together with any other
  applicable law) or, if unincorporated, is not organized for the  private
  profit or benefit of its members.
    (3) "Corporation" means the housing trust fund corporation established
  in section forty-five-a of this chapter.




   §  1053.  Contracts  for  rural  area  revitalization projects. 1. The
  corporation may, in the name of the state,  enter  into  contracts  with
  qualified  applicants  for  the performance of rural area revitalization
  projects.
    2. The corporation may enter into a contract pursuant to this  section
  only if he determines that:
    (a)  the  region  to  be  served is a portion of the rural area of the
  state which is in need of revitalization and can benefit from a  program
  carried out by one or more locally based groups.
    (b)  the  applicant organization, or any predecessor organization, has
  had appropriate experience in community preservation activities; that it
  has, or shows that it can  acquire,  the  capability  and  expertise  to
  undertake  successfully the proposed project; and that it is managed and
  directed by  persons  representative  of  the  region  within  which  it
  operates.
    (c)  the  project  or  projects,  alone  or  in combination with other
  proposed activities of the  applicant  or  others,  will  be  likely  to
  contribute  in  a significant way towards the revitalization and general
  community renewal of the region.
    3. Each contract pursuant to this section shall provide for payment by
  the corporation for the activities to be carried  out  pursuant  to  the
  contract.  Such  payment  shall  be based on the projected costs of such
  activities and the other sources of funding which may  be  available  to
  the  applicant  (including,  if  applicable, funding pursuant to article
  seventeen of this chapter) from any source. Up to  ten  percent  of  the
  program  or  project  cost  may  be  used  for the qualified applicant's
  operating expenses including expenses related to organization  operating
  support  and  administration  of  the  contract. The total state payment
  pursuant to any one contract  shall  not  exceed  two  hundred  thousand
  dollars.
    4.  The  contract shall provide for completion of the project within a
  reasonable period, as specified therein, which shall not  in  any  event
  exceed two years from its commencement.
    5.  For  any  application  for such a contract under this article, the
  corporation shall provide the applicant with a list of  conditions  that
  must  be met prior to entering into a contract pursuant to this article.
  Within fifteen working  days  of  receipt  by  the  corporation  of  all
  documents  in satisfaction of the list, the corporation shall notify the
  applicant of the sufficiency or insufficiency of  the  documents.  After
  satisfaction  by  the  applicant  of  all  conditions  required  by  the
  corporation prior to entering into  a  contract  the  corporation  shall
  enter  into  the contract within forty-five working days of satisfaction
  of such conditions.




   §  1054.  Administration  of contracts. 1. A contract pursuant to this
  article may provide for such periodic payments as may be appropriate.
    2. The corporation shall periodically review the performance  of  each
  contractor   pursuant  to  this  article.  Such  reviews  shall  include
  evaluation of the quality of the activities  performed,  the  conformity
  thereof   to   contract  provisions  and  the  financial  integrity  and
  efficiency of the contractor.
    3. Each contract pursuant to this article shall provide that:
    (a) it may be modified and renegotiated from time to time; and
    (b) it may  be  terminated  by  the  corporation  upon  a  finding  of
  substantial   noncompliance   or  other  breach  of  its  terms  by  the
  contractor.




   §  1055.  Rules  and  regulations.  The  corporation  may  provide, by
  regulation, for the administration  of  the  rural  area  revitalization
  program.  Such  regulations may contain any provisions, not inconsistent
  with this article as may be necessary or appropriate to  carry  out  the
  policy and intent of this article.




   §  1057.  Transfer of authority, administration and appropriations. 1.
  On and after the effective date of this section, all obligations of  the
  division with respect to rural area revitalization projects shall become
  the  obligations  of  the  corporation  and  the  corporation  shall  be
  responsible for the administration  of  all  rural  area  revitalization
  projects.  The  division  shall  provide for the orderly transfer of all
  matters, records and things relating to rural revitalization projects to
  the corporation.
    2. Notwithstanding the provisions of any general or special  law,  the
  director  of  the  budget  is  authorized to transfer to the corporation
  funds otherwise appropriated or reappropriated for the purposes of rural
  area revitalization projects to the division of  housing  and  community
  renewal.
    3.  All  rules, regulations, acts, determinations and decisions of the
  division or the commissioner thereof with respect to the  administration
  of  rural area revitalization projects in force on the effective date of
  this section shall continue in force and effect as  rules,  regulations,
  acts,  determinations  and  decisions  of  the  corporation  until  duly
  modified or rescinded by the corporation.




   § 1100. Statement of legislative findings and purpose. The legislature
  hereby  finds  and  declares  that there is a serious shortage of decent
  affordable housing in the state for persons of low income; that the cost
  of providing such housing without public participation and assistance is
  prohibitively high; that there exists throughout the state a significant
  number  of  dwellings  which  are  deteriorated  and   are   vacant   or
  underutilized;  that  the existence of such properties creates a serious
  threat to the health and safety of persons who live  in  or  near  them,
  limits   the  availability  of  decent  affordable  housing  to  others,
  contributes to the blight and deterioration of neighborhoods, and drains
  municipal resources and expenditures; that the rehabilitation  of  these
  properties would stem the deterioration of neighborhoods and promote the
  preservation  and creation of safe and sanitary low income housing; that
  the potential exists to make such housing available to  persons  of  low
  income   through   projects   carried  out  by  eligible  applicants  to
  rehabilitate these dwelling accommodations, bring  these  accommodations
  into  compliance with all applicable laws and regulations and remove all
  hazardous and immediately hazardous code conditions; that  the  purposes
  of  this article should also be served by providing for new construction
  of housing for persons of low income in areas  in  which  rehabilitation
  opportunities  are  limited  or where new construction would prove to be
  more effective;  that  the  carrying  out  of  such  projects  serves  a
  significant  public  purpose  and  may  appropriately  be  performed  by
  eligible applicants; that payment for such services, tax exemptions  and
  other public participation in such projects would bring down the cost of
  such  housing  and make it affordable to persons of low income; and that
  it is the policy of the state to preserve and create such housing and to
  provide for the aid, care, and support of the needy.    The  legislature
  therefore  finds  that a program should be established to provide monies
  for the rehabilitation and construction of these properties by  eligible
  applicants  to  promote  the  preservation  and  creation  of affordable
  housing for persons of low income.
    It is  intended  that  any  payments,  grants  or  loans  provided  to
  municipalities  through this program not substitute for funds which such
  municipalities would have spent in the absence of this program and  that
  such  payments,  grants  and  loans  will  enable such municipalities to
  expand their commitment to increase the supply of affordable low  income
  housing  to  levels  greater  than would have been possible without this
  program.




   § 1101. Definitions. For the purposes of this article:
    1. "Commissioner" shall mean the commissioner of the state division of
  housing and community renewal.
    2.  "Corporation"  shall  mean  the  housing  trust  fund  corporation
  established by section forty-five-a of this chapter.
    3.  "Rehabilitation"  shall  mean  all  work  necessary  to  bring   a
  residential  property  into  compliance  with  all  applicable  laws and
  regulations including but not limited to the  installation,  replacement
  or  repair  of heating, plumbing, electrical and related systems and the
  elimination of all hazardous and immediately hazardous violations in the
  structure in accordance with state and local  laws  and  regulations  of
  state and local agencies. Rehabilitation may also include reconstruction
  or  work  to  improve the habitability or prolong the useful life of the
  residential property.
    4. "Cooperative project"  or  "condominium  project"  shall  mean  any
  vacant  residential  or nonresidential property, or any portion thereof,
  or any distressed residential property, which, subsequent to  conversion
  or  rehabilitation under this article, will be owned as a cooperative or
  a  condominium  or  new  residential  construction  to  be  owned  as  a
  cooperative or a condominium.
    5.  "Homesteading  project"  shall  mean  any  vacant  residential  or
  nonresidential property, or  any  portion  thereof,  or  any  distressed
  residential   property,  or  any  new  residential  construction  which,
  subsequent to construction,  conversion  or  rehabilitation  under  this
  article,  will  contain less than five dwelling units, have at least one
  owner occupant and not be owned as a cooperative or a condominium.
    6.  "Rental  project"   shall   mean   any   vacant   residential   or
  nonresidential  property,  or  any  portion  thereof,  or any distressed
  residential  property,  or  any  new  residential  construction   which,
  subsequent  to  construction,  conversion  or  rehabilitation under this
  article, will be owned and operated as rental residential property.
    7. "Eligible applicant" shall mean a person of low income,  a  housing
  development fund company incorporated pursuant to article eleven of this
  chapter,  a  not-for-profit corporation or charitable organization which
  has as one of its  primary  purposes  the  improvement  of  housing  for
  persons  of  low income, a wholly-owned subsidiary of such a corporation
  or organization, a partnership at least fifty percent of the controlling
  interest of which is held by such  a  corporation  or  organization  and
  which  has  agreed  to  limit  profits or rate of return of investors in
  accordance with a formula established or approved by the corporation  or
  a  private developer which has agreed to limit profits or rate of return
  of investors in accordance with a formula established or approved by the
  corporation, a city, town or village, or a  county,  provided,  however,
  that  the  county  is only acting as an administrator of a program under
  which  projects  are  rehabilitated  or  constructed  or  nonresidential
  properties  are  converted  by other eligible applicants, or a municipal
  housing authority created pursuant to the public housing law,  provided,
  however,  that  any  real  property  of  such  housing  authority  to be
  rehabilitated, constructed or converted under  this  article  shall  not
  have  been financed pursuant to the provisions of the public housing law
  and shall not have been owned by such authority  prior  to  July  first,
  nineteen  hundred eighty-six and provided further, however, that persons
  of low income shall not be direct  recipients  of  payments,  grants  or
  loans from the corporation under this article but may receive such funds
  from another eligible applicant.
    8.   "Conversion"   shall   mean   all   work   necessary  to  convert
  nonresidential property into a cooperative or condominium,  homesteading
  or rental rehabilitation project.


   9.  "Nonresidential  property"  shall  mean  any property which is not
  residential property and is underutilized.
    10. "Persons of low income" shall mean (a) in cities with a population
  of one million or more persons, those persons and families whose incomes
  do  not  exceed eighty percent of the median income for the metropolitan
  statistical area in which a project is located; provided however that in
  the case of an owner occupant of a homesteading project, "persons of low
  income" shall also mean those persons and families whose incomes do  not
  exceed  eighty percent of the median income for the state and (b) in the
  portion of the state outside cities with a population of one million  or
  more  persons,  (i)  and  within  a  metropolitan statistical area those
  persons and families whose incomes do not exceed ninety percent  of  the
  median  income  for the metropolitan statistical area in which a project
  is located or ninety  percent  of  the  median  income  for  the  state,
  whichever  is  greater  or,  (ii)  if  a  project  is  located outside a
  metropolitan statistical area, those persons and families whose  incomes
  do  not  exceed  ninety  percent  of the median income for the county in
  which a project is located, or ninety percent of the median  income  for
  the state, whichever is greater.
    11.  "  Distressed  residential property" shall mean (a) a residential
  property which has an occupancy rate by lawful occupants  of  less  than
  sixty  percent,  (b)  a  portion  of a residential property described in
  paragraph (a) of this subdivision provided that such portion also has an
  occupancy rate by lawful occupants of less than  sixty  percent,  (c)  a
  residential  property  which  consists  of  one or two residential units
  prior to rehabilitation under this  article  and  which,  subsequent  to
  rehabilitation,  will  contain at least one additional residential unit,
  or (d)  a  residential  property,  the  rehabilitation  of  which  would
  preserve affordable housing currently serving a population whose housing
  need would justify its replacement if it ceased to be available.
    12.  "Project"  shall mean a cooperative, condominium, homesteading or
  rental project. In cases where any such project consists  of  less  than
  the  total  number  of  units  or  the  total amount of floor space of a
  property, any reference in this article, to  a  "project",  "cooperative
  project",  "condominium  project",  "rental  project"  or  "homesteading
  project" shall mean that portion of such property which  makes  up  such
  project.
    13.  "Private  developer"  shall  mean  a person, firm, partnership or
  corporation which  is  not  otherwise  included  in  the  definition  of
  "eligible applicant".




   § 1102. Cooperative or condominium, homesteading and rental contracts.
  1.  Within  the  limit  of  funds  available  in  the housing trust fund
  account, the corporation is hereby authorized to  enter  into  contracts
  with  eligible  applicants  for  the  furnishing  by  such applicants of
  housing for persons of low income. Each such contract shall provide that
  eligible applicants rehabilitate or construct one or  more  projects  or
  convert  one  or  more  nonresidential  properties.  Such  contracts may
  provide for payments,  grants  or  loans  by  the  corporation  for  the
  activities  to  be  carried  out  by  the  eligible  applicant under the
  contract. Such contracts shall provide that a private developer make  an
  equity  investment  of  the  greater  of (i) two and one-half percent of
  project costs or (ii) five percent of project costs  less  grants  which
  are  to  be  applied  to  such costs. The foregoing shall not preclude a
  private developer from making a greater equity investment. Any payments,
  grants or loans made by the  corporation  outstanding  at  the  time  of
  resale  shall  be  subject  to repayment in whole or in part upon resale
  after termination of the regulatory period  and  as  otherwise  provided
  therein. Such repayment provisions may survive the end of the regulatory
  period. Such contracts may provide that eligible applicants shall either
  (a)  perform  activities  specified under the contract themselves or (b)
  act  as  administrators  of  a  program   under   which   projects   are
  rehabilitated  or constructed or nonresidential properties are converted
  by other eligible applicants or (c) perform both such functions. In  the
  case  of  a  municipality  acting as an administrator, funds provided to
  such municipality hereunder shall not be deemed to be  municipal  funds.
  The  corporation  shall  refer any request for payments, grants or loans
  from persons of low income to eligible applicants in the area  in  which
  such  persons reside. Loans may be in the form of participation in loans
  including but not  limited  to  participation  in  loans  originated  or
  financed by lending institutions as defined in section forty-two of this
  chapter,  the  state  of  New  York  mortgage  agency, the New York city
  housing development corporation, the  New  York  state  housing  finance
  agency  or private or public employee pension funds. Notwithstanding any
  other provision of law, payments, grants and loans may be  deposited  by
  the  corporation  directly  with  a lending institution at or before the
  time  of  initial  loan  closing  pursuant  to   an   escrow   agreement
  satisfactory  to the corporation. Payments, grants and loans shall be on
  such terms and conditions as the corporation, or the eligible  applicant
  with  the  approval  of  the  corporation,  as  the  case  may be, shall
  determine. Payments, grants and loans shall  be  used  to  pay  for  the
  actual  and  necessary cost of acquisition, construction, rehabilitation
  or conversion, provided  that  not  more  than  fifty  percent  of  such
  payments, grants and loans received for the rehabilitation, construction
  or  conversion  of  a  project may be used for the cost of the project's
  acquisition and not more than ten percent of such payments,  grants  and
  loans  may be used for the rehabilitation, construction or conversion of
  community service  facilities  and,  provided  further,  that  payments,
  grants or loans shall not be used for (i) the administrative costs of an
  eligible  applicant except as otherwise authorized by law, (ii) the cost
  of  the  acquisition,  construction,  conversion  or  rehabilitation  of
  residential  units  which, subsequent to such acquisition, construction,
  conversion or rehabilitation, are to be occupied by persons  other  than
  persons   of  low  income,  and  (iii)  the  cost  of  the  acquisition,
  construction, conversion or rehabilitation of units which, subsequent to
  such  acquisition,  construction,  conversion  or  rehabilitation,   are
  occupied  or  to be occupied for other than residential purposes, except
  for community service facilities as described above. No  such  payments,
  grants or loans shall exceed a total of one hundred twenty-five thousand


 dollars  per  dwelling  unit.  Among  the criteria the corporation shall
  consider in determining whether to provide additional funds are: average
  cost of construction in the area, location of the project and the impact
  of  the  additional  funding on the affordability of the project for the
  occupants of such project. The length of any loan  provided  under  this
  article  shall not exceed forty years. No more than fifty percent of the
  total amount originally appropriated pursuant to  this  article  in  any
  fiscal  year  shall  be  allocated to projects located within any single
  municipality. Of the amount originally appropriated to  the  corporation
  in  any  fiscal  year,  no  more than thirty-three and one-third percent
  shall be allocated to private developers for projects within a city with
  a  population  of  one  million  or  more.  Of  the  amount   originally
  appropriated  to  the  corporation  in  any  fiscal  year,  no more than
  thirty-three  and  one-third  percent  shall  be  allocated  to  private
  developers  for projects in the area outside cities with a population of
  one million or more.
    2. The corporation and eligible applicants which act as administrators
  of a program under this article shall deposit any  recaptured  funds  or
  funds  from  the  repayment of loans and interest received on loans into
  the housing trust fund account.
    3. The corporation shall not enter into a contract under this  article
  unless  the  eligible  applicant  has  submitted an application and such
  application contains  a  plan,  acceptable  to  the  corporation,  which
  provides for each project:
    (a)  That  violations on the project which are classified as hazardous
  or immediately hazardous shall be repaired in accordance with state  and
  local  laws  and regulations of state and local agencies and the project
  shall  be  brought  into  compliance  with  all  applicable   laws   and
  regulations.
    (b)  For  the  establishment  of  occupant  selection procedures which
  provide that any lawful  occupants  who  live  in  a  project  prior  to
  rehabilitation   shall   not   be   displaced   as   a  result  of  such
  rehabilitation,  other  than  temporarily,  in   which   case   suitable
  relocation  arrangements  shall  be  provided,  and  that any additional
  occupants who move into a project are persons of low income.  Preference
  in selection of such additional occupants; (i) shall be given to persons
  or   families  with  the  lowest  incomes  possible,  given  the  income
  requirements of the project and; (ii) shall also be given to persons  or
  families  whose  current housing fails to meet basic standards of health
  and safety and who have little prospect of improving  the  condition  of
  their housing except by residing in a project receiving payments, grants
  or loans under this article.
    (c)  In  the  case  of a homesteading project that (i) the project may
  only be transferred or sold to  an  eligible  applicant;  and  (ii)  the
  resale  price of the project shall not exceed an amount equal to the sum
  of (A) the original equity  paid  by  the  owner  for  the  project  and
  rehabilitation  or  construction  thereof,  exclusive  of  any payments,
  grants or loans received pursuant to this article for such purposes,  or
  from  such other sources as determined by the corporation, with interest
  thereon at the rate of six percent per annum, (B) the  cost  of  capital
  improvements  to  the project paid by such owner after the completion of
  rehabilitation or construction, exclusive of  any  payments,  grants  or
  loans  received pursuant to this article for such purposes, or from such
  other sources as determined by the corporation, with interest thereon at
  the rate of six percent per annum, (C) the actual amortization  paid  by
  such  owner in the reduction of total outstanding principal indebtedness
  on all existing and prior mortgages on, or loans for, such project,  but
  only  to  the  extent  that the proceeds of such mortgages or loans were


 used by the owner for the project  and  rehabilitation  or  construction
  thereof  or  for the cost of capital improvements thereto, with interest
  thereon at the rate of six percent per annum, (D) the actual outstanding
  principal  indebtedness  on all existing mortgages on, or loans or other
  obligations for, such project which the owner is  required  to  satisfy,
  but only to the extent that the proceeds of such mortgages or loans were
  used  by  the  owner  for the project and rehabilitation or construction
  thereof or for the cost of capital improvements thereto,  with  interest
  thereon  at  the  rate  of  six  percent per annum, provided that if the
  indebtedness is not paid in full upon the  sale  of  the  project,  such
  owner  shall  not  be credited with the amount of such indebtedness, and
  (E) the reasonable costs and expenses incurred in  connection  with  the
  sale of such project.
    (d)  In  the  case  of  a  cooperative  project  that  (i)  the shares
  applicable to a cooperative unit shall be transferred or sold only to an
  eligible applicant; and (ii) the resale price of shares applicable to  a
  cooperative  unit shall not exceed an amount equal to the sum of (A) the
  original equity paid by the tenant shareholder for such shares  and  for
  the  rehabilitation  or  construction  of  such  unit,  exclusive of any
  payments, grants or loans received pursuant to  this  article  for  such
  purposes  or  from  such other sources as determined by the corporation,
  with interest thereon at the rate of six percent per annum, (B) the cost
  of capital improvements to such unit paid  by  such  tenant  shareholder
  after the completion of rehabilitation or construction, exclusive of any
  payments,  grants  or  loans  received pursuant to this article for such
  purposes or from such other sources as determined  by  the  corporation,
  with  interest  thereon  at  the  rate of six percent per annum, (C) the
  pro-rata portion of any capital assessments or capital contributions for
  building  wide  improvements  paid  by  such  tenant  shareholder,  with
  interest  thereon at the rate of six percent per annum, (D) the pro-rata
  portion of actual amortization paid by such tenant  shareholder  on  all
  existing  and  prior mortgages on such project in the reduction of total
  outstanding principal indebtedness, with interest thereon at the rate of
  six percent per annum, (E) the actual amortization paid by  such  tenant
  shareholder in the reduction of total outstanding principal indebtedness
  on  all  existing  and prior loans for such unit, but only to the extent
  that the proceeds of such loans were used by the tenant shareholder  for
  the  purchase  of  such  shares or for the cost of the rehabilitation or
  construction of, or capital improvements to, such  unit,  with  interest
  thereon at the rate of six percent per annum, (F) the actual outstanding
  principal  indebtedness  on  all existing loans or other obligations for
  such unit which the tenant shareholder is required to satisfy, but  only
  to  the  extent that the proceeds of such loans were used by such tenant
  shareholder for the purchase of such shares  or  for  the  cost  of  the
  rehabilitation  or  construction  of,  or  capital improvements to, such
  unit, provided that if such indebtedness is not paid in  full  upon  the
  sale  of  such  tenant's  shares  such  tenant  shareholder shall not be
  credited with the amount of such indebtedness, and  (G)  the  reasonable
  costs and expenses incurred in connection with the sale of such shares.
    (e)  In  the case of a condominium project that (i) a condominium unit
  shall be transferred or sold only to an eligible applicant; and (ii) the
  resale price of a condominium unit shall not exceed an amount  equal  to
  the  sum  of (A) the original equity paid by the owner for such unit and
  the rehabilitation or construction thereof, exclusive of  any  payments,
  grants  or  loans received pursuant to this article for such purposes or
  from such other sources as determined by the corporation, with  interest
  thereon  at  the  rate of six percent per annum, (B) the cost of capital
  improvements to such unit paid by such owner  after  the  completion  of


 rehabilitation  or  construction,  exclusive  of any payments, grants or
  loans received pursuant to this article for such purposes or  from  such
  other sources as determined by the corporation, with interest thereon at
  the  rate  of  six  percent  per  annum, (C) the pro-rata portion of any
  capital  assessments  or  capital  contributions   for   building   wide
  improvements paid by such owner to the project, with interest thereon at
  the  rate  of six percent per annum, (D) the actual amortization paid by
  such owner on all existing and prior mortgages on, or  loans  for,  such
  unit  in  the reduction of total outstanding principal indebtedness, but
  only to the extent that the proceeds of such  mortgages  or  loans  were
  used  by  such owner for the unit and the rehabilitation or construction
  thereof or for the cost of capital improvements  thereto  with  interest
  thereon at the rate of six percent per annum, (E) the actual outstanding
  principal  indebtedness on all existing mortgages on, and loans or other
  obligations for, such unit which the owner is required to  satisfy,  but
  only  to  the  extent  that the proceeds of such mortgages or loans were
  used by such owner for the unit and the rehabilitation  or  construction
  thereof  or  for the cost of capital improvements thereto, provided that
  if the indebtedness is not paid in full upon the sale of such unit, such
  owner shall not be credited with the amount of  such  indebtedness,  and
  (F)  the  reasonable  costs and expenses incurred in connection with the
  sale of such unit.
    (f) In the case of a rental project that (i) the  rental  project  may
  only  be  transferred  or  sold  to  an eligible applicant; and (ii) the
  resale price of the rental project shall not exceed an amount  equal  to
  the sum of (A) the original equity paid by the owner for the project and
  rehabilitation  or  construction  thereof,  exclusive  of  any payments,
  grants or loans received pursuant to this article for such  purposes  or
  from  such other sources as determined by the corporation, with interest
  thereon at the rate of six percent per annum, (B) the  cost  of  capital
  improvements  to  the  project paid by the owner after the completion of
  rehabilitation or construction, exclusive of  any  payments,  grants  or
  loans  received  pursuant to this article for such purposes or from such
  other sources as determined by the corporation, with interest thereon at
  the rate of six percent per annum, (C) the actual amortization  paid  by
  such  owner  on  all existing and prior mortgages on, or loans for, such
  project in the reduction of total  outstanding  principal  indebtedness,
  but only to the extent that the proceeds of such mortgages or loans were
  used by such owner for the project and rehabilitation thereof or for the
  cost  of capital improvements thereto, with interest thereon at the rate
  of  six  percent  per  annum,  (D)  the  actual  outstanding   principal
  indebtedness on all existing mortgages on, or loans or other obligations
  for,  such  project  which the owner is required to satisfy, but only to
  the extent that the proceeds of such mortgages or loans were used by the
  owner for the project and rehabilitation thereof  or  for  the  cost  of
  capital  improvements  thereto, provided that if the indebtedness is not
  paid in full upon the sale of the  project,  such  owner  shall  not  be
  credited  with  the  amount of such indebtedness, and (E) the reasonable
  costs and expenses incurred in connection with the sale of such project.
    (g) In the case of  a  rental  project,  that  the  project  shall  be
  operated initially as a rental property, and when located in the city of
  New  York  shall  be  subject  to the rent stabilization law of nineteen
  hundred sixty-nine, and when located in a municipality which has elected
  to be covered by the provisions of the emergency tenant  protection  act
  of  nineteen seventy-four, be subject to the provisions of such act. Any
  subsequent conversion to cooperative or condominium ownership during the
  period in which such property remains subject to the provisions of  this
  article shall only be allowed with the consent of the corporation and if


 done  pursuant  to section three hundred fifty-two-eeee or three hundred
  fifty-two-eee of the general business law shall only be allowed pursuant
  to  a  non-eviction  plan.  The  conversion  of  a  rental  project   to
  cooperative  or  condominium  ownership  shall  make  the cooperative or
  condominium subject to the provisions of this article for cooperative or
  condominium projects for the remaining term which the rental project was
  to be subject to the provisions of this article.
    (h) To be located in  an  area  which  is  blighted,  deteriorated  or
  deteriorating,  or has a blighting influence on the surrounding area, or
  is in danger of becoming a slum  or  a  blighted  area  because  of  the
  existence  of  substandard,  insanitary,  deteriorating  or deteriorated
  conditions, an aged housing stock, or vacant  non-residential  property,
  or other factors indicating an inability or unwillingness of the private
  sector  unaided  to cause the rehabilitation, construction or conversion
  which is contracted for under this article.
    3-a. The corporation shall  provide  the  applicant  with  a  list  of
  conditions  that  must be met prior to entering into a contract pursuant
  to  this  article.  Within  fifteen  working  days  of  receipt  by  the
  corporation   of   all  documents  in  satisfaction  of  the  list,  the
  corporation  shall  notify  the  applicant   of   the   sufficiency   or
  insufficiency  of  the documents. After satisfaction by the applicant of
  all conditions required by the corporation  prior  to  entering  into  a
  contract the corporation shall enter into the contract within forty-five
  working days of satisfaction of such conditions.
    4.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions of, or any regulation promulgated
  pursuant to, the emergency housing rent control law, the local emergency
  housing rent control act, or local law  enacted  pursuant  thereto,  the
  rent  stabilization law of nineteen hundred sixty-nine, or the emergency
  tenant protection act of nineteen seventy-four, the  eligible  applicant
  with  the  approval  of  the corporation shall have the power to set the
  initial rent level of any rental housing accommodation which is  located
  in  a rental or homesteading project receiving payments, grants or loans
  under this article.
    5. Any cooperative or condominium or  rental  project  which  receives
  payments,  grants  or loans pursuant to this article shall be subject to
  its provisions for a period of  twenty  years  following  completion  of
  rehabilitation work, construction or conversion or for the period during
  which  any  loan  or  indebtedness  received  under this article remains
  outstanding, whichever is greater  provided  however  that  all  housing
  accommodations  in  rental  projects shall continue to be subject to the
  rent stabilization law of nineteen hundred sixty-nine or  the  emergency
  tenant protection act of nineteen seventy-four, as provided in paragraph
  (g)  of  subdivision  three  of this section as the case may be, for the
  period specified in this subdivision and thereafter the applicability of
  such laws shall terminate  as  to  each  accommodation  upon  the  first
  vacancy which occurs in each accommodation.
    6.  Any  homesteading project which receives payments, grants or loans
  under this article shall be subject to its provisions for  a  period  of
  fifteen  years following completion of rehabilitation work, construction
  or conversion, or for the period during which any loan  or  indebtedness
  received under this article remains outstanding, whichever is greater.
    6-a.  Notwithstanding  any  provisions of subdivisions five and six of
  this section to the contrary, in the  case  of  projects  subject  to  a
  mortgage made by any lender:
    (a)  such  lender,  if not the corporation, shall give the corporation
  notice when an owner has  defaulted  on  any  payment  of  principal  or
  interest on such mortgage loan for a project for a consecutive period of
  sixty days.


   (b)  following  receipt of such notice, or at such earlier time as the
  corporation deems appropriate, the corporation shall seek to  cure  such
  default  and make the project economically viable by assisting the owner
  in entering into a mortgage  modification  agreement  with  the  lender,
  finding  a  new  eligible  applicant  to  own the project and assume the
  obligations under the mortgage or taking such other actions,  consistent
  with   the   provisions  of  this  article,  as  the  corporation  deems
  appropriate.
    (c) notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (a) and (b)  of  this
  subdivision,  with respect to any lender other than the corporation, the
  corporation may provide in agreements respecting any project that  where
  a  lender  shall  have  foreclosed  or  obtained  title  to a project in
  accordance with law and the provisions of its mortgage, the  project  or
  particular residential units therein shall not be subject to one or more
  provisions  of  this article, other than the rent stabilization coverage
  provisions of paragraph (g) of subdivision three of  this  section.  Any
  agreement  pursuant  to this paragraph shall only be made upon a finding
  by the corporation that such agreement is necessary in order to enable a
  project owner to obtain a mortgage loan from a  lender  other  than  the
  corporation.
    7. The corporation shall provide for the review, at periodic intervals
  at  least  annually,  of  the  performance  of eligible applicants under
  contract pursuant to  this  article.  Such  review  shall,  among  other
  things,  be  for  the purposes of ascertaining conformity to contractual
  provisions,  the  financial  integrity  and   efficiency   of   eligible
  applicants  and  the  evaluation  of the project. Contracts entered into
  pursuant to this article may be terminated, funds may  be  withheld  and
  unspent  funds  may  be  recaptured by the corporation upon a finding of
  substantial nonperformance or breach by the eligible  applicant  of  its
  obligations under its contract.
    8.  Within  each  of  the three categories of projects (cooperative or
  condominium, rental, or homesteading), preference  in  the  awarding  of
  contracts shall be given to economically feasible projects which contain
  a  substantial  number  of  persons  of low income whose income does not
  exceed  fifty  percent  of  the  median  income  for  the   metropolitan
  statistical  area  in which the project is located, or if the project is
  located outside such an area, to projects which  contain  a  substantial
  number  of  persons  of  low  income  whose  incomes do not exceed fifty
  percent of the median income for the county  in  which  the  project  is
  located,  additional  preference shall be given to economically feasible
  projects located on a brownfield site that has received a certificate of
  completion.




   §  1103.  General  and  administrative  provisions. 1. The corporation
  shall issue and promulgate rules and regulations for the  administration
  of  this  article.  The  rules  and regulations shall include provisions
  concerning the eligibility of applicants for payments, grants and  loans
  under  this  article;  funding  criteria  and  the funding determination
  process;  supervision  and   evaluation   of   contracting   applicants;
  reporting,  budgeting  and  record-keeping  requirements; provisions for
  modification and termination of contracts; and such  other  matters  not
  inconsistent  with  the  purposes  and provisions of this article as the
  corporation shall deem necessary or appropriate.
    2. The corporation may provide technical services  and  assistance  or
  contract  to  provide  technical  services  and  assistance  to eligible
  applicants to comply with the provisions  and  intent  of  this  article
  which  services  and assistance may include but shall not necessarily be
  limited to rehabilitation skills  training,  site  selection,  financial
  packaging  and  engineering and architectural services necessary for the
  preparation  of  proposals  for  entering  into  contracts  or  for  the
  continued  operation  of  cooperative  or  condominium,  homesteading or
  rental rehabilitation projects.
    3. The corporation shall, on or before  September  fifteenth  in  each
  year,  submit a proposed budget for the operation of the corporation for
  its next fiscal year to the director of the budget for his  review.  The
  chairman  of the corporation shall also deliver a copy of such budget to
  the chairman of the senate finance committee and  the  chairman  of  the
  assembly  ways  and  means committee at the same time that the budget is
  delivered to the director of the budget. The budget  shall  include  the
  total amount needed for corporate purposes, including the funds required
  by  the  corporation  for  its  general and administrative expenses, the
  source of all funds that the corporation expects  to  receive  and  such
  other information as the director of the budget shall require.
    4.  The  corporation  shall  require  the  submission  of  the  names,
  addresses and business background of the principals involved, the nature
  of their fiduciary relationship and their financial relationship,  past,
  present and future, to the project and to each other.




   §  1106. Legislative findings and declarations. The legislature hereby
  finds and declares that there is a serious shortage of decent affordable
  housing in the state for  persons  of  low  income;  that  the  cost  of
  providing  such  housing  without public participation and assistance is
  prohibitively  high;  that  programs  operated  by   municipal   housing
  authorities  and  municipalities  have  for decades provided hundreds of
  thousands of low income New Yorkers with  decent,  safe  and  affordable
  housing;  that  due  to the lack of funds available for leveraging state
  dollars for low income housing, and the delay that occurs when a variety
  of funding sources are used to produce such housing, a need  exists  for
  the  state  to  fully  finance  debt  free  low  income  housing.    The
  legislature  therefore  finds  that  a  program  should  be  established
  pursuant  to  which  the  housing  trust  fund corporation shall provide
  grants or loans to municipal  housing  authorities,  municipalities  and
  not-for-profit   organizations   or  charitable  organizations,  housing
  development fund companies, or private developers which shall be used to
  pay for all or a  portion  of  the  project  costs  of  constructing  or
  rehabilitating  turnkey/enhanced rental projects, and that such projects
  shall thereafter be owned by eligible owners for the benefit of  persons
  of  low income. The legislature intends that grants or loans provided to
  municipal housing authorities, or municipalities through the low  income
  turnkey/enhanced  housing  trust  fund  program shall not substitute for
  funds which such authorities or municipalities would have spent  in  the
  absence  of  such program, and that authorities and municipalities shall
  use such grants or loans to increase the supply of low income housing to
  levels greater than would have been possible without such program.




   §  1106-a.  Definitions.  For  purposes of this article, the following
  terms shall have the following meanings:
    1. "Corporation" means the housing trust fund corporation  established
  by section forty-five-a of this chapter.
    2.  "Turnkey/enhanced  rental  project"  or  "project"  means a vacant
  property which is converted or rehabilitated to residential rental  use,
  a  newly  constructed rental project or projects or a state-aided public
  housing project or projects where more than thirty percent of the  units
  are vacant.
    3.  "Turnkey/enhanced  rental  project costs" means the reasonable and
  necessary  costs  for  planning,  financing,  acquisition  of  land   or
  buildings  and  construction  of  new  buildings  or the reconstruction,
  rehabilitation, repair or remodeling  of  existing  buildings,  provided
  however  that not more than twenty percent of such costs may be used for
  acquisition of land or buildings. Such costs may also include all or any
  portion of the cost  necessary  for  the  creation  of  a  reserve  fund
  required  pursuant  to section eleven hundred six-e of this article, and
  all or a portion of a working capital fund. Such costs shall not include
  the  costs  of  nondwelling-related   facilities,   eligible   applicant
  administrative  costs  or, in cities with a population of one million or
  more, the cost of demolition or acquisition of land or buildings.
    4. "Eligible applicant"  means  a  housing  development  fund  company
  incorporated   pursuant   to   article   eleven   of   this  chapter,  a
  not-for-profit corporation or charitable organization which has  as  one
  of  its  primary  purposes the improvement of housing for persons of low
  income, a wholly owned subsidiary of such a corporation or organization,
  a municipality, a municipal housing authority created  pursuant  to  the
  public  housing  law or a person, firm, partnership or corporation which
  has agreed to limit profits or rate of return of investors in accordance
  with a formula established  by  the  corporation.  In  the  case  of  an
  application  by  a  city  with  a  population of one million or more for
  funding pursuant to this article for projects expected to contain thirty
  percent or more permanent housing units occupied  by  eligible  homeless
  families, as defined in article three-A of this chapter, such city shall
  be  an eligible applicant only if the corporation shall determine in its
  sole discretion that funding for the purpose of undertaking the  project
  is  unavailable  for  the  project  pursuant  to article three-A of this
  chapter.
    5.  "Eligible  owner"  means  a  housing  development   fund   company
  incorporated   pursuant   to   article   eleven   of   this  chapter,  a
  not-for-profit corporation or charitable organization which has  as  one
  of  its  primary  purposes the improvement of housing for persons of low
  income, a wholly owned subsidiary of such a corporation or organization,
  a partnership at least fifty percent  of  the  controlling  interest  of
  which is held by such a corporation or organization and which has agreed
  to  limit  profits  or  rate of return of investors in accordance with a
  formula established or approved by the corporation, a municipality or  a
  municipal housing authority created pursuant to the public housing law.
    6.  "Reserve fund" means a fund or funds to be used in accordance with
  guidelines established by the  corporation  for  ongoing  operation  and
  maintenance  costs  and replacement costs and may only be used after the
  first year of a project's  operation,  as  measured  from  the  date  of
  substantial  occupancy, except in the event of an imminent threat to the
  health and safety of the tenants. Such fund  shall  be  deposited  in  a
  banking  institution whose principal place of business is located within
  the state of New York and which has a proven record of investment in the
  community in which the project is located.


   7. "Working capital fund" shall mean a fund to be  used  for  start-up
  expenses  including,  but  not limited to, liability insurance, fidelity
  bond premiums, utility hook-up deposits, maintenance equipment,  movable
  furnishings and equipment and other initial project related expenses, as
  approved by the corporation.




   §  1106-b.  Low  income  turnkey/enhanced  housing  trust fund program
  established. There is hereby established within the housing  trust  fund
  corporation  a  low  income turnkey/enhanced housing trust fund program.
  Within  the  limit  of  funds  available  for  this   purpose   in   the
  turnkey/enhanced  housing  account, the corporation is hereby authorized
  to  enter  into  contracts  to  provide  grants  or  loans  to  eligible
  applicants for all or a portion of turnkey/enhanced rental project costs
  to construct or rehabilitate turnkey/enhanced rental projects subject to
  the   terms   and   conditions  of  this  article.  Upon  completion  of
  construction or rehabilitation of a turnkey/enhanced rental project,  an
  eligible  applicant  may, where appropriate, transfer such project to an
  eligible owner.




   §  1106-c.  Request  for  proposals.  The  corporation,  pursuant to a
  request for proposals, shall not provide  grants  or  loans  under  this
  article   except  to  an  eligible  applicant  which  has  submitted  an
  application in consultation with the eligible  owner  or  owners,  which
  contains:
    1.  a  development  timetable acceptable to the corporation that shall
  include the projected time schedule for (a) commencement and  completion
  of  regulatory  and  review processes and approvals including procedures
  for land use and disposition; (b) construction  loan  closing;  and  (c)
  commencement  and  completion of construction. Such timetable shall also
  include a projected date as to when the  units  will  be  available  for
  occupancy  and  when  such  units  will  be fully occupied and any other
  information the corporation deems appropriate;
    2. a proposed operating and maintenance budget;
    3. an estimate of the total project costs which shall include (a)  the
  costs  necessary  for  construction  or  rehabilitation  which shall not
  exceed  a  ceiling  amount  established  by  the  corporation  which  is
  consistent  with  the reasonable costs of constructing or rehabilitating
  projects in the municipality in which the project shall be located,  (b)
  the  costs necessary for working capital and a reserve fund and (c) such
  other reasonable costs necessary for the completion of such project;
    4. evidence that the municipality within  which  the  turnkey/enhanced
  rental  project will be located is experiencing a shortage of affordable
  housing for persons of low  income  and  the  proposed  turnkey/enhanced
  rental project will contribute to reducing such shortage;
    5.  the  names,  addresses  and  business background of the principals
  involved, the nature of their fiduciary relationship and their financial
  relationship, past, present and future,  to  the  project  and  to  each
  other;
    6. the identity of the eligible owner if the eligible owner is not the
  eligible applicant; and
    7. such other information as the corporation may require.




   §  1106-d.  Selection of eligible applicants for grants or loans under
  this article. 1. Prior to providing  grants  or  loans  to  an  eligible
  applicant  pursuant  to  this  article,  the corporation shall determine
  that:
    (a) eligible applicants can demonstrate by their past  performance  or
  other   objective   factors,   that   they   are   able  to  complete  a
  turnkey/enhanced  rental  project  in  a  timely,  efficient  and   cost
  effective manner;
    (b) the turnkey/enhanced rental project will be managed by an eligible
  owner  or  other  entity  who can demonstrate by its past performance or
  other objective factors that it is capable of effectively managing  such
  a project for the benefit of persons of low income; and
    (c)  the eligible applicant shall not borrow any funds for the project
  without the prior approval of the corporation.
    2. In selecting eligible applicants who will obtain  grants  or  loans
  pursuant  to  this  article,  the  corporation  shall give preference to
  proposals for turnkey/enhanced rental projects which:
    (a) will be located in an area which is experiencing a severe shortage
  of affordable housing for persons of low income;
    (b) will be located in a municipality  which  will  utilize  steps  to
  simplify or expedite processing, where applicable;
    (c) will result in the greatest number of quality units and the lowest
  costs per unit; and
    (d) will rehabilitate or construct small scale, low rise buildings.




   § 1106-e. Reserve fund. There shall be a reserve fund for each project
  which  in  no  event  shall  initially  be less than five percent of the
  turnkey/enhanced rental project costs, exclusive of  any  reserve  fund.
  Such reserve fund may be provided by the corporation or any other source
  and,  if  provided  by  another source, shall be provided in cash or the
  payment of such cash shall be assured by deposit of adequate  marketable
  collateral prior to the payment by the corporation of any project costs,
  excluding advances for planning costs.




   §  1106-f.  Project  operation  and management; rent structure; tenant
  selection. The eligible owner shall enter into  an  agreement  with  the
  corporation  which  provides  that  the  eligible  owner of such project
  shall:
    1. operate and manage such project as a rental building which is  used
  for other than transient occupancy;
    2.  structure rent levels in such project to be: (a) affordable to the
  tenants as specified in subdivision four of this section to  the  extent
  economically  feasible  and (b) when added to any other sources of funds
  available for the project's operation not in  excess  of  the  costs  of
  operating and maintaining the project including a reserve fund;
    3.  not borrow any funds for the project without the prior approval of
  the corporation;
    4. to the extent economically feasible, select tenants who  move  into
  such  project  and maintain a mix of tenants so that (a) at least thirty
  percent and no more than seventy percent of such tenants  are  receiving
  benefits  pursuant  to  section  one  hundred thirty-one-a of the social
  services law or could only afford rents no greater than  those  paid  by
  persons  receiving benefits pursuant to such section, provided, however,
  that of such tenants preference shall be given to persons who have  been
  referred  from  hotels, motels or shelters operated by a social services
  district or receiving payment directly or indirectly from such district,
  or  any  other  philanthropic  or  charitable  facility  providing  such
  accommodations;  and (b) the remaining tenants have incomes which do not
  exceed  eighty  percent  of  the  median  income  for  the  metropolitan
  statistical  area  in  which  such project is located or if a project is
  located outside such area, those persons or families  whose  incomes  do
  not exceed eighty percent of the median income for the county in which a
  project is located; and
    5. provide such other information as may be necessary to carry out the
  provisions of this article.




   §  1106-g.  Adjustment  of rents; income verification. Notwithstanding
  any other provision of  law,  no  grants  or  loans  shall  be  provided
  pursuant  to this article unless an eligible owner has agreed to require
  the tenants and occupants residing in the housing project or projects to
  submit an annual income affidavit  as  prescribed  by  the  corporation,
  together   with  proper  documentation  as  and  if  prescribed  by  the
  corporation, as the case may be. Upon submission of such  affidavit  and
  documentation,  if  any,  the  eligible owner shall adjust the rent of a
  tenant pursuant  to  a  procedure  established  by  the  corporation  by
  regulation  which  procedure shall, to the extent economically feasible,
  maintain the affordability of such  project  to  such  tenants.  If  the
  tenant   or   occupant   shall   fail   to  submit  such  affidavit  and
  documentation, or if such verification as prescribed by the  corporation
  shall  result  in  a disagreement caused by understatement of income and
  the tenant shall have failed to  correct  such  original  affidavit  and
  documentation on forms specified by the corporation within sixty days of
  notification  by  certified  mail by the eligible owner addressed to the
  tenant, the eligible owner shall in addition to  the  last  rent  assess
  such  tenant  or  occupant  a surcharge which shall equal the difference
  between the tenant's last rent and the rent the tenant  would  otherwise
  have  to pay had the grant or loan provided under this article been made
  as a loan at the prevailing market rate of interest and requiring thirty
  year amortization at the time the grant or loan was made. The provisions
  of any other law to the contrary notwithstanding, solely for the purpose
  of verification  of  income,  the  corporation  may  contract  with  the
  department  of  taxation  and  finance  for  services  performed by such
  department in verifying income information forwarded by the  corporation
  or the eligible owner to such department. Nothing contained herein shall
  be  construed  to  authorize  the  corporation  to  contract  with  such
  department  to  provide  any  income  information  whatsoever  and  such
  agreement  shall  be  limited  solely  to  the  verification  of  income
  information. No officer or employee of the  corporation,  the  New  York
  state  housing  finance  agency,  the  division of housing and community
  renewal or the eligible owner shall be subject to any civil or  criminal
  liability  by reason of his forwarding to the department of taxation and
  finance of any income information pursuant to this section,  unless  (i)
  such information is knowingly and willfully materially misrepresented by
  such  officer  or  employee  or  (ii)  such information is knowingly and
  willfully divulged to any  person,  except  in  the  discharge  of  such
  officer's or employee's duties solely for the purpose of verification of
  income,  for  any  reason  whatsoever.  The corporation shall promulgate
  rules and regulations to effect the provisions of this section  provided
  however  that  the corporation need not promulgate rules and regulations
  in the event the corporation adopts procedures which  are  substantially
  similar  to  the  rules  and  regulations  adopted  by  the commissioner
  pursuant to section sixty of this chapter. The provisions of  the  state
  freedom  of  information  act  shall not apply to any income information
  obtained by  an  eligible  owner,  division  of  housing  and  community
  renewal,  New  York  state  housing  finance  agency or the corporation,
  pursuant to the provisions of this section.




   §  1106-h.  Real property tax exemption. 1. The local legislative body
  of any city, town or village is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt
  and amend a local law to provide that all or any portion of the value of
  the  property  included  in  a  turnkey/enhanced  rental  project  which
  represents an increase over the assessed valuation of the real property,
  both  land  and  improvements, prior to the improvements of the property
  necessary or intended to effectuate the purposes of this article, may be
  exempt from any and all city, village and town real property  taxes,  as
  defined  in  subdivision  twenty  of section one hundred two of the real
  property tax law, real property special ad valorem levies, as defined in
  subdivision fourteen of section one hundred two of the real property tax
  law, and special assessments,  as  defined  in  subdivision  fifteen  of
  section  one  hundred  two of the real property tax law, except that the
  assessed valuation may be increased or decreased to reflect a change  in
  the  level  of  assessment as certified pursuant to title two of article
  twelve of the real property tax law.
    2. In any assessing unit in which there has been a change in level  of
  assessment  as  provided  in  title  two  of  article twelve of the real
  property tax law, the commissioner of taxation and finance shall certify
  the change in level of assessment factor in the manner provided in title
  two of article twelve of the real property tax law. The term  "assessing
  unit"  as used in this subdivision means a city, town, village or county
  having a county department of assessment with the power to  assess  real
  property.
    3.  Such local law may also provide for the abatement of any or all of
  the property taxes which are payable to such city, town or village  from
  such project, for such duration as is provided in such local law, if any
  property  taxes  remain  to  be  paid  after  the exemption or abatement
  provided in this section is determined.
    4. Provided that the tax exemption or  abatement  authorized  by  this
  section  shall  be  in  addition to any other tax exemption or abatement
  authorized by law, and provided further, however, that in  the  event  a
  project  ceases  to be subject to one or more provisions of this article
  any tax exemption or abatement authorized pursuant to this section  with
  respect to the eligible property of such project shall terminate.




   §  1106-i.  General  and administrative provisions of this article. 1.
  The corporation shall provide for the review, at periodic  intervals  at
  least  annually, of the performance of eligible applicants to the extent
  applicable and eligible owners under contract pursuant to this  article.
  Such   review  shall,  among  other  things,  be  for  the  purposes  of
  ascertaining conformity to  contractual  provisions  and  the  financial
  condition of the project.
    2.  The  provisions  of  section  eleven hundred three of this chapter
  shall apply to this article.
    3. Paragraph f of subdivision three of section eleven hundred  two  of
  this  chapter  shall  apply  to  this  article. For the purposes of said
  paragraph a turnkey/enhanced rental project shall  be  deemed  to  be  a
  rental project.
    4.  The  corporation  shall deposit any recaptured funds or funds from
  the  repayment  of  loans  and  interest  received  on  loans  into  the
  turnkey/enhanced housing account.
    5.  Notwithstanding  any  other provision of law, payments, grants and
  loans may be deposited  by  the  corporation  directly  with  a  lending
  institution at or before the time of initial loan closing pursuant to an
  escrow agreement satisfactory to the corporation.
    6.  In  addition  to  the information contained in the report required
  pursuant to section twenty of the public housing  law,  the  corporation
  shall,  on  or before October first in each year, submit a report to the
  governor, the temporary president of the  senate,  the  speaker  of  the
  assembly  and  the minority leader of the senate and the minority leader
  of the assembly which shall include (i) the name of the  eligible  owner
  of  the turnkey/enhanced housing trust fund project if such owner is not
  also the eligible applicant; (ii) the  actual  development  schedule  to
  date  for  each  project;  and  (iii)  a list of the number of units per
  project that upon initial occupancy were occupied by  homeless  families
  who  previously resided in hotels, motels or shelters that are regulated
  under title eighteen of the official compilation  of  codes,  rules  and
  regulations  of the state of New York, and a list of names and locations
  of such hotels, motels or shelters.




   §  1106-j.  Liability  on obligations. 1. Except for obligations which
  the corporation assumes by contract for the construction, rehabilitation
  and development period of any project, neither the corporation, the  New
  York  state  housing  finance  agency  nor  the  state  shall  have  any
  responsibility or liability as to construction, rehabilation, operation,
  maintenance, repair or use of  projects  unless  otherwise  specifically
  provided by law.
    2.  Any  contract  entered  into  pursuant to this section between the
  corporation and an eligible applicant, or eligible owner  of  a  project
  shall cite and set forth subdivision one of this section.




   § 1110. Statement of legislative findings and purpose. The legislature
  hereby  finds  and  declares  that  home ownership by persons of low and
  moderate income has long been, and still is, an essential element of the
  state's social economy, resulting in the development, stabilization  and
  preservation  of  neighborhoods and communities. The legislature further
  finds that persons of low and  moderate  income  require  assistance  to
  enable  them  to  supplement  their own resources and the ability of the
  private sector to make the availability  of  private  home  ownership  a
  reality. By providing home ownership assistance the state may narrow the
  gap  between  the  resources of the individual and the high cost of home
  ownership and by requiring leveraging  may  cause  investment  of  other
  public  and private funds. The appeal of private home ownership has been
  demonstrated to be a strong incentive to families  to  move  into  areas
  which  otherwise  may  be in danger of becoming blighted through neglect
  and the lack of investment. Pride in ownership will  halt  deterioration
  and offer the prospect of turnaround. The legislature further finds that
  adequate  private  resources  are  often  not  available to persons with
  modest incomes to acquire, rehabilitate or  construct  their  homes  and
  that  the  preservation of and development of existing private homes can
  often prevent an area from becoming  a  slum  or  a  blighted  area.  In
  addition,  stimulation  of  the level of activity in construction of new
  affordable homes will provide needed jobs and stability for communities.
  The legislature therefore finds that a program should be established  to
  provide  monies to make the construction, rehabilitation and improvement
  of homes for low and moderate income  persons  more  affordable.  It  is
  intended that any monies provided to municipalities through this program
  not  substitute for monies which such municipalities would have spent in
  the absence of this program  and  that  such  monies  will  enable  such
  municipalities  to  expand  their  commitment to increase the supply and
  condition of low and moderate income owner occupied  housing  to  levels
  greater than would have been possible without this program.




   §  1111.  Definitions.  1.  "Home"  shall  mean  a  one to four family
  dwelling which has at least one owner occupant or an owner occupied unit
  in a cooperative or a condominium.
    2. "Eligible applicant" shall mean  a  city,  a  town,  a  village,  a
  housing development fund company incorporated pursuant to article eleven
  of   this   chapter,   any   not-for-profit  corporation  or  charitable
  organization which has as one of its primary purposes the improvement of
  housing or a municipal housing authority created pursuant to the  public
  housing law, or a public benefit corporation formed to assist particular
  municipalities  with  their  housing,  community  development or renewal
  needs, or a county, provided,  however,  that  the  county  acts  as  an
  administrator  of  a  program  under  which  projects  are  constructed,
  rehabilitated or improved by other eligible applicants or  acts  in  any
  other capacity as permitted by law.
    3. "Grantee" shall mean an eligible applicant which operates a program
  of financial assistance pursuant to this article.
    4.  "Owner"  shall mean an individual who owns or agrees to purchase a
  home assisted under this program and to occupy it as his principal place
  of residence or a partnership, corporation or other  entity  which  will
  build or rehabilitate vacant properties for sale to home buyers.
    5.  "Home  buyers" shall mean individuals or households for whom there
  are no other reasonable and affordable homeownership, rehabilitation  or
  home  improvement  alternatives,  as  the  case  may  be, in the private
  market, as determined by  the  grantee  and  who  shall  occupy  a  home
  assisted under this article as their principal place of residence.
    6.   "Rehabilitation"  or  "home  improvement"  shall  mean  all  work
  necessary to bring a structure into compliance with all applicable  laws
  and   regulations   including  but  not  limited  to  the  installation,
  replacement or repair  of  heating,  plumbing,  electrical  and  related
  systems  and  the elimination of all hazardous and immediately hazardous
  violations in the structure in accordance with state and local laws  and
  regulations   of  state  and  local  agencies.  Rehabilitation  or  home
  improvement may also include  reconstruction  or  work  to  improve  the
  habitability or prolong the useful life of residential property.
    7. "Corporation" shall mean the affordable housing corporation created
  by section forty-five-b of this chapter.
    8. "Affordable home ownership development programs" or "Project" shall
  mean  the  rehabilitation,  improvement,  construction  or  acquisition,
  singly or in combination, of one or more homes.




   §  1112.  Affordable  home ownership development contracts.  1. Within
  the limit of funds  available  in  the  affordable  housing  development
  account,  the  corporation  is hereby authorized to enter into contracts
  with eligible applicants to provide grants which such  applicants  shall
  use to finance affordable home ownership development programs subject to
  the  terms  and  conditions  of  this  article. Any grants received by a
  municipality hereunder shall  not  be  deemed  to  be  municipal  funds.
  Grantees shall utilize funds provided pursuant to this article solely as
  payments,  grants  and  loans  to  owners  to  reduce  the  costs of new
  construction,  rehabilitation  or  home  improvement  or  the  cost   of
  acquisition,  but  only  where such acquisition is part of an affordable
  home  ownership  development  program  or  project   to   construct   or
  rehabilitate  homes,  or  as otherwise authorized by law. Such financial
  assistance may be in the form of loans, participation in loans including
  but not limited to participation in  loans  originated  or  financed  by
  lending  institutions  as  defined in section forty-two of this chapter,
  private or public employee pension  funds  or  the  state  of  New  York
  mortgage  agency, or grants, on such terms and conditions as the grantee
  with the approval of the corporation shall determine, provided  that  no
  such  payments,  grants  and  loans shall exceed the lesser of (i) sixty
  percent of the project cost for projects involving  acquisition  or  one
  hundred  percent  of  rehabilitation  programs  without  an  acquisition
  component or (ii) the following per dwelling unit limitations (A)  fifty
  thousand  dollars for projects except as provided in subparagraph (B) of
  this paragraph or (B) up to seventy-five thousand  dollars  for  a  high
  cost  project  or  a  project which will receive a loan from the federal
  farmers home administration. Up to ten percent of the program or project
  cost may be used  for  grantee  operating  expenses  including  expenses
  related  to the organization operating support and administration of the
  contract.  Among  the  criteria  the  corporation  shall   consider   in
  determining  whether  a project is a high cost project are: average cost
  of construction in the area, location of the project, and the impact  of
  the  additional  funding  on  the  affordability  of the project for the
  occupants of such project. No more  than  fifty  percent  of  the  total
  amount appropriated pursuant to this article in any fiscal year shall be
  allocated to homes located within any single municipality.
    2.  The corporation shall not enter into a contract under this article
  except with an eligible applicant which  has  submitted  an  application
  pursuant  to  a  request  for  proposals issued by the corporation which
  application contains a plan acceptable to the corporation which provides
  that:
    (a)  The  proposed  project  or  program  will  make  home  ownership,
  rehabilitation  or  home  improvement  affordable  to persons who cannot
  afford to own,  rehabilitate  or  improve  homes  by  relying  upon  the
  ordinary unaided operation of private enterprise.
    (b)  There  shall  be criteria, satisfactory to the corporation, which
  provide for maximum income limitations or a system of  income  targeting
  designed   to  ensure  that  home  buyers  who  benefit  from  financial
  assistance provided pursuant to this article would be unable to acquire,
  rehabilitate or improve homes  by  relying  upon  the  ordinary  unaided
  operation of private enterprise.
    (c)  The  payments,  grants and loans provided by grantees pursuant to
  this article will be supplemented by private or other public  investment
  and the payments, grants and loans provided by the grantee are the least
  necessary  to  make  home  ownership, rehabilitation or home improvement
  affordable to the income group to be served by the proposed  project  or
  program.


   (d) The proposed project or projects, if not built or rehabilitated by
  a  not-for-profit  corporation,  will  be  built  or  rehabilitated by a
  private  developer/builder  who  has  agreed  to  limit  his  profit  in
  accordance  with  a  formula, satisfactory to the corporation, which has
  been established by the grantee.
    (e) The proposed project or program will provide assistance in an area
  which  is  blighted,  deteriorated  or deteriorating, or has a blighting
  influence on the surrounding area, or is in danger of becoming a slum or
  a blighted area because of the  existence  of  substandard,  insanitary,
  deteriorating  or  deteriorated  conditions,  an  aged housing stock, or
  vacant  non-residential  property,  or  other  factors   indicating   an
  inability  or  unwillingness  of the private sector unaided to cause the
  construction, rehabilitation or home  improvement  for  which  payments,
  grants and loans under this article is provided.
    (f)  Home  buyers  will  occupy  homes  as  their  principal  place of
  residence and funds provided for the benefit of the home buyer  will  be
  recaptured  by the grantee if the home buyer does not occupy the home as
  the home buyer's principal  place  of  residence  under  the  terms  and
  conditions of a formula established or approved by the corporation.
    (g)  In  the case of a rehabilitation or home improvement program, the
  majority of payments, grants and loans provided for each home  shall  be
  used to perform work which prolongs the useful life of the home or shall
  be  used to correct basic structural defects or to repair basic building
  systems which threaten or if not corrected or  repaired  could  threaten
  the health and safety of the dwelling's residents.
    (h)  The  corporation  shall  provide  the  applicant  with  a list of
  conditions that must be met prior to entering into a  contract  pursuant
  to  this  article.  Within  fifteen  working  days  of  receipt  by  the
  corporation  of  all  documents  in  satisfaction  of  the   list,   the
  corporation   shall   notify   the   applicant  of  the  sufficiency  or
  insufficiency of the documents. After satisfaction by the  applicant  of
  all  conditions  required  by  the  corporation prior to entering into a
  contract the corporation shall enter into the contract within forty-five
  working days of satisfaction of such conditions.
    (i) Eligible applicants receiving awards pursuant to this article  for
  homes  located  in  cities  with a population of one hundred thousand or
  more shall provide preference to homebuyers who are members of a  police
  force  of  such  city,  provided  that such city has adopted a local law
  authorizing such preference.
    (j) In the case of projects  that  receive  an  award  of  over  forty
  thousand   dollars,   the  grantee  may  establish  resale  restrictions
  requiring the sale of the unit or units receiving such funding through a
  grant from the corporation be purchased  only  by  qualified  low-income
  homebuyers  extending  for a period of at least sixty years, but no more
  than  ninety-nine  years,  and  the  grantee  may  ensure  this   resale
  restriction  by  use  of  deed  restrictions,  community land trusts, or
  limited-equity cooperative ownership structure.
    3. In determining awards pursuant  to  this  article  the  corporation
  shall give preference to applications based upon the extent to which the
  proposed program or project will:
    (a) Serve the lowest income households in the applicable region and is
  designed  to  continue  to  be  affordable  to  such  households  for  a
  substantial period of time.
    (b) Leverage private and other public investment so as to  reduce  the
  amount  of  assistance  provided  pursuant  to  this  article  which  is
  necessary to operate or establish the program or project.
    (c) Contribute to the development of the neighborhood or community  in
  which the program or project is located.


   (d) Not directly displace current low and moderate income residents of
  such neighborhood or community.
    (e) Be undertaken and completed in a timely fashion.
    (f)  Utilize innovative, cost effective design techniques and building
  materials, which reduce construction, rehabilitation or operating  costs
  including, but not limited to factory built or modular homes.
    (g) Be located on a brownfield site that has received a certificate of
  completion.
    3-a.  In  determining awards pursuant to this article, the corporation
  shall establish tiered project funding levels based on length and  depth
  of affordability.
    4.  The corporation shall not provide a grant to an eligible applicant
  pursuant to this article unless the corporation determines that there is
  a strong probability that the  private  investment  in  the  applicant's
  proposed  program would not be made without the grant and that the grant
  will not substitute for private funds which would be otherwise available
  to the program.
    5. The corporation shall provide for the review, at periodic intervals
  not less  than  annually,  of  the  performance  of  grantees  receiving
  financial  assistance pursuant to this article. Such review shall, among
  other  things,  be  for  the  purposes  of  ascertaining  conformity  to
  contractual  provisions,  the  financial  integrity  and  efficiency  of
  grantees and the  evaluation  of  the  grantees'  activities.  Contracts
  entered  into  pursuant  to this article may be terminated, funds may be
  withheld and unspent funds recaptured by the corporation upon a  finding
  of   substantial   nonperformance  or  breach  by  the  grantee  of  its
  obligations under its contract.




   §  1113.  General  and  administrative  provisions. 1. The corporation
  shall issue and promulgate rules and regulations for the  administration
  of  this  article.  The  rules  and regulations shall include provisions
  concerning eligibility  of  grantees  for  state  financial  assistance;
  funding  criteria and the funding determination process; supervision and
  evaluation  of  the  contracting  grantees;  reporting,  budgeting   and
  recordkeeping  requirements;  provisions  for modification, termination,
  extension  and  renewal  of  contracts;  and  such  other  matters   not
  inconsistent  with  the  purposes  and provisions of this article as the
  corporation shall deem necessary, proper or appropriate. Grantees  shall
  deposit  any  funds  received  from  the  repayment of loans or interest
  received  on  loans  into  the  affordable  home  ownership  development
  account.  The  corporation may provide technical services and assistance
  or contract to provide technical services and assistance to grantees  to
  comply with the provisions and intent of this article which services and
  assistance   may  include  but  shall  not  necessarily  be  limited  to
  construction skills training, site selection,  financial  packaging  and
  engineering  and architectural services necessary for the preparation of
  proposals for entering into contracts or for the continued operation  of
  projects.
    2.  (a)  The corporation shall provide the commissioner of housing and
  community  renewal,  on  a  timely  basis,  with  the  data  and   other
  information necessary to compile the report or reports required pursuant
  to section twenty of the public housing law.
    (b)  The  corporation  shall, on or before September fifteenth in each
  year, submit a proposed budget for the operation of the corporation  for
  its  next fiscal year to the director of the budget for his review.  The
  chairman of the corporation shall also deliver a copy of such budget  to
  the  chairman  of  the  senate finance committee and the chairman of the
  assembly ways and means committee at the same time that  the  budget  is
  delivered  to  the  director of the budget. The budget shall include the
  total amount needed for corporate purposes, including the funds required
  by the corporation for its  general  and  administrative  expenses,  the
  source  of  all  funds  that the corporation expects to receive and such
  other information as the director of the budget shall require.
    3.  The  corporation  shall  require  the  submission  of  the  names,
  addresses and business background of the principals involved, the nature
  of  their fiduciary relationship and their financial relationship, past,
  present and future, to the project and to each other.




   §  1120. Statement of legislative intent. The legislature hereby finds
  and declares that the shortage of decent affordable housing for  persons
  of  low and moderate income remains significant and must be addressed in
  new and innovative ways; that a particular housing  problem  exists  for
  homeowners  residing  in  manufactured  home parks, wherein there is the
  potential for serious dislocation of families and loss of equity through
  the sale of manufactured  home  parks  to  interests  not  conducive  to
  continuation  of  park  settings  for  these  manufactured  homes;  that
  manufactured home  park  residents  frequently  lack  the  resources  to
  purchase  new  homes or move existing homes; that an innovative and cost
  effective solution to the problem of dislocation  of  manufactured  home
  park  families  is  the  formation  of  park  cooperatives  in which the
  manufactured home park is owned cooperatively by the  manufactured  home
  owners  who  reside  therein;  that  a significant public purpose may be
  served by assisting these homeowners in the  formation  of  manufactured
  home  park  cooperatives,  such purpose being a reduction in the cost of
  safe and sanitary housing for persons of low and moderate  income;  that
  manufactured  home  park  cooperatives should be assisted through public
  support for infrastructure improvements; that it is the  policy  of  the
  state  to  create  such housing cooperative opportunities and to provide
  for the aid, care, and support of the needy in a manner that  encourages
  self-sufficiency and self-determination. The legislature therefore finds
  that  a  program  should  be  established  to  provide  monies  for land
  acquisition by manufactured home park cooperatives and for  improvements
  to the infrastructures of such manufactured home parks.




   § 1121. Definitions. For the purposes of this article:
    1.  "Agency"  shall  mean  the  New  York state housing finance agency
  created by section forty-three of this chapter.
    2. "Cooperative project" or "project" shall mean any manufactured home
  park property which,  subsequent  to  receiving  assistance  under  this
  article,   will  be  owned  as  a  cooperative  by  the  owners  of  the
  manufactured homes situated therein.
    3. "Eligible applicant" shall  mean  a  manufactured  home  residents'
  association  representing a majority of the manufactured home residents,
  a  manufactured  home  park  cooperative,  a  municipality,  a   housing
  development fund company incorporated pursuant to article eleven of this
  chapter,  or  any  not-for-profit corporation or charitable organization
  which has as one of its primary purposes the improvement of housing.
    4.  "Infrastructure  improvement"   shall   mean   the   construction,
  reconstruction, improvement, reconditioning, and preservation, including
  the  acquisition  of  real  property  and  interests therein required or
  expected to be required in  connection  therewith,  of  roads,  bridges,
  sewage  and  water  collection and disposal systems, lighting districts,
  sidewalks, and other capital projects which will benefit the cooperative
  as a whole.
    5. "Manufactured home park" shall mean a  manufactured  home  park  as
  defined in section two hundred thirty-three of the real property law.
    6.  "Manufactured  home  park cooperative" shall mean a corporation or
  other entity formed for the purpose of owning a manufactured  home  park
  wherein the ownership of such shares, membership interest or certificate
  of membership will entitle the owners or holders thereof to occupancy in
  such  park  pursuant to section three hundred fifty-two-e of the general
  business law.




   §  1122.  Manufactured  home cooperative fund contracts. 1. Within the
  limit of funds available in the manufactured home cooperative fund,  the
  agency  is  hereby  authorized  to  enter  into  contracts with eligible
  applicants to provide loans which such eligible applicants shall use  to
  establish  manufactured  home  park  cooperatives through acquisition or
  infrastructure improvement or both.
    2. No such loan may be made or its  term  extended  pursuant  to  this
  article,  unless  the  agency  determines  that  the eligible applicants
  cannot afford or  obtain  the  financing  necessary  to  accomplish  the
  purposes of such loans through the ordinary unaided operation of private
  enterprise.
    3.  The  agency  shall  not enter into loans under this article except
  with an eligible applicant which has submitted a plan acceptable to  the
  agency  which  provides  that  subsequent  to  conversion to cooperative
  ownership, a majority of the manufactured home owners  or  one  or  more
  members  of  their  immediate family intend to occupy their manufactured
  homes as their primary residence.
    4. Such contracts  may  provide  for  loans  by  the  agency  for  the
  activities  to  be  carried  out  by  the  eligible  applicant under the
  contract, including participation in loans including but not limited  to
  participation in loans originated or financed by lending institutions as
  defined in section forty-two of this chapter, private or public employee
  pension  funds  or the state of New York mortgage agency. Loans shall be
  at the prevailing interest rate in the area for  long  term  residential
  mortgages or at such lower rate as the agency determines to be necessary
  for  the  project  to  be  financially  feasible. Loans shall not exceed
  ninety-five percent of the project costs including  purchase  price  and
  costs  for  infrastructure  improvement.  The  term  of  the  loan for a
  cooperative project or infrastructure improvement shall not  exceed  ten
  years  unless extended for periods not to exceed ten years in which case
  the term of the loan as extended shall not exceed thirty  years  in  the
  aggregate  and  the  amortization schedule for the loan shall not exceed
  thirty years.
    5. In determining loans pursuant to this article the agency shall give
  preference to applications based upon the following criteria:
    (a)  the  extent  to  which  park  residents   are   threatened   with
  displacement by the projected sale or closing of the existing park;
    (b)  the  scarcity of affordable alternate sites in the immediate area
  for relocation of park residents;
    (c) the  extent  to  which  manufactured  home  parks,  subsequent  to
  receiving  assistance under this article, will be owned as a cooperative
  by  shareholders  or  owners  or  holders  of  membership  interests  or
  certificate  of  membership in such cooperative whose average incomes do
  not exceed (i) the greater of one hundred percent of the  median  income
  for  the  metropolitan statistical area in which a project is located or
  one hundred percent of the median income for the state, or (ii)  if  the
  project  is  located  outside  such  an area, the greater of one hundred
  percent of the median income for the county  in  which  the  project  is
  located or one hundred percent of the median income for the state;
    (d)  the  extent  to  which  the proposed resident ownership structure
  provides long-term security and tenure;
    (e) the extent to which the proposed project will  be  undertaken  and
  completed in a timely fashion; and
    (f)  the  extent  to  which  the  homes  in a park are occupied by the
  manufactured home owners or members of their families.
    6. The agency shall provide for the review, at periodic intervals  not
  less than annually, of the performance of applicants receiving financial
  assistance  pursuant  to  this  article.  Such review shall, among other


 things, be for the purposes of ascertaining  conformity  to  contractual
  provisions, the financial integrity and efficiency of applicants and the
  evaluation   of  the  applicants'  activities.  Contracts  entered  into
  pursuant  to  this  article may be terminated, funds may be withheld and
  unspent funds recaptured by the agency upon  a  finding  of  substantial
  nonperformance  or  breach by the applicant of its obligations under its
  contract.




   § 1123. General and administrative provisions. 1. The agency may issue
  and  promulgate  rules  and  regulations  for the administration of this
  article. The rules and regulations shall include  provisions  concerning
  the  eligibility of applicants for payments, grants and loans under this
  article;  funding  criteria  and  the  funding  determination   process;
  supervision   and   evaluation  of  contracting  applicants;  reporting,
  budgeting and record-keeping requirements; provisions  for  modification
  and  termination  of  contracts; and such other matters not inconsistent
  with the purposes and provisions of this article  as  the  agency  shall
  deem necessary, proper and appropriate.
    2.  The  agency  may  provide  technical  services  and  assistance or
  contract to  provide  technical  services  and  assistance  to  eligible
  applicants  to  comply  with  the  provisions and intent of this article
  which services and assistance may include but shall not  necessarily  be
  limited  to  site  selection,  financial  packaging  and engineering and
  architectural services necessary for the preparation  of  proposals  for
  entering into contracts or for the continued operation of a manufactured
  home cooperative or for infrastructure improvement projects.
    3.  The  agency  and  applicants shall deposit any recaptured funds or
  funds from the repayment of loans and interest received  on  loans  into
  the manufactured home cooperative fund.
    4.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  article  one-A of the public
  authorities law, contracts entered into by the agency pursuant  to  this
  article  shall  not be subject to the provisions of article one-A of the
  public authorities law.
    5. The agency shall require the submission of the names, addresses and
  business background of the principals  involved,  the  nature  of  their
  fiduciary  relationship  and their financial relationship, past, present
  and future, to the project and to each other.
   § 1130. Statement of legislative findings and purpose. The legislature
  hereby  finds  and  declares  that  there  exists throughout the state a
  serious  shortage  of  affordable  housing  and   that   the   cost   of
  infrastructure  improvements,  such  as  sewer, water and utility lines,
  increases the cost of providing such housing. The legislature  therefore
  determines that a demonstration program should be established to provide
  infrastructure  development  grants  in conjunction with existing state,
  local and federal housing programs to eligible applicants to enable, aid
  and facilitate the development of affordable housing.






   §  1131.  Definitions.  1.  "Eligible  applicant"  shall mean a public
  benefit   corporation,   not-for-profit   corporation   or    charitable
  organization  whose  purpose includes the construction or rehabilitation
  of affordable housing or a municipality.
    2.  "Infrastructure  improvements"  shall  mean  the  installation  or
  upgrading  of  water  and  sewer  lines  to  a  public  connection,  the
  installation or upgrading of private wells and sanitary  systems,  storm
  sewers and road and sidewalk construction where required by local zoning
  ordinances and the installation of gas and electric lines and other site
  improvements  or site preparation which is necessary for the creation of
  affordable housing.
    3. "Affordable housing project" shall mean residential  housing  being
  rehabilitated  or  constructed  in  conjunction with a state, federal or
  local program to produce affordable housing.
    4. "Agency" shall mean the New York state housing finance agency.
    5. "Municipality" shall mean a county, city, town or village.