ARTICLE 1
                          SHORT TITLE; DEFINITIONS
  Section 1. Short title.
          2. Definitions.


Section  1.  Short  title.  This  chapter  shall be known as the "Real
  Property Law."
§  2. Definitions. 


1. The terms "real property" and "lands" as used in
  the first eight articles of this chapter  are  coextensive  in  meaning
  with lands, tenements and hereditaments.
    2. The term "infant" or "minor" as used in this chapter means a person
  who has not attained the age of eighteen years.


ARTICLE 2
                           TENURE OF REAL PROPERTY
  Section 10. Capacity to hold real property.
          11. Capacity to transfer real property.
          15. Title through noncitizen.
          16. Liabilities of noncitizen holders of real property.
          17. Heirs of patriotic Indian.
          18. Mines in Saint Lawrence county.


§  10.  Capacity  to  hold  real  property. 1. A citizen of the United
  States is capable of holding real property within  this  state,  and  of
  taking the same by descent, devise or purchase.
    2.  Noncitizens  are empowered to take, hold, transmit, and dispose of
  real property within this  state  in  the  same  manner  as  native-born
  citizens  and  their  heirs  and  devisees  take  in  the same manner as
  citizens.
    3. For the purpose of maintaining offices and places of residence  for
  its ambassadors and consular officers and for its representatives at the
  United  Nations, a foreign government is empowered to hold, transmit and
  dispose of real property within this state. Title to such  property  may
  be  taken either in the name of the foreign government or in the name of
  its ambassador or consul or in the name of its minister  to  the  United
  Nations.  If  a  conveyance of real property is made to an ambassador or
  consul or  minister  of  a  foreign  government  as  such,  or  contains
  appropriate  words showing the intention to vest the title in the holder
  of the office rather than in the named individual, the title to the real
  property shall pass from time to time without any further conveyance  to
  the  respective  successors in such office, who shall have full power to
  dispose of such property.


§ 11. Capacity to transfer real property. A person other than a minor,
  a  person  with  a  developmental disability, or person of unsound mind,
  seized of or entitled to an estate or interest  in  real  property,  may
  transfer such estate or interest.


§  15. Title through noncitizen. The right, title or interest in or to
  real property in this state now held or hereafter acquired by any person
  entitled to hold the same can not be questioned or impeached  by  reason
  of  the noncitizen status of any person through whom such title may have
  been derived. Nothing in this section affects or impairs  the  right  of
  any heir, devisee, mortgagee, or creditor by judgment or otherwise.


§  16.  Liabilities  of  noncitizen  holders  of  real property. Every
  noncitizen holding real property in this state  is  subject  to  duties,
  assessments,  taxes  and burdens as if such noncitizen were a citizen of
  the state.


 §  17.  Heirs of patriotic Indians. The heirs of an Indian to whom real
  property was granted for military services rendered during  the  war  of
  the  Revolution  may  take  and hold such real property by descent as if
  they were citizens of the state at  the  time  of  the  death  of  their
  ancestors.  A  conveyance  of  such  real  property to a citizen of this
  state, executed by  such  Indian  or  his  heirs  after  March  seventh,
  eighteen  hundred  and  nine, is valid, if executed with the approval of
  the surveyor-general or state engineer and  surveyor  prior  to  January
  first,  nineteen  hundred  and  twenty-seven,  and  thereafter  with the
  approval of the commissioner of transportation endorsed thereon.


§  18. Mines in Saint Lawrence county. The proprietors of any mines or
  veins of lead or copper in the county of  Saint  Lawrence,  may  demise,
  lease, or rent the same for a period not to exceed twenty-one years from
  the  date  of  any such lease, to any foreign individual or company, and
  such lessee may take, hold, work, use or convey the same during the said
  term, in the same manner and subject to the same liabilities as if  such
  lessee were a natural born citizen.


ARTICLE 4
                               USES AND TRUSTS
  Section 119.   Purchase by mortgage trustee.
          120.   Operation and sale by mortgage trustee.
          120-a. Liquidation of mortgage by trustee.
          121.   Reorganization of property covered by trust mortgage.
          122.   Procedure  of  reorganization  and expenses in connection
                   therewith.
          122-a. Modification  of   trust   mortgages   given   in   prior
                   re-organizations.
          123.   Preserving existing rights.


  §   119.  Purchase  by  mortgage  trustee.  Any  banking  corporation,
  including corporations organized under the banking law and also national
  banking associations authorized to act as trustees  within  this  state,
  which  shall  act  as  trustee, depository or in other representative or
  fiduciary capacity in respect to any mortgage upon real property  within
  this  state or upon some interest therein or in respect to any indenture
  relating to such real property against which bonds  or  certificates  of
  parts or of shares have been issued to the public, may acquire such real
  property in any foreclosure action now or hereafter pending; and in lieu
  of  paying  cash therefor, may make settlement for the purchase price by
  crediting upon the bond, mortgage or other obligation held  by  it,  the
  net  proceeds of sale after deducting therefrom the expenses of the sale
  and the costs of the action and any other sums  which  such  trustee  is
  authorized to deduct under the mortgage, deed of trust or indenture. The
  officer  making  such  foreclosure  sale  shall  accept  such settlement
  without requiring the production of the bonds,  notes,  certificates  of
  sharing, certificates of participation, or other security evidencing the
  pro  rata  interest  of the holders thereof in the mortgage or indenture
  being foreclosed; and, without such production, there  shall  be  deemed
  credited  thereon  the  pro  rata  share  of  the  net  proceeds of sale
  ascertained and established as aforesaid.


§   120.   Operation  and  sale  by  mortgage  trustee.  Such  banking
  corporation, upon acquiring such  property,  shall  hold,  lease,  rent,
  operate  and  manage  the  same  for the pro rata benefit of all parties
  interested in said mortgage, deed of trust or  indenture  and  may,  but
  shall  not  be  required to, issue certificates of participation in said
  property and the rents, issues and  profits  thereof  to  those  parties
  interested  in  said mortgage or indenture according to their respective
  interests. At any time thereafter with the consent  of  the  holders  of
  eighty-five  per  centum  of  the  principal  amount  of  the  bonds  or
  certificates outstanding, or with the approval of the court  after  such
  notice  to  the bondholders or certificate holders as the court by order
  may direct, the court may make an order authorizing the trustee to  sell
  such  property  for  such  price  and  upon  such  terms as to credit or
  otherwise or for such stocks, bonds or other securities as it deems best
  for those beneficially interested in said mortgage,  deed  of  trust  or
  indenture.  The  order directing the giving of notice to bondholders and
  certificate holders of the application  of  the  trustee  to  sell  such
  property shall provide for personal service of such notice not less than
  thirty  days  before  the  return  date  thereof, upon not less than ten
  specified bondholders or certificate holders and notice by mail  to  all
  other  bond  or  certificate  holders  whose  addresses are known to the
  trustee and publication of such notice once a week on  a  week  day  for
  three  successive  weeks  preceding  the  return  date  thereof  in  one
  newspaper of general circulation published in the city or  county  where
  said real property is located.




    §  120-a.  Liquidation of mortgage by trustee. Any banking corporation
  or individual acting as trustee in respect to  any  mortgage  upon  real
  property  against  which  bonds shall have been issued to the public and
  which mortgage shall have been given to such trustee  by  a  corporation
  organized under the provisions of section one hundred twenty-one hereof,
  pursuant  to  a  plan  of reorganization approved by the court and which
  became effective under section one hundred twenty-two hereof,  or  which
  mortgage  shall  have  been  given  pursuant to a plan of reorganization
  heretofore or hereafter approved and confirmed under the bankruptcy acts
  of the United States, or which mortgage shall have been  given  to  such
  trustee under a voluntary plan of reorganization by a corporation caused
  to be organized by a bondholders' committee for the purpose of acquiring
  the  property  secured  by  such  mortgage at a sale under a judgment of
  foreclosure  and  sale  of  a  prior  mortgage  given  to  secure  bonds
  theretofore  issued to the public, may, with the approval of the supreme
  court in the county where all or part of the property affected  by  such
  mortgage  is  situate,  sell, assign, discharge or satisfy such mortgage
  upon such consideration in  cash  as  the  court  shall  deem  fair  and
  equitable  to  the  bondholders  and as the court by order shall direct.
  Such order may be made upon the application of the trustee or the holder
  of twenty-five per cent of the bonds or of the mortgagor  or  owners  of
  the  property  securing  such  mortgage.  The  court may approve a sale,
  assignment, discharge or satisfaction at such price as may appear to the
  court to be fair and in the best interests of the  bondholders  and  not
  less  than  the  cash  value  of said mortgage if sold at a public sale,
  unless duly acknowledged  dissents  thereto  by  holders  of  more  than
  one-third  of  the  principal  amount of the bonds then outstanding have
  been filed. If the application for such sale shall be  consented  to  by
  the  holders  of  two-thirds  of  the  principal  amount  of  the  bonds
  outstanding such consent shall constitute a presumption that it is  fair
  and  in  the  best  interests  of  the bondholders that said mortgage be
  liquidated at the price fixed in such consent and the court may  approve
  a  sale  at  such  amount  unless it shall appear to the court that such
  amount is less than the cash value of said mortgage if sold at a  public
  sale.  If  the  application shall not be made by the trustee then notice
  shall be given to the trustee and  in  any  event  the  order  directing
  notice  to the bondholders of the application to liquidate such mortgage
  shall provide for personal service of such notice not less  than  thirty
  days  before  the  return  date thereof upon not less than ten specified
  bondholders whose addresses are known to the  applicant  and  notice  by
  mail  to  all  of  the  bondholders  whose  addresses  are known and the
  publication of such  notice  once  a  week  on  a  week  day  for  three
  successive  weeks  preceding the return date thereof in one newspaper of
  general circulation published in the  city  or  county  where  the  real
  property  securing  said mortgage is located. Except as herein otherwise
  provided all proceedings hereunder and the rights of the parties hereto,
  shall be governed by section one hundred twenty-two hereof; except  that
  if the order shall become effective it shall be without prejudice to the
  right  of  any  particular  bondholder who has filed a duly acknowledged
  dissent therefrom, within the time fixed in the order, to have the court
  determine the cash value of the mortgage securing such bond if sold at a
  public sale and providing for the payment or securing his ratable  share
  of such amount as a condition for declaring the order effective.
    If  any provision of this section or of section one hundred twenty-two
  hereof or any clause, sentence, paragraph or any part of such section or
  the application thereof to any person  or  circumstance  shall  be  held
  unconstitutional  or invalid, such decision or judgment shall not affect
  or impair the constitutionality or validity of  the  remainder  thereof,
  but  shall  be  confined  in  its  operation  to  the  clause, sentence,
  paragraph  or  part  thereof  directly  involved  in  such  decision  or
  Judgment.


§  121.  Reorganization  of  property covered by trust mortgage.  Such
  banking corporation, under the direction of the court in the foreclosure
  action may, and if directed by the court shall, purchase or cause to  be
  purchased  said  real  property,  pursuant to a reorganization plan, and
  cause to be  formed  a  domestic  business  corporation,  or  a  foreign
  corporation  providing  such  foreign  corporation  is  authorized to do
  business within this state,  or  utilize  any  other  such  corporation,
  providing  the  corporation so formed or utilized shall have provided in
  its certificate of incorporation the restriction set  forth  in  section
  one hundred eleven of decedent estate law, and shall thereupon grant and
  release  said  property to such new corporation and its assigns forever,
  or by assignment of its bid to such new corporation, or otherwise, cause
  the referee's deed in foreclosure to be executed and delivered  directly
  to  such  new corporation granting and releasing such property to it and
  its assigns forever,  in  exchange  for  the  stocks,  bonds  and  other
  securities of such new corporation except such of said securities as may
  be  reserved  for  the  adjustment  of  liens  and  claims  against said
  property, or for other purposes as specified in the plan, including  any
  provision  made  in a plan approved by the court and thereafter becoming
  effective  as  provided  in  section  one  hundred  twenty-two  for  any
  interest,  junior  or  subordinate to the mortgage foreclosed; provided,
  however, that such new corporation shall be authorized to raise money by
  mortgage, pledge, borrowing, sale of  securities  or  otherwise  to  the
  extent  which  may  be  set  forth  in  the  plan of reorganization. The
  trustee, upon receiving such securities and any cash available from  the
  new  corporation,  shall  distribute  the  same  and  any other funds or
  property constituting part of the trust estate,  ratably  amongst  those
  parties  interested  in  such  mortgage, deed of trust or indenture less
  such trustee's proper expenses and charges in connection therewith;  and
  thereupon  the  trustee  upon the filing and approval of its accounts in
  the foreclosure action and upon assigning to such  new  corporation  any
  deficiency  judgment  and  any guarantees and insurance policies held by
  the trustee and any claim for waste or otherwise in connection with  the
  mortgage  estate,  shall  be  discharged  of  any  further obligation or
  liability under such mortgage or indenture or otherwise. Nothing  herein
  contained  shall  affect or impair the liability of any guarantor or any
  right or remedy existing in  favor  of  any  holders  of  bonds,  notes,
  certificates  or other securities which are secured by or participate in
  such mortgages, deeds of trust or indentures.


§   122.  Procedure  of  reorganization  and  expenses  in  connection
  therewith.  The reorganization plan may be presented to the  court  with
  the  complaint  for  foreclosure, or thereafter by the trustee or by any
  persons owning or representing twenty-five per centum of  the  principal
  amount  of  the  securities  covered  by such mortgage, deed of trust or
  indenture at any time prior to the  foreclosure  sale.  The  plan  shall
  contain  a  statement  of the minimum and maximum sums which the trustee
  shall bid for the property, which sums may be varied by the  court  upon
  its  approval of the plan; and the trustee shall not incur any liability
  by reason of its failure to bid more than said maximum sum. The  trustee
  shall   not   be  liable  for  any  action  in  executing  the  plan  of
  reorganization approved by the court except for its  wilful  misconduct,
  fraud,  bad faith or gross negligence. Hearings upon such reorganization
  plan  shall  be  at  such  time  and  place  and  upon  such  notice  by
  publication, mailing or otherwise, as the court shall fix in an order to
  show  cause  why  the  plan  should not be approved. The trustee and any
  person beneficially interested  in  said  mortgage,  deed  of  trust  or
  indenture,  and  any  person  whose  rights  may  be  affected  by  such
  reorganization, may appear upon the return day  of  the  order  to  show
  cause  or  at  any  adjournment  thereof,  and  submit objections to and
  modifications of the plan or an alternate plan, and the court shall hear
  the parties by affidavit or summarily or otherwise, as in its discretion
  it  may  direct,  and  thereupon   finally   determine   the   plan   of
  reorganization  and fix the time and method for persons affected by such
  reorganization to become parties thereto. Where neither the mortgage  or
  indenture,   nor  the  statute  relating  to  the  particular  class  of
  securities nor  any  other  statute,  authorizes  the  purchase  of  the
  property  on behalf of all the holders of bonds or certificates of parts
  or shares, then if any holder, within twenty days after the approval  of
  the  plan,  shall  file  with  the  court  a  duly  acknowledged dissent
  therefrom, the court shall determine the cash value of the  property  as
  if sold at a public sale and such dissenting holder shall be entitled to
  be  secured  for  his  ratable  share  of such amount as a condition for
  declaring the plan effective. In all other cases the reorganization plan
  shall be deemed binding on all  holders  of  bonds  or  certificates  of
  shares or parts unless within twenty days after the approval of the plan
  one-third  in  principal  sum  of such holders shall file with the court
  duly acknowledged dissents therefrom; in which event  the  plan  may  be
  abandoned or may be further modified as the court shall direct, with the
  same  right of dissent as aforesaid as to any subsequently amended plan.
  Notice  of  the  court's  approval  of  the  plan  shall  be  given   by
  publication,  mailing  or otherwise as the court may in particular cases
  or by general rule direct. Any person  aggrieved  by  any  determination
  hereunder  shall have such rights of appeal as are granted to a party to
  a special proceeding. The expenses and compensation of the  trustee  and
  of  any  committee  or  person  who  shall  have  submitted  a  plan  of
  reorganization or modifications thereof shall be fixed at  such  sum  as
  the court may deem reasonable and shall be chargeable as a lien upon the
  property  or collectible through their assumption by the new corporation
  or in such other manner as the court may approve.   All proceedings  and
  appeals  in  respect  to the plan of reorganization shall be entitled to
  preference over all other civil causes  next  in  order  to  actions  or
  special  proceedings  in  which  the people of the state or any officer,
  board or political subdivision thereof shall be a party.
Search Word or Phrase 
  
§   122-a.   Modification   of   trust   mortgages   given   in  prior
  re-organizations. Any such banking corporation or any individual  acting
  as  trustee  in respect to any mortgage, deed of trust or indenture upon
  real property, or any leasehold interest therein, against  which  bonds,
  certificates,  shares or any other evidence of interests therein (herein
  called "debts") shall have been issued to the public, and which mortgage
  shall have been given to such trustee by a corporation  organized  under
  section   one   hundred   twenty-one  hereof,  pursuant  to  a  plan  of
  reorganization approved by the court and which  became  effective  under
  section one hundred twenty-two hereof, or which mortgage shall have been
  given to or is held by such trustee pursuant to, or by reason of, a plan
  of  reorganization  heretofore or hereafter approved and confirmed under
  the bankruptcy acts of the United States or which  mortgage  shall  have
  been given to such trustee under a voluntary plan of reorganization by a
  corporation  caused  to be organized by a bondholders' committee for the
  purpose of acquiring the property secured by such mortgage, may, without
  foreclosure of such mortgage,  and  whether  or  not  a  default  exists
  thereunder, present to the supreme court in the county where all or part
  of  the  real property affected by such mortgage is situated, a plan for
  the reorganization of such mortgage, deed of  trust  or  indenture.  The
  plan  of  reorganization  may  provide  for:  (1)  the  extension of the
  maturity of the mortgage, deed of  trust  or  indenture  and  the  debts
  secured  thereby;  (2)  the modification of the provisions for interest,
  amortization or sinking funds; and (3) such other changes, modifications
  or amendments as may be fair and feasible and for the best interests  of
  the  security holders. Such plan may likewise be presented by holders or
  representatives of twenty-five per centum in principal  amount  of  such
  securities.  Such  plan  may cover one or more mortgages with respect to
  said property. If no default shall exist in the payment of principal  or
  interest, such plan may be presented by the mortgagor or by the owner of
  the  property covered by such mortgage. Hearing upon such reorganization
  plan  shall  be  at  such  time  and  place  and  upon  such  notice  by
  publication,  mailing or otherwise as the court shall fix in an order to
  show cause why the plan  should  not  be  approved.  No  plan  shall  be
  approved unless the court, after such hearing shall determine that it is
  fair,  feasible  and for the best interests of the security holders. The
  affirmative consent of the holders of two-thirds of the principal amount
  of the outstanding securities shall constitute a  presumption  that  the
  plan  is  fair,  feasible  and  for  the  best interests of the security
  holders. All proceedings hereunder and the rights of the parties hereto,
  including  the  hearing,  the  final  order  determining  the  plan   of
  reorganization embodying such modifications, the time and method for the
  persons  affected by such plan becoming parties thereto and the right of
  appeal from  any  order,  shall  be  governed  by  section  one  hundred
  twenty-two  hereof;  except  that  if  the  reorganization  shall become
  effective it shall be without prejudice to the right of  any  particular
  holder  of  such securities who has duly dissented therefrom to have the
  court determine the cash value of such securities as he may  have  owned
  on  or before the date of the presentation of the plan of reorganization
  pursuant to this section, and providing for the payment or securing  his
  ratable  share  of  such  amount  as  a condition for declaring the plan
  effective. Upon the order becoming effective the plan shall  be  binding
  upon all the security holders.
    If  any provision of this section or of section one hundred twenty-two
  hereof or any clause, sentence, paragraph or any part of such section or
  the application thereof to any person  or  circumstance  shall  be  held
  unconstitutional  or invalid, such decision or judgment shall not affect
  or impair the constitutionality or validity of  the  remainder  thereof,
  but  shall  be  confined  in  its  operation  to  the  clause, sentence,
  paragraph  or  part  thereof  directly  involved  in  such  decision  or
  Judgment.


§ 123. Preserving existing rights. Nothing in this act shall be deemed
  to  prevent  any  bondholder or committee of bondholders from bidding at
  the foreclosure sale and in case he  or  they  should  be  a  successful
  bidder,  from  applying upon the purchase price the bonds held by him or
  them at the amount distributable thereon and reorganizing  the  property
  so  purchased  in  any manner which was lawful prior to the enactment of
  this act, nor to impair any previously existing right of a trustee so to
  purchase and pay for the property, or  to  preclude  any  trustee  which
  shall  have  purchased such property from submitting to the court a plan
  for its reorganization. The court may provide for the  qualification  of
  bidders  other  than  the  trustee by requiring them to deposit with the
  officer conducting the sale in advance of bidding up to ten  per  centum
  of  the  amount  of their bid in cash or in bonds taken at the principal
  amount  thereof.  In  any  action  now  or  hereafter  pending  for  the
  foreclosure  of  any  such mortgage or indenture, the property shall, on
  application of the trustee, be sold subject to the lien  of  any  taxes,
  assessments  and  water rates, any prior lien, or to any liens which may
  thereafter be established, which are the subject of  litigation  pending
  at the time of the sale, provided a brief statement thereof is contained
  in the notice of sale.


ARTICLE 4-A
                   TRUST INDENTURES AND INTERESTS THEREIN
  Section 124.   Purpose and application of article.
          125.   Definitions.
          126.   Trust indentures.
          127.   Restrictions on trustees.
          128.   Minimum bid of trustee at sale on foreclosure to be fixed
                   by court.
          129.   Deposit agreements.
          130-a. Restrictions on committees.
          130-b. Managing agents and management companies.
          130-c. Voting trustees and voting trust agreements.
          130-d. Fees and allowances.
          130-e. Removal of trustees, committees or depositaries.
          130-f. Actions  for  accounting  by  minority  groups;  expenses
                   thereof.
          130-g. Violations and penalties.
          130-h. Construction of article.
          130-i. Separability.
          130-j. Right to appeal.
          130-k. Exemptions  from  restrictions  on  trustees  and   trust
                   Indentures.


 §  124.  Purpose  and application of article. It is the purpose of the
  legislature, in enacting this article, to provide for the regulation and
  supervision of the appointment,  creation,  agreements,  acts,  conduct,
  practices   and   proceedings   of   trustees,  bondholders'  protective
  committees, depositaries,  management  companies,  voting  trustees  and
  other  persons  administering, holding in custody or otherwise concerned
  with real estate mortgages and interests therein to the  end  that  such
  interests  will  be  properly  conserved,  administered  and  ultimately
  liquidated in the public interest. This  article,  except  as  otherwise
  expressly  provided, shall apply, to the extent that the state has power
  to  provide  therefor,  to  all  mortgage  investments,  as  hereinafter
  defined,   where  the  property  constituting  the  underlying  security
  therefor, or any part thereof, is located within the state or where  the
  trustee,  committee,  depositary,  management company, voting trustee or
  other person administering, holding in custody, or  otherwise  concerned
  with such investments has an office for the transaction of business with
  respect  thereto  within  the  state  or  has  obtained  authority to do
  business in this state.


§  125.  Definitions.  As  used  in  this  article, unless the context
  requires otherwise:
    1. "Mortgage investments" shall mean and include any  and  all  shares
  and  interests,  heretofore or hereafter acquired, in an issue of bonds,
  notes or other evidence of indebtedness  of  individuals,  partnerships,
  associations  or  corporations, held by more than one person and secured
  by a mortgage or mortgages upon real property, or by a deed or deeds  of
  trust,  trust  indenture  or indentures or other evidence of interest in
  real property, the payment of which is not guaranteed by any  title  and
  mortgage  guaranty  corporation  or investment company and shall include
  certificates of deposit  issued  by  or  on  behalf  of  a  bondholders'
  protective committee or similar group and also any bonds, notes or other
  evidences  of  indebtedness  taken  in  lieu  of  such  real property by
  foreclosure or otherwise, provided, however, that it shall  not  include
  industrial   securities.  The  term  "industrial  securities"  shall  be
  construed to mean the bonds, debentures, notes  or  other  evidences  of
  indebtedness  of individuals, partnerships, associations or corporations
  not engaged in the business  of  owning,  improving  or  operating  real
  property  but  whose  ownership  of  such  real property shall be merely
  incidental to the operation and conduct of its business and  which  real
  property  shall  be  used as incidental and additional security for such
  bonds, notes, debentures or other evidences of indebtedness.
    2. "Bondholder" shall mean and include any person,  firm,  association
  or corporation owning or holding a mortgage investment.
    3.  "Trustee"  shall mean and include any person, firm, association or
  corporation named, appointed or designated as such in any deed of trust,
  trust indenture or other similar instrument or  any  successor  of  such
  trustee.
    4.  "Committee"  shall  mean and include a person or group of persons,
  however known or designated, appointed by agreement, assignment,  proxy,
  consent,  authorization,  power of attorney, or other similar instrument
  to act as an agency to receive and hold mortgage  investments  deposited
  by  bondholders  and  to administer or do any act in respect to the same
  for the bondholders.
    5. "Deposit agreement" shall include any agreement, assignment, proxy,
  consent, authorization, power of attorney or  other  similar  instrument
  whereby  a  mortgage  investment  is  deposited  with  or  assigned to a
  committee.
    6. "Depositary" shall mean and include any person,  firm,  association
  or  corporation  designated  in  any  trust indenture, deed of trust, or
  deposit  agreement  as  the  custodian   or   depositary   of   mortgage
  investments.
    7.  "Property"  shall mean and include all of the real property or any
  incidental personal property constituting the  underlying  security  for
  mortgage investments.
    8. "Court," unless some other court has jurisdiction over the property
  or  a  plan  of reorganization therefor, shall mean the supreme court of
  the state of New York in the county in which the property or  the  major
  portion  thereof  is located, or, if the property be located outside the
  state, in the county of the state in which  the  committee,  trustee  or
  other  person  dealing  with  the mortgage investment has or proposes to
  have his principal office for the transaction of business  with  respect
  to such mortgage investment.
  
§  126.  Trust  indentures.  No trustee shall hereafter accept a trust
  under any trust indenture or mortgage within the contemplation  of  this
  article  or act as trustee thereunder unless the instrument creating the
  trust shall contain the following provisions, among others, which confer
  the following powers and impose the following duties upon the trustees:
    1. In the case of an event of default (as such term is defined in such
  instrument), to exercise such of the rights and  powers  vested  in  the
  trustee by such instrument, and to use the same degree of care and skill
  in  their  exercise  as  a  prudent  man would exercise or use under the
  circumstances in the conduct of his own affairs.
    2. In  considering  what  actions  are  or  are  not  prudent  in  the
  circumstances, to consider whether or not:
    (a) to take such action as may be necessary or proper to sequester the
  rents and income of the property;
    (b)  to  procure from the owner of the property an assignment of rents
  and/or a consent to enter into possession of the property and to collect
  the rents therefrom;
    (c) to apply to the court for the appointment of  a  receiver  of  the
  rents and income of the property;
    (d)  to  declare  due  and  payable  forthwith  any  principal  amount
  remaining due and unpaid and commence an action of foreclosure;
    (e) to apply the moneys received as rents and income from the property
  as well as moneys received by the trustee from  any  receiver  appointed
  for such property in his discretion, to the maintenance and operation of
  such  property, the payment of taxes, water rents and assessments levied
  thereon and any arrears thereof, to the payment of underlying liens, and
  to the creation and maintenance of a reserve or sinking fund.
    3. If the trustee can  obtain  the  information  without  unreasonable
  effort  or  expense,  to  render  annually  to  bondholders,  after  the
  occurrence of a default, unless such  default  be  previously  cured,  a
  summarized  statement  of income and expenditures in connection with the
  property.
    4. To distribute the proceeds of any sale or other disposition of  the
  property  ratably among the bondholders, subject to applicable mandatory
  provisions of law.
    5. To permit the obligor or other person in possession or  control  of
  the  property,  or  his successors in interest, to be free to select the
  insurance broker or agent through whom any insurance of any kind  is  to
  be  placed  or written on any property affected or covered by a mortgage
  held by such trustee.


§ 127. Restrictions on trustees. 1. No trustee shall accept a trust or
  act as trustee under a trust mortgage affecting any property in which he
  or  any of the officers or directors of the trustee shall have, directly
  or indirectly, any financial interest.
    2. No trustee nor any officer  or  director  of  a  trustee,  nor  any
  employee  of  any  company  which  is  a subsidiary of, controlled by or
  affiliated with the trustee shall, either directly or indirectly, act as
  insurance broker or agent in connection with the placing or  writing  of
  any  insurance  of  any  kind  on  any property affected or covered by a
  mortgage held by such trustee under a trust indenture, deed of trust, or
  other  similar  instrument,  nor  shall  such  trustee  be  an  officer,
  director, partner or employee of or otherwise connected with or have any
  financial  interest  in,  directly  or  indirectly, in any firm, agency,
  business, association or corporation that shall act as broker  or  agent
  in  connection  with the placing or writing of such insurance; nor shall
  any trustee or any officer, director or employee of the  trustee  be  an
  officer,  director,  partner  or  an  employee  of or have any financial
  interest in any firm, agency, association or corporation engaged by such
  trustee as his or its representative  or  agent  in  the  management  or
  supervision  of, or the collection of rents and income from any property
  affected or covered by the mortgage held by the trustee  under  a  trust
  indenture, deed of trust, or other similar instrument.
    3. No trustee shall accept any trust or act as trustee under any other
  trust indenture covering or affecting the same property.
    4. No owner or mortgagor of any property covered by a trust indenture,
  deed  of  trust,  or  other similar instrument and no officer, director,
  stockholder or employee of such owner or mortgagor shall accept a  trust
  or act as trustee with respect to such property.
    5. The provisions of this section shall only apply to trust indentures
  or mortgages hereafter entered into.


§  128.  Minimum  bid of trustee at sale on foreclosure to be fixed by
  court. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, on application
  for judgment of foreclosure and sale in an action brought to foreclose a
  trust indenture, deed of trust or mortgage upon  real  property,  except
  where  a  plan  of  reorganization  shall  have been consented to by one
  hundred per centum of all the bondholders or where a minimum and maximum
  sum at which the trustee shall bid for the property has been  set  forth
  in  a  plan  of reorganization and approved by the court in a proceeding
  for the reorganization of the property covered by trust indenture  under
  sections  one  hundred  and twenty-one and one hundred and twenty-two of
  this chapter, the court shall determine what is a fair upset price below
  which the property shall not be sold  and  the  judgment  directing  the
  foreclosure  and  sale  shall fix the minimum price which the trustee or
  his agent or nominee shall bid for the property.


§  129.  No deposit agreement shall be valid or binding which does not
  set  forth  the  following  provisions  for  the   protection   of   the
  bondholders:
    (a) That the fees of the members of the committee, the assignee or the
  other  person or persons to whom the deposit agreement was given, as the
  case may be, shall be reasonable and subject  to  the  approval  of  the
  court.
    (b) That the deposit agreement may not be amended without the approval
  of the court.
    (c)  That  the  mortgage  investments  deposited thereunder may not be
  sold, pledged or otherwise disposed of without the unanimous consent  of
  the  depositing  bondholders  or,  in  lieu thereof, the approval of the
  court.
    (d) No deposit agreement shall be  valid  or  binding  or  confer  any
  rights whatever upon any member of a committee, assignee or other person
  to whom the agreement was given, who has any financial interest directly
  or  indirectly in the depositary named or to be named by such committee,
  assignee or other person, and no person shall act for a bondholder or  a
  deposit agreement who has such an interest.


§  130-a.  Restrictions on committees. No sale of mortgage investments
  by a committee shall be valid unless the fairness of the price  received
  at  such  sale  shall  have first been approved by the court except that
  where an action to foreclose a mortgage on the property is pending,  the
  application  to pass upon the fairness of such price shall be determined
  by the court in which such action is  pending.  The  hearing  upon  such
  application shall be held at such time and place and upon such notice to
  the depositing bondholders as the court shall direct.


§  130-b. Managing agents and management companies. 1. A person, firm,
  association or  corporation  appointed,  designated  or  employed  by  a
  trustee  entering  or taking possession of mortgaged property to collect
  rents from, or to manage or supervise the operation and  maintenance  of
  property  shall  be bonded by a surety bond, approved by the court as to
  form and sufficiency, in a sum equivalent to at least the  gross  rental
  or  income  of  the  property for the three months immediately preceding
  such appointment, designation or employment,  running  to  the  trustee,
  during  the  period  of  his  or  its  possession for the benefit of the
  bondholders, conditioned upon the faithful performance by  such  person,
  firm,  association  or  corporation,  of  his  or its duties and the due
  accounting for all moneys received by him or it during the course of his
  or its employment. The  cost  or  premium  of  such  bond  may,  in  the
  discretion  of  the  court,  be  a  charge against and paid for from the
  income of the mortgaged property.
    2. No trustee or committee  shall  employ  as  a  managing  agent  any
  management  company  or  corporation any of whose officers, directors or
  stockholders are also officers, directors or employees of the trustee or
  members or employees of the committee.
    3. No voting trustee, officer or director of a  corporation  acquiring
  the  title  to  property in or through a reorganization of such property
  and no corporation  of  which  he  shall  be  an  officer,  director  or
  stockholder,  shall  be employed as a managing agent for the reorganized
  property except with the approval of the persons owning  or  holding  at
  least  fifty-one  per centum of the securities issued by the reorganized
  company.




§ 130-c. Voting trustees and voting trust agreements. 1. No trustee or
  member  of  a  committee or the attorney of such trustee or committee or
  any employee of either shall be eligible to become a voting  trustee  or
  an  officer  or  director  of a corporation to be formed or used under a
  plan  of  reorganization  to  acquire  title  to   property   previously
  administered  by such trustee or committee unless the facts with respect
  to their previous connection with the  property  are  disclosed  to  the
  court  and the affirmative approval of the holders of at least fifty-one
  per centum of the mortgage investments is obtained or unless a  plan  of
  reorganization  approved  by  the court in proceedings under section one
  hundred and twenty-two of this chapter shall so provide.
    2.  No  agreement  appointing  trustees  to  vote  the  stock  of  any
  corporation  formed  or  used under a plan of reorganization of property
  shall be valid for a longer term than five years and unless it has  been
  submitted to and approved by the court and no trustees appointed by such
  agreement  shall  continue to act thereunder after the expiration of its
  term, unless and until a new or an extension agreement has been  entered
  into  and  received  the affirmative approval of the holders of at least
  fifty-one per centum of the stock.
    3. No salary or other compensation shall be paid to any voting trustee
  or any officer or director of a corporation formed or  used  to  acquire
  the  title  to property in or through reorganization unless the same has
  been approved by the court.


§  130-d.  Fees  and  allowances. In the event of a default in a trust
  indenture necessitating the sequestration of the rents and income of the
  property covered thereby and where the trustee  or  committee  or  other
  person  or  persons  representing  the bondholders is or are lawfully in
  possession of the property and they or their attorneys,  if  any,  shall
  have rendered services in connection with the property at any time after
  default,  no  fees  or allowances shall be paid for such services unless
  and until affidavits showing the value thereof have  been  presented  to
  the  court  or  a justice thereof and such court or justice has approved
  the same and such fees and allowances, if approved,  shall  be  paid  in
  such manner and at such times as the court or justice shall direct.


§  130-e.  Removal of trustees, committees or depositaries. A trustee,
  committee or any member thereof and a depositary may be removed  by  the
  court  for  cause  shown upon the application of any person aggrieved by
  the act or omission  to  act  of  such  trustee,  committee,  member  or
  depositary  after  such notice and opportunity to be heard in his or its
  defense as the court shall direct.


§  130-f. Actions for accounting by minority groups; expenses thereof.
  In any special proceeding or action brought  by  or  on  behalf  of  any
  minority  bondholder  or group of minority bondholders, or any person or
  group of persons not holding at least fifty-one per centum of the  stock
  or  bonds  of  the mortgage issue, but claiming an interest in the trust
  property,  for  a  judicial  accounting,  the  court   may   take   into
  consideration the information as to income and disbursements theretofore
  furnished to bondholders, the merits and good faith of the proceeding or
  action,  and whether the accounting will be of value to the bondholders,
  as well as the cost of such accounting, and the court may  require  that
  the  petitioner  or plaintiff furnish a surety company bond to indemnify
  the estate against the expenses of the accounting, including fees of the
  referee to take the accounting, stenographic fees, and the  expenses  of
  the  trustee,  and  may  direct  that,  if  it  should  appear  that the
  accounting result in any practical benefit to all the  bondholders,  the
  court should then, in its discretion, release the indemnity, and that if
  no  such  benefit  accrue,  the petitioner or plaintiff and his attorney
  should receive no compensation, and the trust fund should be  reimbursed
  for the expenses saddled upon it by reason thereof.


§  130-g.  Violations  and  penalties.  The  wilful  violation  of any
  provision of this article, except section  one  hundred  and  twenty-six
  unless  elsewhere  otherwise defined, shall constitute a misdemeanor and
  shall be punishable, unless elsewhere otherwise prescribed by a fine  of
  not  exceeding one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for not exceeding
  one year or by both such fine and imprisonment.


§  130-h.  Construction  of  article.  This article shall be construed
  liberally to effectuate its purpose.  The enumeration by this article of
  specific powers and duties in trust  indentures  and  other  instruments
  shall  not  preclude  or  prevent  the  use,  exercise  or  enjoyment of
  additional powers and duties under or pursuant to  such  instruments  or
  excuse  the  failure to exercise or perform such other powers or duties.
  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to repeal any other
  provision of law except in so far as it is  irreconcilably  in  conflict
  with  a  provision  of  this  article  in  which  event the latter shall
  Control.


§ 130-i. Separability. If any of the provisions of this article or the
  application  thereof to any person or circumstance be held invalid, such
  invalidity shall not affect or impair other provisions  or  applications
  to  other  circumstances  which  can be given effect without the invalid
  provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article
  are declared to be separable.


§  130-j.  Right  to appeal. Any person aggrieved by any determination
  hereunder shall have such right of appeal as is granted to a party to  a
  special  proceeding.    All  proceedings  and appeals hereunder shall be
  entitled to such preference  as  is  granted  in  respect  to  plans  of
  reorganization   under   the  provisions  of  section  one  hundred  and
  twenty-two of this chapter.


 §   130-k.   Exemptions   from  restrictions  on  trustees  and  trust
  indentures.  The provisions of sections one hundred and  twenty-six  and
  one  hundred  and  twenty-seven  of  this article shall not apply to any
  mortgage, deed of trust, trust indenture, or  other  similar  instrument
  which  has been qualified with the United States securities and exchange
  commission pursuant to the provisions of  the  trust  indenture  act  of
  nineteen hundred thirty-nine, as from time to time amended and in force.
  In  the  case  of  a  mortgage, deed of trust, trust indenture, or other
  similar instrument which has not been so qualified,  the  provisions  of
  section  one  hundred  twenty-seven  shall  not apply if such instrument
  (hereinafter referred to as  the  "indenture")  contains  provisions  in
  substance to the following effect:
    (a)  If  the  trustee has or shall acquire any conflicting interest as
  hereinafter defined,
    (1) such trustee shall, within ninety days after ascertaining that  it
  has   such  conflicting  interest,  either  eliminate  such  conflicting
  interest or resign,  such  resignation  to  become  effective  upon  the
  appointment  of  a  successor trustee and such successor's acceptance of
  such appointment; and  the  obligor  upon  the  bonds,  notes  or  other
  evidences  of  indebtedness  issued  under  the  indenture  (hereinafter
  referred to as the "indenture securities") shall take  prompt  steps  to
  have a successor appointed in the manner provided in the indenture;
    (2)  in  the  event  that  such  trustee shall fail to comply with the
  provisions of subparagraph (1), such  trustee  shall,  within  ten  days
  after  the expiration of such ninety-day period, transmit notice of such
  failure by mail (i) to all registered holders of  indenture  securities,
  as  the names and addresses of such holders appear upon the registration
  books of the obligor upon the indenture securities, (ii) to such holders
  of indenture securities as have, within the  two  years  preceding  such
  transmission, filed their names and addresses with the indenture trustee
  for  the  purpose  of receiving notices or reports to indenture security
  holders, and (iii) to all holders of indenture  securities  whose  names
  and  addresses  are  contained in information currently preserved by the
  trustee for such purpose in accordance with provisions of the  indenture
  requiring the obligor to furnish or cause to be furnished to the trustee
  at stated intervals of not more than six months, and at such other times
  as the trustee may request in writing, all information in the possession
  or  control  of  such obligor, or of any of its paying agents, as to the
  names and addresses of the indenture security holders, and requiring the
  trustee to preserve, in as current a form as is reasonably practicable,
  all such information so furnished  to  it  or  received  by  it  in  the
  capacity of paying agent; and
    (3)  subject to any provision of the indenture to the effect that in a
  suit against the trustee (unless instituted by  a  holder  or  group  of
  holders of more than ten per centum in principal amount of the indenture
  securities  outstanding)  the  court  may  in  its discretion require an
  undertaking  for  costs  and  may  assess  reasonable  costs,  including
  reasonable  attorneys'  fees,  against  any party litigant, any security
  holder who has been a bona fide holder of indenture  securities  for  at
  least  six  months  may,  on  behalf of himself and all others similarly
  situated, petition any court of competent jurisdiction for  the  removal
  of  such  trustee,  and  the appointment of a successor, if such trustee
  fails, after written request therefor by such holder, to comply with the
  provisions of subparagraph (1).
    (b) For purposes of paragraph (a), the trustee shall be deemed to have
  a conflicting interest if---
    (1) such trustee is trustee under another indenture  under  which  any
  other  securities,  or  certificates of interest or participation in any
  other securities, of  an  obligor  upon  the  indenture  securities  are
  outstanding  unless  (A)  the  indenture securities are collateral trust
  notes under which the only  collateral  consists  of  securities  issued
  under  such other indenture, or (B) such other indenture is a collateral
  trust indenture under which the only collateral  consists  of  indenture
  securities,  or  (C)  such obligor has no substantial unmortgaged assets
  and is engaged primarily in the business of owning,  or  of  owning  and
  developing  and/or  operating,  real  estate,  and  the  indenture to be
  qualified and such other indenture are secured by  wholly  separate  and
  distinct  parcels  of  real  estate:  Provided,  that  the indenture may
  contain a provision excluding from the operation  of  this  subparagraph
  any  other  indenture or indentures which shall have been qualified with
  the United States securities and exchange  commission  pursuant  to  the
  provisions  of  the trust indenture act of nineteen hundred thirty-nine,
  as from time to time amended and in force;
    (2) such trustee or any of its directors or executive officers  is  an
  obligor  upon  the  indenture  securities  or an underwriter for such an
  obligor;
    (3) such trustee directly or indirectly controls  or  is  directly  or
  indirectly  controlled  by or is under direct or indirect common control
  with an obligor upon the indenture securities or an underwriter for such
  an obligor;
    (4) such trustee or any of its directors or executive  officers  is  a
  director, officer, partner, employee, appointee, or representative of an
  obligor  upon the indenture securities, or of an underwriter (other than
  the trustee itself) for such an obligor who is currently engaged in  the
  business  of  underwriting,  except  that  (A)  one  individual may be a
  director and/or an executive officer  of  the  trustee  and  a  director
  and/or  an executive officer of such obligor, but may not be at the same
  time an executive officer of both the trustee and of such  obligor,  and
  (B)  if  and so long as the number of directors of the trustee in office
  is more than nine, one additional individual may be a director and/or an
  executive officer of the trustee and a director of such obligor, and (C)
  such trustee may be designated by any such obligor or by any underwriter
  for any such  obligor,  to  act  in  the  capacity  of  transfer  agent,
  registrar,  custodian,  paying  agent,  fiscal  agent,  escrow  agent or
  depositary, or in  any  other  similar  capacity,  or,  subject  to  the
  provisions  of  subparagraph  (1)  of this paragraph, to act as trustee,
  whether under an indenture or otherwise;
    (5) ten per centum or more of the voting securities of such trustee is
  beneficially owned either by an obligor upon the indenture securities or
  by any director, partner, or executive officer thereof,  or  twenty  per
  centum  or  more  of  such  voting  securities  is  beneficially  owned,
  collectively, by any two or more of such persons; or ten per  centum  or
  more  of  the  voting  securities  of such trustee is beneficially owned
  either by an underwriter for  any  such  obligor  or  by  any  director,
  partner,  or  executive  officer  thereof,  or  is  beneficially  owned,
  collectively, by any two or more such persons;
    (6) such trustee is the beneficial owner of, or  holds  as  collateral
  security  for  an obligation which is in default as hereinafter defined,
  (A) five per centum or more of the voting securities, or ten per  centum
  or more of any other class of security, of an obligor upon the indenture
  securities,  not  including  indenture  securities and securities issued
  under any other indenture under which such trustee is also such trustee,
  or (B) ten per centum or more of any class of security of an underwriter
  for any such obligor;
    (7) such trustee is the beneficial owner of, or  holds  as  collateral
  security  for  an obligation which is in default as hereinafter defined,
  five per centum or more of the voting securities of any person  who,  to
  the  knowledge of the trustee, owns ten per centum or more of the voting
  securities of, or controls directly or indirectly or is under direct  or
  indirect common control with, an obligor upon the indenture securities;
    (8)  such  trustee  is the beneficial owner of, or holds as collateral
  security for an obligation which is in default as  hereinafter  defined,
  ten  per  centum  or more of any class of security of any person who, to
  the knowledge of the trustee, owns fifty  per  centum  or  more  of  the
  voting securities of an obligor upon the indenture securities; or
    (9)  such  trustee owns, on May fifteenth in any calendar year, in the
  capacity  of  executor,  administrator,  testamentary  or  inter   vivos
  trustee,  guardian,  committee  or  conservator, or in any other similar
  capacity, an aggregate of twenty-five per centum or more of  the  voting
  securities,  or  of any class of security, of any person, the beneficial
  ownership of a specified percentage of which would  have  constituted  a
  conflicting  interest  under  subparagraph  (6),  (7)  or  (8)  of  this
  paragraph.  The indenture may provide, as  to  any  such  securities  of
  which   the   trustee  acquired  ownership  through  becoming  executor,
  administrator or testamentary trustee of an estate which included  them,
  that  the  provisions  of  the preceding sentence shall not apply, for a
  period of not more than two years from the date of such acquisition,  to
  the  extent  that  such securities included in such estate do not exceed
  twenty-five per centum of such  voting  securities  or  twenty-five  per
  centum  of any such class of security.  The indenture shall provide that
  promptly after May fifteenth in each calendar year,  the  trustee  shall
  make  a  check  of  its  holdings  of  such  securities  in  any  of the
  above-mentioned capacities as of  such  May  fifteenth.  Such  indenture
  shall  also  provide  that  if the obligor upon the indenture securities
  fails to make payment in  full  of  principal  or  interest  under  such
  indenture when and as the same becomes due and payable, and such failure
  continues  for  thirty  days thereafter, the trustee shall make a prompt
  check of its holdings of such securities in any of  the  above-mentioned
  capacities  as  of the date of the expiration of such thirty-day period,
  and after such date, notwithstanding the foregoing  provisions  of  this
  subparagraph,  all  such securities so held by the trustee, with sole or
  joint control over such securities vested in it, shall be considered  as
  though   beneficially  owned  by  such  trustee,  for  the  purposes  of
  subparagraphs (6), (7) and (8) of this paragraph.
    (c) The indenture shall provide that the specification of  percentages
  in  subparagraphs  (5)  to (9), inclusive, of paragraph (b) shall not be
  construed as indicating that the ownership of such  percentages  of  the
  securities  of  a  person  is  or  is  not  necessary  or  sufficient to
  constitute direct or indirect control for the purposes  of  subparagraph
  (3) or (7) of paragraph (b).
    (d)  For  the  purposes  of  subparagraphs  (6),  (7),  (8) and (9) of
  paragraph (b), (A) the terms "security" and "securities"  shall  include
  only such securities as are generally known as corporate securities, but
  shall  not  include any note or other evidence of indebtedness issued to
  evidence an obligation to repay monies lent to a person by one  or  more
  banks, trust companies, or banking firms, or any certificate of interest
  or  participation  in  any such note or evidence of indebtedness; (B) an
  obligation shall be deemed to be in default when a default in payment of
  principal shall have continued for thirty days or more,  and  shall  not
  have  been  cured;  and (C) the trustee shall not be deemed the owner or
  holder of (i) any security which it holds  as  collateral  security  (as
  trustee or otherwise) for an obligation which is not in default as above
  defined,  or  (ii)  any  security  which it holds as collateral security
  under the indenture, irrespective of any default  thereunder,  or  (iii)
  any  security  which  it holds as agent for collection, or as custodian,
  escrow agent, or depositary, or in any similar representative capacity.
    (e)  For  the  purposes  of paragraph (b), the term "underwriter" when
  used with reference to an obligor upon the  indenture  securities  means
  every  person  who, within three years prior to the time as of which the
  determination is made, was  an  underwriter  of  any  security  of  such
  obligor outstanding at such time.
    (f)  When used in paragraphs (b) to (e), inclusive, unless the context
  otherwise requires---
    (1) The term "underwriter" means any person who has purchased from  an
  issuer  with  a  view to, or offers or sells for an issuer in connection
  with, the distribution of any security, or participates or has a  direct
  or  indirect  participation  in any such undertaking, or participates or
  has a participation in the direct or indirect underwriting of  any  such
  undertaking;  but such term shall not include a person whose interest is
  limited to a commission from an underwriter or dealer not in  excess  of
  the usual and customary distributors' or sellers' commission.
    (2)  The  term  "director" means any director of a corporation, or any
  individual performing similar functions with respect to any organization
  whether incorporated or unincorporated.
    (3) The term "executive  officer"  means  the  president,  every  vice
  president,  every  trust  officer,  the  cashier, the secretary, and the
  treasurer of a corporation, and any  individual  customarily  performing
  similar  functions with respect to any organization whether incorporated
  or unincorporated, but shall not include the chairman of  the  board  of
  directors.
    (4)    The  term  "obligor",  when  used with respect to any indenture
  security, means every  person  who  is  liable  thereon,  and,  if  such
  security  is a certificate of interest or participation, such term means
  also every person who is liable upon the security or securities in which
  such certificate evidences an interest or participation; but  such  term
  shall   not   include   the  trustee  under  an  indenture  under  which
  certificates of interest or participation, equipment trust certificates,
  or like securities are outstanding.
    (5) The term "voting security" means any security presently  entitling
  the  owner  or  holder thereof to vote in the direction or management of
  the affairs of a person, or any security issued under or pursuant to any
  trust, agreement, or arrangement whereby a trustee or trustees or  agent
  or  agents  for  the  owner  or  holder  of  such security are presently
  entitled to vote in the direction or management  of  the  affairs  of  a
  person;  and a specified percentage of the voting securities of a person
  means such amount of the outstanding voting securities of such person as
  entitles the holder or holders thereof to cast such specified percentage
  of the aggregate votes which the holders of all the  outstanding  voting
  securities  of  such  person  are  entitled  to cast in the direction or
  management of the affairs of such a person.


ARTICLE 6
                              DOWER AND CURTESY
  Section 189.   Estate of curtesy abolished.
          190.   Dower.
          190-b. Lands reacquired by the husband.
          191.   Dower in lands exchanged.
          192.   Dower in lands mortgaged before marriage.
          193.   Dower in lands mortgaged for purchase-money.
          194.   Surplus proceeds of sale under purchase-money mortgages.
          195.   Widow of mortgagee not endowed.
          196.   When dower barred by misconduct.
          196-a. When dower barred by dissolution of marriage.
          197.   When dower barred by jointure.
          198.   When dower barred by pecuniary provisions.
          199.   When widow to elect between jointure and dower.
          200.   Election between devise and dower.
          201.   When deemed to have elected.
          202.   When provision in lieu of dower is forfeited.
          203.   Effect of acts of husband.
          204.   Widow's quarantine.
          205.   Widow may bequeath a crop.
          206.   Divorced woman may release dower.
          207.   Married woman may release dower by attorney.
§  189.  Estate  of  curtesy  abolished.  The common law estate by the
  curtesy in the real property of a wife dying after the thirty-first  day
  of  August,  nineteen  hundred  and  thirty,  and all its incidents, are
  hereby abolished.


§  190. Dower. When the parties intermarried prior to the first day of
  September, nineteen hundred and thirty, a widow shall be endowed of  the
  third  part  of all the lands whereof her husband was prior to the first
  day of September, nineteen hundred and thirty, seized of  an  estate  of
  inheritance,  at  any  time  during the marriage. Except as hereinbefore
  provided, after the thirty-first day of  August,  nineteen  hundred  and
  thirty,  no  inchoate right of dower shall be possessed by a wife during
  coverture, and no widow shall be  endowed,  in  any  lands  whereof  her
  husband became seized of an estate of inheritance.


§  190-b.  Lands reacquired by the husband. Lands in which the husband
  did not have an estate  of  inheritance  on  September  first,  nineteen
  hundred  thirty,  and  in  which  the wife did not then have an inchoate
  right of dower, shall not be subject to dower or an  inchoate  right  of
  dower if acquired by the husband after said date, although they had been
  owned by the husband prior to said date.


§  191.  Dower in lands exchanged. If a husband seized of an estate of
  inheritance in lands, exchanges them for other lands,  his  widow  shall
  not have dower of both, but she must make her election, to be endowed of
  the  lands given, or of those taken, in exchange; and if her election be
  not evinced by the commencement of an action to recover her dower of the
  lands given in exchange, within one year after the death of her husband,
  she is deemed to have elected to take her dower of the lands received in
  Exchange.


§ 192. Dower in lands mortgaged before marriage. Where a person seized
  of  an  estate  of  inheritance  in  lands, executes a mortgage thereof,
  before marriage, his widow is, nevertheless, entitled to  dower  of  the
  lands  mortgaged, as against every person except the mortgagee and those
  claiming under him.


§  193.  Dower  in lands mortgaged for purchase-money. Where a husband
  purchases lands during the marriage, and at the same time mortgages  his
  estate  in  those lands to secure the payment of the purchase-money, his
  widow is not entitled to dower of those lands, as against the  mortgagee
  or those claiming under him, although she did not unite in the mortgage.
  She is entitled to her dower as against every other person.


§  194.  Surplus  proceeds  of  sale  under  purchase-money mortgages.
  Where, in a case specified in the last  section,  the  mortgagee,  or  a
  person  claiming  under him, causes the land mortgaged to be sold, after
  the death of the husband, either under a power of sale contained in  the
  mortgage,  or  by  virtue  of  a  judgment in an action to foreclose the
  mortgage, and any surplus remains, after payment of the money due on the
  mortgage  and  the  costs  and  charges  of  the  sale,  the  widow   is
  nevertheless entitled to the interest or income of one-third part of the
  surplus for her life, as her dower.


§ 195. Widow of mortgagee not endowed. A widow shall not be endowed of
  the lands conveyed to her husband by way of mortgage, unless he acquires
  an absolute estate therein, during the marriage.


§  196.  When  dower  barred  by  misconduct.  In  case  of a divorce,
  dissolving the marriage contract for the misconduct  of  the  wife,  she
  shall not be endowed.


§  196-a.  When  dower barred by dissolution of marriage. In case of a
  dissolution of the marriage because of the absence of the wife for  five
  successive  years,  as  provided  in  section  seven-a  of  the domestic
  relations law, she shall not be endowed.


§ 197. When dower barred by jointure. Where an estate in real property
  is  conveyed  to a person and his intended wife, or to the intended wife
  alone, or to a person in trust for them or for the intended wife  alone,
  for the purpose of creating a jointure for her, and with her assent, the
  jointure  bars  her  right  or  claim  of  dower in all the lands of the
  husband. The assent of the wife to such a jointure is evidenced, if  she
  be of full age, by her becoming a party to the conveyance by which it is
  settled;  if  she be a minor, by her joining with her father or guardian
  in that conveyance.


§  198.  When  dower  barred  by  pecuniary  provisions. Any pecuniary
  provision, made for the benefit of an  intended  wife  and  in  lieu  of
  dower, if assented to by her as prescribed in the last section, bars her
  right or claim of dower in all the lands of her husband.


§  199. When widow to elect between jointure and dower. If, before the
  marriage, but without her  assent,  or,  if  after  the  marriage,  real
  property  is given or assured for the jointure of a wife, or a pecuniary
  provision is made for her, in lieu of dower, she must make her  election
  whether she will take the jointure or pecuniary provision, or be endowed
  of the lands of her husband; but she is not entitled to both.


§  200. Election between devise and dower. If real property is devised
  to a woman, or a pecuniary or other provision is made for her by will in
  lieu of her dower, she must make her election whether she will take  the
  property  so  devised,  or  the provisions so made, or be endowed of the
  lands of her husband; but she is not entitled to both.


§  201.  When  deemed to have elected. Where a woman is entitled to an
  election, as prescribed in either of  the  last  two  sections,  she  is
  deemed  to  have  elected  to  take  the  jointure,  devise or pecuniary
  provision, unless within six months after the death of her  husband  she
  enters  upon  the  lands  assigned to her for her dower, or commences an
  action for her dower. But, during such period of six  months  after  the
  death  of  her  said  husband,  her  time  to  make such election may be
  enlarged by the order of any court competent to pass on the accounts  of
  executors,  administrators  or  testamentary  trustees,  or to admeasure
  dower, on an affidavit showing the pendency of a proceeding  to  contest
  the  probate  of  the will containing such jointure, devise or pecuniary
  provision, or of an action to construe or set aside such will,  or  that
  the  amount  of  claims  against  the  estate of the testator can not be
  ascertained within the period so limited, or other reasonable cause, and
  on notice given to such persons, and in such manner, as such  court  may
  direct. Such order shall be indexed and recorded in the same manner as a
  notice  of  pendency of action in the office of the clerk of each county
  wherein the real property or  a  portion  thereof  affected  thereby  is
  Situated.


§  202.  When provision in lieu of dower is forfeited. Every jointure,
  devise and pecuniary provision in lieu of  dower  is  forfeited  by  the
  woman  for whose benefit it is made in a case in which she would forfeit
  her dower; and on such forfeiture, an estate so conveyed  for  jointure,
  or  devised,  or a pecuniary provision so made, immediately vests in the
  person or legal representatives of the person in whom  they  would  have
  vested on the determination of her interest therein, by her death.


§ 203. Effect of acts of husband. An act, deed or conveyance, executed
  or performed by the husband without the assent of his wife, evidenced by
  her  acknowledgment  thereof,  in the manner required by law to pass the
  contingent right of dower of a married woman, or a  judgment  or  decree
  confessed by or recovered against him, or any laches, default, covin, or
  crime  of  a  husband,  does  not prejudice the right of his wife to her
  dower or jointure, or preclude her from the recovery thereof.


§  204.  Widow's  quarantine. A widow may remain in the chief house of
  her husband forty days after his death,  whether  her  dower  is  sooner
  assigned  to  her or not, without being liable to any rent for the same;
  and in the meantime she may have her reasonable sustenance  out  of  the
  estate of her husband.


§  205.  Widow may bequeath a crop. A widow may bequeath a crop in the
  ground of land held by her in dower.


§  206. Divorced woman may release dower. A woman who is divorced from
  her husband, whether such divorce be absolute or limited, or granted  in
  his or her favor, by any court of competent jurisdiction, may release to
  him,  by  an  instrument  in  writing,  sufficient to pass title to real
  estate, her inchoate right  of  dower  in  any  specific  real  property
  theretofore  owned  by  him, or generally in all such real property, and
  such as he shall thereafter acquire.


§ 207. Married woman may release dower by attorney. A married woman of
  full  age  may  release  her inchoate right of dower in real property by
  attorney in fact in any case where she can personally release the same.


ARTICLE 7
                             Landlord and Tenant
  Section  220.     Action for use and occupation.
           221.     Rent due on life leases recoverable.
           222.     When rent is apportionable.
           223.     Rights where property or lease is transferred.
           223-a.   Remedies of lessee when possession is not delivered.
           223-b.   Retaliation by landlord against tenant.
           224.     Attornment by tenant.
           225.     Notice of action adverse to possession of tenant.
           226.     Effect of renewal on sub-lease.
           226-a.   Effect  of  new  lease  on  tenant's  right  to remove
                      fixtures or improvements.
           226-b.   Right to sublease or assign.
           226-c.   Notice of rent increase or non-renewal of  residential
                      tenancy.
           227.     When tenant may surrender premises.
           227-a.   Termination of residential lease by senior citizens or
                      individuals  with a disability moving to a residence
                      of a family member or entering certain  health  care
                      facilities,   adult   care   facilities  or  housing
                      projects.
           227-b.   Termination of certain contracts by senior citizens.
           227-c.   Termination  of  residential  lease  by   victims   of
                      domestic violence.
           227-d.   Discrimination  based  on  domestic  violence  status;
                      prohibited.
           227-e.   Landlord duty to mitigate damages.
           227-f.   Denial on the basis of involvement in  prior  disputes
                      prohibited.
           228.     Termination  of tenancies at will or by sufferance, by
                      notice.
           229.     Liability of tenant holding over after  giving  notice
                      of intention to quit.
           230.     Right  of  tenants  to  form,  join  or participate in
                      tenants' groups.
           231.     Lease, when void; liability of landlord where premises
                      are occupied for unlawful purpose.
           231-a.   Sprinkler system notice in residential leases.
           231-b.   Flood history and risk notice in residential leases.
           232.     Duration of certain agreements in New York.
           232-a.   Notice to terminate monthly tenancy  or  tenancy  from
                      month to month in the city of New York.
           232-b.   Notification  to  terminate monthly tenancy or tenancy
                      from month to month outside the city of New York.
           232-c.   Holding over by a tenant after expiration  of  a  term
                      longer than one month; effect of acceptance of rent.
           233.     Manufactured home parks; duties, responsibilities.
           233-a.   Sale of manufactured home parks.
           233-b.   Manufactured home parks; rent increases.
           233-b*2. Campgrounds.
           234.     Right to recover attorneys' fees in actions or summary
                      proceedings  arising  out  of  leases of residential
                      property.
           234-a.   Unauthorized legal fees.
           235.     Wilful violations.
           235-a.   Tenant right to offset  payments  and  entitlement  to
                      damages in certain cases.
           235-b.   Warranty of habitability.
           235-bb.  Certificates  of  occupancy;  required  disclosure  to
                      tenant.
           235-c.   Unconscionable lease or clause.
           235-d.   Harassment.
           235-e.   Duty to provide written receipt.
           235-f.   Unlawful restrictions on occupancy.
           235-g.   Electronic billing and/or payment of rent.
           235-h.   Waiver  of  right  to  bring  a  declaratory  judgment
                      action.
           235-i.   Unreasonable tenant fees for reproductions of keys.
           236.     Assignment of lease of a deceased tenant.
           237.     Discrimination  in  leases  with respect to bearing of
                      children.
           237-a.   Discrimination against children in dwelling houses and
                      manufactured home parks.
           238.     Agreements or contracts for privileges  to  deal  with
                      occupants of tenements, apartment houses or bungalow
                      colonies.
           238-a.   Limitation on fees.


§  220.  Action  for  use  and  occupation. The landlord may recover a
  reasonable compensation for the use and occupation of real property,  by
  any  person,  under an agreement, not made by deed; and a parol lease or
  other agreement may be used as evidence of the amount  to  which  he  is
  Entitled.


§  221.  Rent  due on life leases recoverable. Rent due on a lease for
  life or lives is recoverable by action, as  well  after  as  before  the
  death  of  the  person  on  whose life the rent depends, and in the same
  manner as rent due on a lease for years.


§  222. When rent is apportionable. Where a tenant for life, who shall
  have demised the real property, dies  before  the  first  rent  day,  or
  between  two  rent  days,  his executor or administrator may recover the
  proportion of rent which accrued to him before his death.


§  223.  Rights where property or lease is transferred. The grantee of
  leased real property, or of a reversion thereof, or  of  any  rent,  the
  devisee  or  assignee  of  the  lessor  of  such a lease, or the heir or
  personal representative of either of them, has  the  same  remedies,  by
  entry,  action  or  otherwise,  for  the nonperformance of any agreement
  contained in the assigned lease for the recovery of rent, for the  doing
  of  any waste, or for other cause of forfeiture as his grantor or lessor
  had, or would have had, if the reversion had remained in him.  A  lessee
  of  real property, his assignee or personal representative, has the same
  remedy  against  the  lessor,  his   grantee   or   assignee,   or   the
  representative  of  either,  for the breach of an agreement contained in
  the lease, that the lessee might have had against his immediate  lessor,
  except  a  covenant  against  incumbrances  or  relating to the title or
  possession of the premises leased. This section applies  as  well  to  a
  grant  or  lease  in  fee, reserving rent, as to a lease for life or for
  years; but not to a deed of conveyance in fee, made before the ninth day
  of April, eighteen hundred and five, or  after  the  fourteenth  day  of
  April, eighteen hundred and sixty.


§  223-a. Remedies of lessee when possession is not delivered.  In the
  absence of an express provision to the contrary, there shall be  implied
  in every lease of real property a condition that the lessor will deliver
  possession  at the beginning of the term. In the event of breach of such
  implied condition the lessee shall have the right to rescind  the  lease
  and  to  recover  the consideration paid. Such right shall not be deemed
  inconsistent with any right of action he may have to recover damages.


 §  223-b.  Retaliation  by  landlord against tenant. 1. No landlord of
  premises or units to which this section  is  applicable  shall  serve  a
  notice  to  quit  upon any tenant or commence any action to recover real
  property or summary proceeding to recover possession of real property in
  retaliation for:
    a. A good faith complaint, by or in  behalf  of  the  tenant,  to  the
  landlord,  the  landlord's  agent  or  a  governmental  authority of the
  landlord's alleged violation of any health or  safety  law,  regulation,
  code,  or  ordinance,  the  warranty  of  habitability under section two
  hundred thirty-five-b of this article, the duty to repair under sections
  seventy-eight, seventy-nine, and eighty of the multiple dwelling law  or
  section  one  hundred seventy-four of the multiple residence law, or any
  law or regulation which has as its objective the regulation of  premises
  used  for  dwelling  purposes  or  which pertains to the offense of rent
  gouging in the third, second or first degree; or
    b. Actions taken in good faith, by or in  behalf  of  the  tenant,  to
  secure  or  enforce  any rights under the lease or rental agreement, the
  warranty of habitability under section two hundred thirty-five-b of this
  article, the duty to repair under sections seventy-eight,  seventy-nine,
  and  eighty  of  the  multiple  dwelling  law  or  section  one  hundred
  seventy-four of the multiple residence law, or under any  other  law  of
  the  state  of  New York, or of its governmental subdivisions, or of the
  United States which has as its objective the regulation of premises used
  for dwelling purposes or which pertains to the offense of  rent  gouging
  in the third, second or first degree; or
    c.  The  tenant's  participation  in  the  activities  of  a  tenant's
  organization.
    2. No  landlord  of  premises  or  units  to  which  this  section  is
  applicable  or such landlord's agent shall substantially alter the terms
  of the tenancy in retaliation for any actions set forth in paragraphs a,
  b, and c of subdivision one  of  this  section.  Substantial  alteration
  shall  include, but is not limited to, the refusal to continue a tenancy
  of the tenant, upon expiration of the tenant's lease, to renew the lease
  or offer a new lease, or offering a new lease with an unreasonable  rent
  increase; provided, however, that a landlord shall not be required under
  this  section to offer a new lease or a lease renewal for a term greater
  than one year.
    3. A landlord  shall  be  subject  to  a  civil  action  for  damages,
  attorney's  fees  and  costs  and  other  appropriate  relief, including
  injunctive and other equitable remedies, as may be determined by a court
  of competent jurisdiction in any case in which the landlord has violated
  the provisions of this section.
    4. In any action to recover real property  or  summary  proceeding  to
  recover  possession  of real property, judgment shall be entered for the
  tenant if the court finds that the landlord is acting in retaliation for
  any action set forth in paragraphs a, b, and c  of  subdivision  one  of
  this section. Retaliation shall be asserted as an affirmative defense in
  such  action  or  proceeding.  The  tenant  shall not be relieved of the
  obligation to pay any rent for which he is otherwise liable.
    5. In an action or proceeding instituted against a tenant of  premises
  or  a unit to which this section is applicable, a rebuttable presumption
  that the landlord is acting in  retaliation  shall  be  created  if  the
  tenant  establishes  that  the  landlord  served  a  notice  to quit, or
  instituted an action or proceeding to recover possession,  or  attempted
  to substantially alter the terms of the tenancy, within one year after:
    a.  A good faith complaint was made, by or in behalf of the tenant, to
  the landlord, the landlord's agent or a governmental  authority  of  the
  landlord's  violation  of any health or safety law, regulation, code, or
  ordinance, the  warranty  of  habitability  under  section  two  hundred
  thirty-five-b  of  this  article,  the  duty  to  repair  under sections
  seventy-eight, seventy-nine, and eighty of the multiple dwelling law  or
  section  one  hundred seventy-four of the multiple residence law, or any
  law or regulation which has as its objective the regulation of  premises
  used  for  dwelling  purposes  or  which pertains to the offense of rent
  gouging in the third, second or first degree; or
    b. The tenant in good faith took action to secure or  enforce  against
  the  landlord  or  his  agents  any  rights  under  the  lease or rental
  agreement, the  warranty  of  habitability  under  section  two  hundred
  thirty-five-b  of  this  article,  the  duty  to  repair  under sections
  seventy-eight, seventy-nine, and eighty of the multiple dwelling law  or
  section one hundred seventy-four of the multiple residence law, or under
  any  other  law  of  the  state  of  New  York,  or  of its governmental
  subdivisions, or of the United States which has  as  its  objective  the
  regulation  of  premises used for dwelling purposes or which pertains to
  the offense of rent gouging in the third, second or first degree.
    c. Judgment under subdivision  three  or  four  of  this  section  was
  entered  for  the tenant in a previous action between the parties; or an
  inspection was made, an order was entered, or other action was taken  as
  a  result  of  a  complaint or act described in paragraph a or b of this
  subdivision.
    The effect of the presumption shall be  to  require  the  landlord  to
  establish  a  non-retaliatory  motive for his acts by a preponderance of
  the evidence.
    5-a. Any lease provision which seeks  to  assess  a  fee,  penalty  or
  dollar  charge, in addition to the stated rent, against a tenant because
  such  tenant  files  a  bona  fide  complaint  with  the  landlord,  the
  landlord's  agent  or a building code officer regarding the condition of
  such tenant's leased premises shall be null and void  as  being  against
  public  policy. A landlord or agent of the landlord who seeks to enforce
  such a fee, penalty or charge shall be liable to the tenant  for  triple
  the amount of such fee, penalty or charge.
    6.  This section shall apply to all rental residential premises except
  owner-occupied  dwellings  with  less  than  four  units.  However,  its
  provisions  shall  not  be  given  effect  in  any  case  in which it is
  established that the condition from which the complaint or action  arose
  was caused by the tenant, a member of the tenant's household, or a guest
  of  the  tenant.  Nor  shall  it  apply  in  a  case where a tenancy was
  terminated pursuant to the terms of a lease as a result of a  bona  fide
  transfer of ownership.


§  224. Attornment by tenant. The attornment of a tenant to a stranger
  is absolutely void and does not in any way affect the possession of  the
  landlord unless made either:
    1. With the consent of the landlord; or,
    2.  Pursuant to or in consequence of a judgment, order, or decree of a
  court of competent jurisdiction; or
    3. To a purchaser at foreclosure sale.


§  225.  Notice  of  action  adverse  to possession of tenant. Where a
  process or summons in an action to recover the real property occupied by
  him, or the possession  thereof,  is  served  upon  a  tenant,  he  must
  forthwith give notice thereof to his landlord; otherwise he forfeits the
  value  of  three  years' rent of such property, to the landlord or other
  person of whom he holds.


§ 226. Effect of renewal on sub-lease. The surrender of an under-lease
  is not requisite to the validity of the surrender of the original lease,
  where  a  new lease is given by the chief landlord. Such a surrender and
  renewal do not impair any right or interest of the chief  landlord,  his
  lessee  or  the  holder  of  an  under-lease,  under the original lease;
  including the chief landlord's remedy by entry, for the rent  or  duties
  secured  by the new lease, not exceeding the rent and duties reserved in
  the original lease surrendered.


§  226-a.  Effect of new lease on tenant's right to remove fixtures or
  improvements. Unless otherwise expressly agreed, where a  tenant  has  a
  right  to  remove fixtures or improvements, such right shall not be lost
  or impaired by reason of his acceptance of  a  new  lease  of  the  same
  premises without any surrender of possession between terms.


§  226-b.  Right  to  sublease or assign. 1. Unless a greater right to
  assign is conferred by the lease, a tenant renting a residence  may  not
  assign his lease without the written consent of the owner, which consent
  may  be  unconditionally  withheld without cause provided that the owner
  shall release the tenant from the lease upon request of the tenant  upon
  thirty  days  notice  if  the owner unreasonably withholds consent which
  release shall be the sole remedy of the tenant. If the owner  reasonably
  withholds consent, there shall be no assignment and the tenant shall not
  be released from the lease.
    2. (a) A tenant renting a residence pursuant to an existing lease in a
  dwelling  having  four or more residential units shall have the right to
  sublease his premises subject to the written consent of the landlord  in
  advance  of  the  subletting.  Such  consent  shall  not be unreasonably
  withheld.
    (b) The tenant shall inform the landlord of his intent to sublease  by
  mailing  a  notice  of  such  intent  by  certified mail, return receipt
  requested.  Such  request  shall  be  accompanied   by   the   following
  information: (i) the term of the sublease, (ii) the name of the proposed
  sublessee, (iii) the business and permanent home address of the proposed
  sublessee,  (iv)  the  tenant's  reason for subletting, (v) the tenant's
  address for the term of the sublease, (vi) the written  consent  of  any
  cotenant  or  guarantor  of  the lease, and (vii) a copy of the proposed
  sublease, to which a copy of the tenant's lease  shall  be  attached  if
  available,  acknowledged by the tenant and proposed subtenant as being a
  true copy of such sublease.
    (c) Within ten days after the mailing of such  request,  the  landlord
  may  ask  the  tenant  for  additional  information  as  will enable the
  landlord  to  determine  if  rejection  of   such   request   shall   be
  unreasonable.  Any  such request for additional information shall not be
  unduly burdensome.  Within thirty days after the mailing of the  request
  for  consent,  or  of the additional information reasonably asked for by
  the landlord, whichever is later, the landlord shall send  a  notice  to
  the  tenant  of  his  consent  or,  if  he does not consent, his reasons
  therefore, Landlord's failure to send such a notice shall be deemed to be
  a consent to the proposed subletting.  If  the  landlord  consents,  the
  premises  may  be  sublet in accordance with the request, but the tenant
  thereunder, shall nevertheless remain  liable  for  the  performance  of
  tenant's  obligations  under  said  lease.  If  the  landlord reasonably
  withholds consent, there shall be no subletting and the tenant shall not
  be released from the  lease.  If  the  landlord  unreasonably  withholds
  consent,  the  tenant  may sublet in accordance with the request and may
  recover the costs of the proceeding and attorneys fees if  it  is  found
  that the owner acted in bad faith by withholding consent.
    3.  The  provisions of this section shall apply to leases entered into
  or renewed before or after the effective date of this  section,  however
  they  shall  not apply to public housing and other units for which there
  are constitutional or statutory criteria covering admission thereto  nor
  to  a proprietary lease, viz.: a lease to, or held by, a tenant entitled
  thereto by reason of ownership of stock in a corporate owner of premises
  which operates the same on a cooperative basis.
    4. With respect to units covered by the  emergency  tenant  protection
  act  of  nineteen seventy-four or the rent stabilization law of nineteen
  hundred sixty-nine the exercise of the rights granted  by  this  section
  shall  be  subject  to  the  applicable provisions of such laws. Nothing
  contained in this section two hundred twenty-six-b shall  be  deemed  to
  affect  the  rights, if any, of any tenant subject to title Y of chapter
  51 of the administrative code of the city of New York or  the  emergency
  housing rent control law.
    5.  Any sublet or assignment which does not comply with the provisions
  of this section shall  constitute  a  substantial  breach  of  lease  or
  tenancy.
    6.  Any provision of a lease or rental agreement purporting to waive a
  provision of this section is null and void.
    7. The provisions of this section except for items in paragraph (b) of
  subdivision two of this section not previously required, shall apply  to
  all  actions  and  proceedings  pending  on  the  effective date of this
  section.
    8. Nothing contained in this section shall be  deemed  to  prevent  or
  limit  the  right of a tenant to sell improvements to a unit pursuant to
  article seven-C of the multiple dwelling law.


§  226-c.  Notice  of  rent  increase  or  non-renewal  of residential
  tenancy.   1. (a) Whenever a landlord intends  to  offer  to  renew  the
  tenancy  of  an  occupant  in  a  residential  dwelling unit with a rent
  increase equal to or greater than five percent above the  current  rent,
  or the landlord does not intend to renew the tenancy, the landlord shall
  provide  written  notice as required in subdivision two of this section.
  If the landlord fails to provide timely notice,  the  occupant's  lawful
  tenancy  shall continue under the existing terms of the tenancy from the
  date on which the landlord gave actual written notice until  the  notice
  period  has  expired,  notwithstanding any provision of a lease or other
  tenancy agreement to the contrary.
    (b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this  subdivision,  notice  shall
  not  be  required  under  this  section  to be provided by a cooperative
  housing  corporation,  other  than  a  cooperative  housing  corporation
  subject  to the provisions of article two, article four, article five or
  article eleven of the private housing finance law, to a tenant who is  a
  dwelling  unit owner or shareholder of such corporation. Nothing in this
  paragraph shall relieve such  cooperative  housing  corporation  of  any
  otherwise  applicable  obligation  to  provide  notice  to  such  tenant
  pursuant to any other law or any agreement between the parties.
    2. (a) For the purposes of this section, the required notice shall  be
  based  on  the  cumulative  amount  of  time the tenant has occupied the
  residence or the length of the  tenancy  in  each  lease,  whichever  is
  longer.
    (b)  If  the  tenant  has occupied the unit for less than one year and
  does not have a lease term of at least  one  year,  the  landlord  shall
  provide at least thirty days' notice.
    (c)  If  the  tenant  has occupied the unit for more than one year but
  less than two years, or has a lease term of at least one year  but  less
  than two years, the landlord shall provide at least sixty days' notice.
    (d) If the tenant has occupied the unit for more than two years or has
  a  lease term of at least two years, the landlord shall provide at least
  ninety days' notice.


§  227. When tenant may surrender premises.  Where any building, which
  is leased or occupied, is destroyed or so injured by  the  elements,  or
  any  other  cause as to be untenantable, and unfit for occupancy, and no
  express agreement to the contrary has been made in writing,  the  lessee
  or  occupant  may,  if the destruction or injury occurred without his or
  her fault or neglect, quit and surrender  possession  of  the  leasehold
  premises,  and  of  the land so leased or occupied; and he or she is not
  liable to pay to the lessor or owner, rent for the  time  subsequent  to
  the surrender. Any rent paid in advance or which may have accrued by the
  terms  of  a  lease or any other hiring shall be adjusted to the date of
  such surrender.


§  227-a.  Termination  of  residential  lease  by  senior citizens or
  individuals with a disability moving to a residence of a  family  member
  or  entering  certain  health  care facilities, adult care facilities or
  housing projects. 1. In any lease or rental agreement covering  premises
  occupied  for  dwelling  purposes  in  which  a lessee or tenant has (a)
  attained the age of sixty-two years or older, or will  attain  such  age
  during  the  term  of  such  lease  or  rental  agreement  or  (b) is an
  individual with a "disability", as defined in subdivision twenty-one  of
  section two hundred ninety-two of the executive law or a husband or wife
  or  dependent  of such a person residing with him or her, there shall be
  implied a covenant by the lessor or  owner  to  permit  such  lessee  or
  tenant:  (i)  who  is  certified  by  a physician as no longer able, for
  medical reasons, to live independently in such  premises  and  requiring
  assistance  with  instrumental  activities  of  daily living or personal
  activities of daily living, and who will move to a residence of a member
  of his or her family, or (ii) who is notified of his or her  opportunity
  to  commence  occupancy  in  an  adult  care  facility  (as  defined  in
  subdivision twenty-one of section two of the social services law) except
  for a shelter for adults (as  defined  in  subdivision  twenty-three  of
  section two of such law), a residential health care facility (as defined
  in  section two thousand eight hundred one of the public health law), or
  a housing unit which receives substantial assistance of grants, loans or
  subsidies from any federal, state or local agency or instrumentality, or
  any not-for-profit  philanthropic  organization  one  of  whose  primary
  purposes  is  providing  low  or  moderate  income  housing,  or in less
  expensive premises in a housing  project  or  complex  erected  for  the
  specific   purpose   of   housing   senior   citizens  or  persons  with
  disabilities, to terminate such lease or rental agreement and  quit  and
  surrender  possession  of  the  leasehold  premises,  and of the land so
  leased or occupied; and  to  release  the  lessee  or  tenant  from  any
  liability  to pay to the lessor or owner, rent or other payments in lieu
  of rent for the time subsequent to the date of termination of such lease
  in accordance with subdivision two of this section; and to adjust to the
  date of surrender any rent or other payments made in  advance  or  which
  have accrued by the terms of such lease or rental agreement.
    2.  (a)  Any  lease  or  rental  agreement covered by paragraph (a) of
  subdivision one of this section may be terminated by notice  in  writing
  delivered  to the lessor or owner or to the lessor's or owner's agent by
  a lessee or tenant. Such termination shall be effective no earlier  than
  thirty  days  after the date on which the next rental payment subsequent
  to the date when such notice is  delivered  is  due  and  payable.  Such
  notice  shall  be  accompanied  by  a  documentation  of the physician's
  certification, accompanied by a notarized statement from a family member
  stating that the senior citizen is related,  and  will  be  moving  into
  their  place  of  residence  for a period of not less than six months or
  admission or pending admission to a facility set  forth  in  subdivision
  one  of  this  section.  Such notice shall be deemed delivered five days
  after mailing. Documentation of admission  or  pending  admission  shall
  consist of a copy of an executed lease or contract between the lessee or
  tenant and a facility set forth in subdivision one of this section.
    (b)  Any  lease  or  rental  agreement  covered  by  paragraph  (b) of
  subdivision one of this section may be terminated by notice  in  writing
  delivered  to the lessor or owner or to the lessor's or owner's agent by
  a lessee or tenant. Such termination shall be effective no earlier  than
  thirty  days  after the date on which the next rental payment subsequent
  to the date when such notice is  delivered  is  due  and  payable.  Such
  notice  shall  be  accompanied  by  a  documentation  of the physician's
  certification. Such notice shall be deemed  delivered  five  days  after
  mailing.  Documentation  of admission or pending admission shall consist
  of a copy of an executed lease or contract between the lessee or  tenant
  and a facility set forth in subdivision one of this section.
    3.  Any person who shall knowingly seize, hold, or detain the personal
  effects, clothing, furniture or other property of  any  person  who  has
  lawfully  terminated a lease or rental agreement covered by this section
  or the spouse or  dependent  of  any  such  person,  or  in  any  manner
  interferes  with  the removal of such property from the premises covered
  by such lease or rental agreement, for  the  purpose  of  subjecting  or
  attempting to subject any of such property to a purported claim for rent
  accruing  subsequent  to the date of termination of such lease or rental
  agreement, or attempts so to do, shall be guilty of  a  misdemeanor  and
  shall  be punished by imprisonment not to exceed one year or by fine not
  to exceed one thousand dollars, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
    3-a. Each owner or lessor of a facility or unit into which a lessee or
  tenant is entitled to move after quitting and surrendering  as  provided
  for  herein  shall  in  writing, upon an application, notify prospective
  tenants of the provision of this section. Such notice shall include,  in
  plain  and  simple  English,  in  conspicuous print of at least eighteen
  point type, an explanation of a tenant's right to terminate the  existing
  lease and all other applicable requirements and duties relating thereto.
  Such notice shall read as follows:
                    NOTICE: RESIDENTIAL LEASE TERMINATION
    SECTION 227-a OF THE REAL PROPERTY LAW OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK ALLOWS
  FOR  THE  TERMINATION  OF  A  RESIDENTIAL  LEASE  BY  SENIOR CITIZENS OR
  INDIVIDUALS WITH A DISABILITY MOVING TO A RESIDENCE OF A  FAMILY  MEMBER
  OR  ENTERING  CERTAIN  HEALTH  CARE FACILITIES, ADULT CARE FACILITIES OR
  HOUSING PROJECTS.
  Who is eligible?
    Any lessee or tenant who is age sixty-two years or older,
    or who will attain such age during the term of the lease or rental
    agreement,
    or an individual with a "disability", as defined in subdivision
    21 of section 292 of the executive law,
    or a spouse or dependent of such person residing with him or her.
    What kind of facilities does this law apply to?
    This law will apply  if  the  senior  citizen  or  individual  with  a
  disability is relocating to:
    A. An adult care facility;
    B. A residential health care facility;
    C. Subsidized low income housing;
    D. Senior citizen housing; or
    E. A residence of a family member.
    What are the responsibilities of the rental property owner?
    When  the  tenant  gives notice of his or her opportunity to move into
  one of the above facilities the landlord must allow:
    A. for the termination of the lease or rental agreement, and
    B. the release of the tenant from any liability to pay rent  or  other
  payments in lieu of rent from the termination of the lease in accordance
  with section 227-a of the real property law, to the time of the original
  termination date, and
    C.  to  adjust  any  payments  made  in advance or payments which have
  accrued by the terms of such lease or rental agreement.
    How do you terminate the lease?
    If the tenant can move into one of the specified facilities, he or she
  must terminate the lease or agreement in writing no earlier than  thirty
  days  after  the date on which the next rental payment (after the notice
  is delivered) is due and payable. The notice is  deemed  delivered  five
  days  after  being mailed. The written notice must include documentation
  of admission  or  pending  admission  to  one  of  the  above  mentioned
  facilities.
    For example: Mail the notice: May 5th
    Notice received: May 10th
    Next rental payment due: June 1st
    Termination effective: July 1st
    Will the landlord face penalties if he or she does not comply?
    Yes,  according  to  section 227-a of the real property law, if anyone
  interferes with the removal of your property from the premises they will
  be guilty of a misdemeanor and will be either imprisoned for up  to  one
  year or fined up to $1000.00 or both.
    4.  Any  agreement  by  a  lessee  or  tenant of premises occupied for
  dwelling purposes waiving or modifying his or her rights as set forth in
  This section shall be void as contrary to public policy.


§  227-b.  Termination  of certain contracts by senior citizens. 1. In
  any lease or contract for a senior citizen who has attained the  age  of
  sixty-two   or  older  to  reside  in  those  facilities  set  forth  in
  subdivision one of section two hundred twenty-seven-a  of  this  article
  except  for  residential  health  care  facility  (as defined in section
  twenty-eight hundred one  of  the  public  health  law)  and  any  other
  facilities  operated for the specific purpose of housing senior citizens
  which offer ancillary services to  accommodate  senior  citizens,  there
  shall be implied a covenant by the lessor or owner of such facilities to
  permit  such  senior  citizen,  or other person obligated by any part of
  such lease or contract on behalf of such senior citizen, to cancel  such
  lease  or  contract until midnight of the third business day after which
  such person has signed such lease or contract. Where  any  provision  of
  such lease or contract or any law or regulations affords a longer period
  to  cancel  than  the  period  provided in this subdivision, such longer
  period shall govern.
    2. Cancellation occurs when written notice of cancellation is given to
  the owner or lessor.
    3. Notice of cancellation, if given by mail, shall be deemed given  on
  the date of the postmark.
    4.  The form of notice of cancellation shall not be prescribed by such
  lease or contract. Notice of cancellation  shall  be  sufficient  if  it
  indicates  the intention of the senior citizen or other person obligated
  for any part of the contract on behalf of such senior citizen to  cancel
  such lease or contract.
    5.  Where a person exercises their right to cancel a lease or contract
  pursuant to this section, and such person  has  terminated  a  lease  or
  rental  agreement  under  section  two  hundred  twenty-seven-a  of this
  article, such person shall have the right  to  reinstate  such  original
  lease or rental agreement until midnight of the fifth business day after
  the  notice of termination required under subdivision two of section two
  hundred twenty-seven-a of this article has  been  delivered.  Notice  of
  intent  to  reinstate  a  lease  or  rental  agreement  pursuant to this
  subdivision shall be made in writing and  delivered  to  the  lessor  or
  owner  or  to  the owner's or lessor's agent by the lessee or tenant. If
  such notice is given by mail, it shall be deemed given on  the  date  of
  the  postmark. Such original lease or rental agreement shall continue to
  be in effect for the period stated in such agreement  as  if  there  had
  been no interruption in the lease period.
    6.  Any lease or rental agreement entered into by a lessor or owner to
  relet the premises being vacated by the senior  citizen  pursuant  to  a
  notice  served  pursuant  to  section two hundred twenty-seven-a of this
  article shall be subject to the provisions of this section. In the event
  a senior citizen exercises his or her right of reinstatement pursuant to
  this section such lease or rental agreement to relet the premises  shall
  be  canceled. In such event the owner or lessor shall have no obligation
  to (a) the prospective tenant other than refund of any rent or  security
  paid  to  such  owner  or  lessor  by the prospective tenant, or (b) any
  broker, agent or other party in connection with such reletting.
    7. Any broker's fee or commission paid in connection with the lease or
  contract referred to in subdivision one of  this  section  or  reletting
  referred  to in subdivision six of this section shall be refunded to the
  party who paid such fee or commission if such lease or contract referred
  to in subdivision one of this  section  is  canceled  pursuant  to  this
  section  or if such lease or rental agreement referred to in subdivision
  six of this section is canceled or terminated.
    8. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any person who
  enters senior citizen housing prior to midnight of  the  third  business
  day  after  the  day on which such person has signed a lease or contract
  for such housing and subsequently cancels such lease or  contract  shall
  be  financially  responsible for room, board and services received while
  such person was a resident in such housing in the same manner and to the
  same  extent had the lease or contract not been canceled pursuant to the
  provisions of this section.
    9. Such lease or contract referred  to  in  subdivision  one  of  this
  section shall include a statement notifying the senior citizen of his or
  her right to cancel such lease or contract pursuant to the provisions of
  this  section.  Such statement shall include in conspicuous print, of at
  least eighteen point type, an explanation of a senior citizen's right to
  cancel a lease or contract  referred  to  in  subdivision  one  of  this
  section  and  all  other  applicable  requirements  and  duties relating
  thereto. Such notice shall read as follows:
                         NOTICE TO SENIOR CITIZENS:
 
                      A. CONTRACT OR LEASE CANCELLATION
 
    SECTION 227-b OF THE REAL PROPERTY LAW OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK ALLOWS
  FOR THE CANCELLATION OF A CONTRACT  OR  LEASE  ENTERED  INTO  BY  SENIOR
  CITIZENS  WITH  CERTAIN HEALTH CARE FACILITIES, ADULT CARE FACILITIES OR
  OTHER SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING FACILITIES.
 
  Who is eligible?
    Any senior citizen who is age sixty-two years or older.
 
  What kind of facilities does this law apply to?
    This law will apply if the senior citizen is canceling a  contract  or
    lease with:
      a. An adult care facility;
      b. Other senior citizen housing facilities.
  How do you cancel the contract or lease?
    The  senior  citizen  is allowed to cancel a contract or lease entered
    into with any of the above mentioned facilities until midnight of  the
    third business day after which the contract or lease was signed by the
    senior   citizen.   Cancellation   occurs   when   written  notice  of
    cancellation is  given  to  the  owner  of  the  facility.  Notice  of
    cancellation,  if  given by mail, shall be deemed given on the date of
    the postmark.
                    B. REINSTATEMENT OF A RESIDENTIAL LEASE
    SECTION 227-B OF THE REAL PROPERTY LAW OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK ALLOWS
  SENIOR  CITIZENS  TO  REINSTATE  A  RESIDENTIAL  LEASE   UNDER   CERTAIN
  CONDITIONS.
  Who is eligible?
    Any  senior  citizen  who  has  exercised his or her right to cancel a
    lease or contract with an adult care  facility  or  a  senior  citizen
    housing  facility and has terminated a residential lease under Section
    227-a of the Real Property Law of the State of New York.
  How do you reinstate a residential lease?
    The senior citizen is allowed to reinstate a residential  lease  until
    midnight  of  the  fifth  business day after the notice of termination
    required under subdivision two of section 227-a of the  real  property
    law  has  been  delivered. Reinstatement occurs when written notice of
    reinstatement is given to the landlord. Notice  of  reinstatement,  if
    given by mail, shall be deemed given on the date of the postmark.
    10.  Any agreement by a senior citizen waiving or modifying any of the
  rights set forth in this section shall be void  as  contrary  to  public
  Policy.


§  227-c.  Termination  of  residential  lease  by victims of domestic
  violence. 1. Lease or rental agreement. In any lease or rental agreement
  covering premises occupied for dwelling purposes, where a  tenant  or  a
  member  of  the  tenant's  household is a victim of domestic violence as
  defined by section four hundred fifty-nine-a of the social services  law
  and  reasonably  fears  remaining  in  the leasehold premises because of
  potential further domestic violence, such tenant shall be  permitted  to
  terminate  such  lease  or  rental  agreement  and  quit  and  surrender
  possession of the leasehold premises and the land so leased or  occupied
  pursuant  to  the provisions of this section and to be released from any
  liability to pay to the lessor or owner, rent or other payments in  lieu
  of rent for the time subsequent to the date of termination of such lease
  in accordance with subdivision two of this section.
    2.   Lease   termination   procedure.  (a)  A  tenant  who  meets  the
  requirements in subdivision  one  of  this  section  may  terminate  the
  tenant's  lease by notice in writing delivered to the lessor or owner of
  the premises occupied by such person, or  to  the  lessor's  or  owner's
  agent,  and  to  any  co-tenants of such lessee or tenant other than the
  perpetrator  of  domestic  violence.  The  notice  shall   specify   the
  termination  date  which shall be no earlier than thirty days after such
  notice is delivered. If the notice is mailed via first  class  mail,  it
  shall be deemed delivered five days after mailing. If the tenant asserts
  that  the  lessor  or  owner  is the perpetrator of domestic violence, a
  person authorized by the tenant may deliver such notice on the  tenant's
  behalf.
    (b)  Such  notice  shall  state  that  the  tenant  or a member of the
  tenant's household has  experienced  domestic  violence  and  reasonably
  believes  the tenant, or the member of the tenant's household, is unable
  to safely remain in the leased premises as  a  result  of  the  domestic
  violence.
    (c)  Within  twenty-five days of such notice, the tenant shall provide
  documentation demonstrating that the tenant or a member of the  tenant's
  household  has  been  a  victim  of  domestic  violence  as described in
  subdivision one of this section. This documentation may include any  one
  or more of the following:
    (i)  A  temporary  or  final  order of protection issued by a court of
  competent jurisdiction;
    (ii) A record, complaint, or report from a federal,  state,  or  local
  law  enforcement  agency  of an act of domestic violence as described in
  section four hundred fifty-nine-a of the social services law or a family
  offense as described in section eight hundred twelve of the family court
  act, or certifying that the tenant or a member of the tenant's household
  has been subjected to domestic violence;
    (iii) A record from a health care provider for  treatment  related  to
  domestic  violence  as described in section four hundred fifty-nine-a of
  the social services law or a family  offense  as  described  in  section
  eight hundred twelve of the family court act;
    (iv)  A  written  verification from any other qualified third party to
  whom the tenant, or a member of  the  tenant's  household  reported  the
  domestic violence.
    (A)  "Qualified  third  party"  shall  include:  any  law  enforcement
  officer;  employee  of  a  court  of  the  state;  attorney,  physician,
  psychiatrist,  psychologist, social worker, registered nurse, therapist,
  or clinical professional counselor licensed to practice  in  any  state;
  person  employed  by  a  government or non-profit agency or service that
  advises or provides services to persons regarding domestic violence;  or
  any   member  of  the  clergy  of  a  church  or  religious  society  or
  denomination.
    (B) Written verification as described herein shall be satisfied by any
  sworn or notarized statement including the required information.
    (d)   The   following  sample  forms  shall  satisfy  the  notice  and
  verification requirements but are not required. These sample forms shall
  be posted to the New York state  unified  court  system's  website,  and
  shall be made available in the state's family, civil, housing, criminal,
  and supreme courts:
 
  Part I. Tenant/Legal Occupant Statement
 
  I, (insert name of tenant), state as follows:
 
  (Choose  the  next part (A, B, or C) that most accurately describes your
  situation)
 
  (A) I  have  been  subject  to  domestic  violence.  Date(s)  of  recent
  incident(s) happened on or about:
 
  (B)  A  member  of  my  household has been subject to domestic violence.
  Date(s) of recent incident(s) happened on or about:
 
  (C) Both I and at least one member of my household have been subject  to
  domestic violence. Date(s) of recent incident(s) happened on or about:
 
  The  person  I  have  asserted  has  perpetrated domestic violence is my
  co-tenant, and I cannot safely give  notice  of  my  termination  to  my
  co-tenant. (YES/NO)
 
  I reasonably fear that I cannot safely remain in my current apartment. I
  hereby  terminate  my  lease  effective (date at least thirty days after
  this notice is delivered).
 
  _______________________        ___________
  (signature of tenant)          (date)
 
                                 Acknowledgement
 
  State of _____________________)
                                )ss.:
  County of ____________________)
  On the ______ day of __________  in  the  year  _____,  before  me,  the
  undersigned  notary public, personally appeared _______________________,
  personally known to me or proved to me  on  the  basis  of  satisfactory
  evidence  to  be  the individual(s) whose name(s) is (are) subscribed to
  the within instrument and acknowledged to me that  he/she/they  executed
  the  same  in  his/her/their  capacity(ies),  and  that by his/her/their
  signature(s) on the instrument, the individual(s), or  the  person  upon
  behalf of which the individual(s) acted, executed the instrument.
 
  _________________________
  Notary Public
 
  Part II. Qualified Third Party Statement
 
  I, (insert name of qualified third party), state as follows:
  My employer name/address/phone number/e-mail address are as follows:
  I am:
 
  ____ A  law  enforcement officer employed by the (insert law enforcement
       agency).
  ____ An employee of  __________________________  court  located  in  the
       state of _______________.
  ____ An attorney licensed to practice in (insert name of state(s)).
  ____ A physician licensed to practice in (insert name of state(s)).
  ____ A psychiatrist licensed to practice in (insert name of state(s)).
  ____ A psychologist licensed to practice in (insert name of state(s)).
  ____ A social worker licensed to practice in (insert name of state(s)).
  ____ A nurse licensed to practice in (insert name of state(s)).
  ____ A therapist or clinical professional counselor licensed to practice
       in (insert name of state(s));
  ____ Employed  by  a  government  or  non-profit  agency or service that
       advises persons regarding  domestic  violence  or  refers  them  to
       persons or agencies for services or advice.
  ____ A  member  of  the  clergy  of  a  church  or  religious society or
       denomination.
  ____ Other (describe):_________________________________________________
 
  The person who signed the  Tenant/Legal  Occupant  Statement  above  has
  stated  to  me that he/she/they, or a member of his/her/their household,
  has been subject to domestic violence.
 
  This person further stated to me the incident(s) occurred  on  or  about
  the date(s) stated above.
 
  I  understand  that  the  person  who  signed  the Tenant/Legal Occupant
  Statement may use this document as a basis for terminating a lease  with
  the person's lessor.
 
  __________________________________________
  (name of qualified third party)
 
  __________________________________________
  (signature of qualified third party)
 
  ______________
  (date)
 
                               Acknowledgement
 
  State of ______________________)
                                 )ss.:
  County of _____________________)
 
  On  the  _______  day  of  ___________ in the year _____, before me, the
  undersigned       notary       public,        personally        appeared
  _________________________, personally known to me or proved to me on the
  basis  of satisfactory evidence to be the individual(s) whose name(s) is
  (are) subscribed to the within instrument and acknowledged  to  me  that
  he/she/they  executed  the same in his/her/their capacity(ies), and that
  by his/her/their signature(s) on the instrument, the  individual(s),  or
  the  person  upon  behalf of which the individual(s) acted, executed the
  instrument.
 
  ____________________________________________
  Notary Public
 
  Part III. Statement of Interpretation/Translation
 
  I  am  bilingual  in  English  and  ____________  and have translated or
  interpreted this document to the best  of  my  ability  for  the  signer
  above.
 
  _________________________________________
  (name of interpreter/translator)
 
  _________________________________________
  (signature of interpreter/translator)
 
  ___________________
  (date)
 
                               Acknowledgement
 
  State of ______________________)
                                 )ss.:
  County of _____________________)
 
  On  the  _______  day  of  ___________ in the year _____, before me, the
  undersigned  notary  public,   personally   appeared   ________________,
  personally  known  to  me  or  proved to me on the basis of satisfactory
  evidence to be the individual(s) whose name(s) is  (are)  subscribed  to
  the  within  instrument and acknowledged to me that he/she/they executed
  the same in  his/her/their  capacity(ies),  and  that  by  his/her/their
  signature(s)  on  the  instrument, the individual(s), or the person upon
  behalf of which the individual(s) acted, executed the instrument.
 
  ____________________________________________
  Notary Public
 
    3. Treatment of rent. (a) The tenant terminating the lease  shall  pay
  rent,  pro-rata,  up  to  the  lease  termination  date pursuant to this
  section.
    (b) The tenant terminating the lease shall be entitled to a refund for
  any prepaid rent  or  other  payments  covering  the  period  after  the
  effective  date  of  the  lease  termination,  as long as the tenant has
  vacated the premises. Such refund shall be provided within ten  days  of
  delivery  of  the  written notice as outlined in subdivision two of this
  section.
    (c) A tenant who meets the requirements in  subdivision  one  of  this
  section  and  submits  proper notice pursuant to subdivision two of this
  section shall have a defense in any action brought by a landlord against
  such tenant to recover rent and/or damages for breach of lease and shall
  not be liable for any rent after the effective termination date.
    (d) The lessor or owner may withhold a security deposit in part or  in
  full to the extent allowed by the lease or statute, except for the early
  termination  granted by this section, and shall not withhold any part of
  the security deposit due to the tenant's exercise of rights  under  this
  section.
    (e) Nothing in this section shall be construed to be a defense against
  an  action  for  rent for a period of time before the tenant vacated the
  premises and gave notice as required in subdivision two of this section.
    4. Co-tenants and other occupants. Upon termination:
    (a) If the terminating tenant is the sole  leaseholder,  the  premises
  shall be delivered to the lessor or owner:
    (i)  free  of all tenants and occupants, provided that the terminating
  tenant shall not be responsible for ensuring that the abusive  household
  member is not present; and
    (ii) in accordance with the terms of the lease relating to delivery of
  the premises at the termination of the lease.
    (b)  If  there  are  tenants  on  the lease other than the terminating
  tenant:
    (i) the landlord shall not, except upon  consent  of  such  additional
  tenants,  terminate  or  sever the co-tenancy. The landlord must provide
  the remaining tenant at least thirty days from the termination  date  to
  decide whether to consent to a termination or severance.
    (ii)  The  remaining  co-tenant or co-tenants hold the right to add an
  additional occupant as defined by paragraph (b) of  subdivision  one  of
  section two hundred thirty-five-f of this article.
    5.  Confidentiality  provisions.  (a)  Unless  the  terminating tenant
  provides written authorization for the release of information or  unless
  required  by  law, court order, or statute, the information shall not be
  released. Information that shall  be  kept  confidential  shall  include
  information obtained during the process of the tenant terminating his or
  her  lease  in  accordance with this section, such as: (i) the nature of
  the termination, (ii) the status of the tenant or member of the tenant's
  household as a victim of domestic violence, and  (iii)  any  information
  contained in documentation provided to demonstrate status as a victim of
  domestic violence.
    (b)  Pursuant  to  this  section,  the  landlord  shall  not  divulge,
  describe, or characterize the termination of the rental agreement as  an
  early  termination  by  a  current lessor to a prospective lessor or any
  third party.
    6. Violations. (a) Landlords who knowingly, or  intentionally  violate
  any  part  of  this section may be liable for liquidated damages, not to
  exceed one thousand dollars, actual damages, costs and attorneys' fees.
    (b) Any agreement by a lessee  or  tenant  of  premises  occupied  for
  dwelling purposes waiving or modifying his or her rights as set forth in
  this section shall be void as contrary to public policy.


§ 227-d. Discrimination based on domestic violence status; prohibited.
  1.  Definitions.  For  the  purposes  of  this  section,  a  person is a
  "domestic violence  victim"  and  possesses  "domestic  violence  victim
  status"  if  such person is or has been, or is a parent accompanied by a
  minor child or children who is or has been, in a situation in which such
  person or child is a victim of an act that would  constitute  a  violent
  felony  offense  as  enumerated  in section 70.02 of the penal law, or a
  family offense as enumerated in subdivision one of section eight hundred
  twelve of the family court act, and such act is  alleged  to  have  been
  committed  by  a  member  of the same family or household, as defined in
  subdivision one of section eight hundred twelve of the family court act.
    2. Discrimination based on domestic violence victim status prohibited.
  (a) No person, firm or corporation owning or managing any building  used
  for dwelling purposes, or the agent of such person, firm or corporation,
  shall,  because  of  such  person's or family member's domestic violence
  victim status, (1) refuse to rent a residential unit to  any  person  or
  family,  when,  but for such status, rental would not have been refused,
  (2) discriminate in the terms, conditions, or  privileges  of  any  such
  rental,  when,  but  for such status, such discrimination would not have
  occurred, or  (3)  print  or  circulate,  or  cause  to  be  printed  or
  circulated, any statement, advertisement or publication which expresses,
  directly    or    indirectly,    any   limitation,   specification,   or
  discrimination. A violation of this subdivision shall be  a  misdemeanor
  and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than
  one  thousand  dollars  and  not more than two thousand dollars for each
  offense; provided, however, that it shall be a defense that such person,
  firm, corporation or agent refused to rent a  residential  unit  on  any
  other lawful ground.
    (b)  (1)  Where  discriminatory conduct prohibited by this subdivision
  has occurred, such person or family shall have a cause of action in  any
  court of appropriate jurisdiction for compensatory and punitive damages,
  with  such  punitive damages not exceeding two thousand dollars for each
  offense, and declaratory and injunctive relief; and (2) in  all  actions
  brought  under this section, reasonable attorneys' fees as determined by
  the court may be awarded to a prevailing party, provided, however,  that
  a  prevailing  defendant  in order to recover such reasonable attorneys'
  fees must make a motion requesting such fees and show that the action or
  proceeding brought was  frivolous.  In  order  to  find  the  action  or
  proceeding  to  be  frivolous,  the  court  must find one or more of the
  following: (i) the action was commenced, used or continued in bad faith,
  solely to delay or prolong the resolution of the litigation or to harass
  or maliciously injure another; or  (ii)  the  action  was  commenced  or
  continued  in  bad  faith  without any reasonable basis and could not be
  supported by a good faith argument for  an  extension,  modification  or
  reversal  of  existing  law.  If  the  action or proceeding was promptly
  discontinued when the party or attorney learned or should  have  learned
  that  the action or proceeding lacked such a reasonable basis, the court
  may find that the party or the attorney did not act in bad faith.
    (c) Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the ability
  of a person, firm or corporation owning or managing a building used  for
  dwelling  purposes,  or  the  agent of such person, firm or corporation,
  from applying reasonable standards not based on or derived from domestic
  violence victim status in determining the eligibility  of  a  person  or
  family seeking to rent a residential unit.
    (d)  This  section  shall  not  apply  to  buildings used for dwelling
  purposes that are owner occupied  and  have  two  or  fewer  residential
  units.
    3.  A  person, firm, or corporation owning or managing a building used
  for dwelling purposes or agent of such person, firm or corporation shall
  not be civilly liable to other tenants, guests, invitees,  or  licensees
  arising  from  reasonable  and  good  faith  efforts to comply with this
  section.
    4. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a person,
  firm  or  corporation  owning  or  managing a building used for dwelling
  purposes, or the agent of such person, firm or corporation, from:
    (a) providing or preserving a  rental  preference  in  any  public  or
  private housing for victims of domestic violence;
    (b)  providing any other assistance to victims of domestic violence in
  obtaining or retaining any public or private housing; or
    (c) responding to an inquiry or request by an  applicant,  tenant,  or
  leaseholder who is a victim of domestic violence.
    5.  Nothing  in  this  section  shall  be  construed  as prohibiting a
  municipality from retaining or promulgating  local  laws  or  ordinances
  imposing  additional  or enhanced protections prohibiting discrimination
  against victims of domestic violence.
    6.  Nothing  in  this  section  shall  be   construed   as   limiting,
  diminishing, or otherwise affecting any rights under existing law.


§  227-e.  Landlord  duty  to mitigate damages. In any lease or rental
  agreement, excluding  any  real  estate  purchase  contract  defined  in
  paragraphs  (a), (c) and (d) of subdivision four of section four hundred
  sixty-one of this  chapter,  covering  premises  occupied  for  dwelling
  purposes,  if  a  tenant vacates a premises in violation of the terms of
  the lease, the landlord shall,  in  good  faith  and  according  to  the
  landlord's  resources  and  abilities,  take  reasonable  and  customary
  actions to rent the premises at fair market value or at the rate  agreed
  to  during  the term of the tenancy, whichever is lower. If the landlord
  rents the premises at fair market value or at the rate agreed to  during
  the  term  of the tenancy, the new tenant's lease shall, once in effect,
  terminate the previous tenant's lease  and  mitigate  damages  otherwise
  recoverable  against  the  previous  tenant  because  of  such  tenant's
  vacating the premises. The burden of proof shall be on the party seeking
  to recover damages. Any provision in a lease that exempts  a  landlord's
  duty to mitigate damages under this section shall be void as contrary to
  public policy.


§  227-f.  Denial  on  the  basis  of  involvement  in  prior disputes
  prohibited. 1. No landlord of a residential  premises  shall  refuse  to
  rent  or  offer  a  lease  to  a  potential tenant on the basis that the
  potential tenant was involved  in  a  past  or  pending  landlord-tenant
  action  or  summary  proceeding under article seven of the real property
  actions and proceedings law. There shall  be  a  rebuttable  presumption
  that  a person is in violation of this section if it is established that
  the person requested information from a tenant screening bureau relating
  to a potential tenant or otherwise inspected court records relating to a
  potential tenant and the person subsequently refuses to rent or offer  a
  lease to the potential tenant.
    2.   Whenever   the  attorney  general  shall  believe  from  evidence
  satisfactory to him  or  her  that  any  person,  firm,  corporation  or
  association or agent or employee thereof has violated subdivision one of
  this section, he or she may bring an action or special proceeding in the
  supreme court for a judgment enjoining the continuance of such violation
  and  for  a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars, but not
  more than one thousand dollars for each violation.


§ 228. Termination of tenancies at will or by sufferance, by notice. A
  tenancy  at will or by sufferance, however created, may be terminated by
  a written notice of not less than thirty days given  in  behalf  of  the
  landlord,  to  the  tenant,  requiring  him to remove from the premises;
  which notice must be served, either by delivering to the tenant or to  a
  person of suitable age and discretion, residing upon the premises, or if
  neither the tenant nor such a person can be found, by affixing it upon a
  conspicuous  part of the premises, where it may be conveniently read. At
  the expiration of thirty days after the  service  of  such  notice,  the
  landlord  may  re-enter,  maintain  an  action to recover possession, or
  proceed, in the manner prescribed by law, to remove the tenant,  without
  further or other notice to quit.


§  229.  Liability  of  tenant  holding  over  after  giving notice of
  intention to quit. If a tenant gives notice of his intention to quit the
  premises held by him, and does not accordingly deliver up the possession
  thereof, at the time specified  in  such  notice,  he  or  his  personal
  representatives  must,  so long as he continue in possession, pay to the
  landlord, his  heirs  or  assigns,  double  the  rent  which  he  should
  otherwise  have  paid, to be recovered at the same time, and in the same
  manner, as the single rent


§  230.  Right  of  tenants  to  form, join or participate in tenants'
  groups. 1. No landlord shall interfere with the right  of  a  tenant  to
  form,  join  or  participate  in  the  lawful  activities  of any group,
  committee or other organization formed to protect the rights of tenants;
  nor shall any landlord harass, punish, penalize, diminish,  or  withhold
  any  right,  benefit  or  privilege  of  a  tenant under his tenancy for
  exercising such rights.
    2. Tenants' groups, committees or other tenants'  organizations  shall
  have  the  right  to  meet  without  being  required to pay a fee in any
  location on the premises including a community or social room where  use
  is  normally  subject to a fee which is devoted to the common use of all
  tenants  in  a  peaceful  manner,  at  reasonable  hours   and   without
  obstructing access to the premises or facilities. No landlord shall deny
  such right.


§  231.  Lease,  when  void;  liability of landlord where premises are
  occupied for unlawful purposes. 1. Whenever the lessee or occupant  other
  than  the  owner  of  any  building or premises, shall use or occupy the
  same, or any part thereof, for any illegal trade, manufacture  or  other
  business,  the  lease  or agreement for the letting or occupancy of such
  building or premises, or any part thereof shall thereupon  become  void,
  and  the landlord of such lessee or occupant may enter upon the premises
  so let or occupied.
    2. The owner of real property, knowingly leasing or giving  possession
  of  the  same to be used or occupied, wholly or partly, for any unlawful
  trade, manufacture or business, or knowingly permitting the same  to  be
  so  used,  is liable severally, and also jointly with one or more of the
  tenants or  occupants  thereof,  for  any  damage  resulting  from  such
  unlawful use, occupancy, trade, manufacture or business.
    3.  For  the  purposes of this section, two or more convictions of any
  person or persons had, within a period of  one  year,  for  any  of  the
  offenses  described  in  section 230.00, 230.05, 230.06, 230.11, 230.12,
  230.13, 230.20, 230.25, 230.30,  230.32  or  230.40  of  the  penal  law
  arising  out  of conduct engaged in at the same premises consisting of a
  dwelling as that term is defined in subdivision four of section four  of
  the  multiple dwelling law shall be presumptive evidence of unlawful use
  of such premises and of the owner's knowledge of the same.
    4. Any lease or  agreement  hereafter  executed  for  the  letting  or
  occupancy  of  real  property  or any portion thereof, to be used by the
  lessee as a residence,  which  contains  therein  a  provision  pledging
  personal  property  exempt  by  law  from  levy and sale by virtue of an
  execution, as security for the payment of rent  due  or  to  become  due
  thereunder, is void as to such provision.
    * 5.  The attorney general may commence an action or proceeding in the
  supreme court to enjoin the continued  unlawful  trade,  manufacture  or
  business in such premises.
    * NB There are 2 sub 5's
    * 5.  For the purposes of this section, two or more convictions of any
  person or persons had, within a period of  one  year,  for  any  of  the
  offenses  described  in  section 225.00, 225.05, 225.10, 225.15, 225.20,
  225.30, 225.32, 225.35 or 225.40  of  the  penal  law,  arising  out  of
  conduct engaged in at the same premises consisting of a dwelling as that
  term  is  defined  in  subdivision  four of section four of the multiple
  dwelling law shall be presumptive  evidence  of  unlawful  use  of  such
  premises and of the owner's knowledge of the same.
    * NB There are 2 sub 5's
    6.  Any owner or tenant, including a tenant of one or more rooms of an
  apartment house, tenement house or multiple  dwelling  of  any  premises
  within  two  hundred  feet of the demised real property, may commence an
  action or proceeding in supreme court to enjoin the  continued  unlawful
  trade, manufacture or other business in such premises.


§  231-a.  Sprinkler  system  notice  in  residential leases. 1. Every
  residential lease shall provide conspicuous notice in bold face type  as
  to  the  existence  or  non-existence  of  a  maintained  and  operative
  sprinkler system in the leased premises.
    2. For purposes of this section, "sprinkler  system"  shall  have  the
  same  meaning  as  defined  in  section  one hundred fifty-five-a of the
  executive law.
    3. If there is a maintained and  operative  sprinkler  system  in  the
  leased  premises,  the residential lease agreement shall provide further
  notice as to the last date of maintenance and inspection.


§ 231-b. Flood history and risk notice in residential leases. 1. Every
  residential  lease  shall  provide  notice  of the following information
  related to the previous flood history and  current  flood  risk  of  the
  leased premises, as follows:
    (a)  whether  any  or  all of the leased premises is located wholly or
  partially in a Federal Emergency Management Agency  ("FEMA")  designated
  floodplain;
    (b)  whether  any  or  all of the leased premises is located wholly or
  partially  in  the  Special  Flood  Hazard   Area   ("SFHA";   "100-year
  floodplain")  according  to FEMA's current Flood Insurance Rate Maps for
  the leased premises' area;
    (c) whether any or all of the leased premises  is  located  wholly  or
  partially  in  a Moderate Risk Flood Hazard Area ("500-year floodplain")
  according to FEMA's current Flood Insurance Rate  Maps  for  the  leased
  premises' area; and
    (d)  any  prior  flood  damage to the leased premises due to a natural
  flood  event,  such  as  heavy  rainfall,  coastal  storm  surge,  tidal
  inundation,  or  river  overflow,  that  the  lessor knows or reasonably
  should know has occurred to such premises and the  nature  of  any  such
  damage.
    2.  Every residential lease shall also contain the following notice to
  tenants: "Flood insurance is available to renters  through  the  Federal
  Emergency  Management Agency's (FEMA's) National Flood Insurance Program
  (NFIP) to cover your personal property and contents in the  event  of  a
  flood.  A  standard  renter's  insurance policy does not typically cover
  flood damage. You are encouraged to examine  your  policy  to  determine
  whether you are covered."


§  232.  Duration  of certain agreements in New York. An agreement for
  the occupation of real estate in the city of New York, which  shall  not
  particularly  specify the duration of the occupation, shall be deemed to
  continue until the first  day  of  October  next  after  the  possession
  commences under the agreement.


§  232-a. Notice to terminate monthly tenancy or tenancy from month to
  month in the city of New York. No monthly tenant, or tenant  from  month
  to  month, shall hereafter be removed from any lands or buildings in the
  city of New York on the grounds of holding over the tenant's term unless
  pursuant to the notice period required by subdivision two of section two
  hundred twenty-six-c of this article, or for  a  tenancy  other  than  a
  residential  tenancy  at  least thirty days before the expiration of the
  term, the landlord or the landlord's agent serve upon the tenant, in the
  same manner in which a notice of petition in summary proceedings is  now
  allowed  to be served by law, a notice in writing to the effect that the
  landlord elects to terminate the tenancy  and  that  unless  the  tenant
  removes  from  such  premises  on  the day designated in the notice, the
  landlord will commence summary proceedings under the statute  to  remove
  such tenant therefrom.


§  232-b.  Notification  to  terminate monthly tenancy or tenancy from
  month to month outside the city  of  New  York.  A  monthly  tenancy  or
  tenancy from month to month of any lands or buildings located outside of
  the  city  of  New York may be terminated by the tenant or for a tenancy
  other than a residential tenancy the  landlord,  upon  the  tenant's  or
  non-residential  landlord's  notifying  the  landlord or non-residential
  tenant at least one month before the  expiration  of  the  term  of  the
  tenant's  election to terminate; provided, however, that no notification
  shall be necessary to terminate a tenancy for a definite term.


§  232-c.  Holding  over by a tenant after expiration of a term longer
  than one month; effect of acceptance of rent. Where a tenant whose  term
  is  longer  than one month holds over after the expiration of such term,
  such holding over shall not give to the landlord the option to hold  the
  tenant  for a new term solely by virtue of the tenant's holding over. In
  the case of such a holding over by the tenant, the landlord may proceed,
  in any manner permitted by  law,  to  remove  the  tenant,  or,  if  the
  landlord  shall  accept rent for any period subsequent to the expiration
  of such term, then, unless an agreement either  express  or  implied  is
  made  providing otherwise, the tenancy created by the acceptance of such
  rent shall be a tenancy from month to month commencing on the first  day
  after the expiration of such term.




§  233. Manufactured home parks; duties, responsibilities. a. Wherever
  used in this section:
    1. The term "manufactured home tenant" means one who rents space in  a
  manufactured  home  park from a manufactured home park owner or operator
  for the purpose of parking his manufactured home  or  one  who  rents  a
  manufactured  home  in a manufactured home park from a manufactured home
  park owner or operator.
    2. The term "manufactured home owner" means one who holds title  to  a
  manufactured home.
    3.  The  term  "manufactured  home  park" means a contiguous parcel of
  privately owned land which is used for the  accommodation  of  three  or
  more manufactured homes occupied for year-round living.
    4.  The  term  "manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in
  one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or
  more in width or forty body feet or more in length, or, when erected  on
  site, is three hundred twenty or more square feet, and which is built on
  a  permanent  chassis  and  designed  to  be  used as a dwelling with or
  without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities,
  and includes the plumbing,  heating,  air-conditioning,  and  electrical
  systems contained therein; except that such term shall include a "mobile
  home"  as defined in paragraph five, and shall include a structure which
  meets  all  the  requirements  of  this  subdivision  except  the   size
  requirements  and  with  respect  to  which the manufacturer voluntarily
  files a certification required by the secretary  of  housing  and  urban
  development.
    5.  The  term  "mobile  home"  means  a  moveable  or  portable  unit,
  manufactured prior  to  January  first,  nineteen  hundred  seventy-six,
  designed  and  constructed  to be towed on its own chassis, comprised of
  frame and wheels, connected to utilities, and designed  and  constructed
  without a permanent foundation for year-round living. A unit may contain
  parts  that  may be folded, collapsed or telescoped when being towed and
  expanded later to provide additional cubic capacity as well  as  two  or
  more  separately  towable  components  designed  to  be  joined into one
  integral unit capable of being again separated into the  components  for
  repeated  towing.  "Mobile  home"  shall  mean units designed to be used
  exclusively for residential purposes, excluding travel trailers.
    6. The term "rent-to-own contract" shall mean any agreement between  a
  manufactured  home park owner or operator and a manufactured home renter
  which provides that after a specified  term  or  other  contingency  the
  manufactured home renter will take ownership of the rented home.
    7.  The  term "rent-to-own payment" shall mean any payment or payments
  made by a manufactured home renter pursuant to  a  rent-to-own  contract
  which  are  in  addition  to rental payments for the rented site and the
  rented home.
    b. A manufactured  home  park  owner  or  operator  may  not  evict  a
  manufactured home tenant other than for the following reasons:
    2.  The manufactured home tenant has defaulted in the payment of rent,
  pursuant to the agreement under which  the  premises  are  held,  and  a
  demand  of the rent with at least thirty days notice in writing has been
  served upon him as prescribed in section seven  hundred  thirty-five  of
  the  real  property  actions and proceedings law. Upon the acceptance of
  such delinquent rent together with allowable costs, an action instituted
  for nonpayment of rent shall be terminated. Any person succeeding to the
  manufactured home park owner or operator's interest in the premises  may
  proceed  under this subdivision for rent due his predecessor in interest
  if he has a right thereto.
    3. The premises, or any part  thereof,  are  used  or  occupied  as  a
  bawdy-house,  or  house or place of assignation for lewd purposes or for
  purposes of prostitution, or for any illegal trade or business.
    4. The manufactured home tenant is in violation of some federal, state
  or  local law or ordinance which may be deemed detrimental to the safety
  and welfare of the other persons residing in the manufactured home park.
    5. The manufactured home tenant or anyone occupying  the  manufactured
  home is in violation of any lease term or rule or regulation established
  by  the  manufactured  home  park  owner  or  operator  pursuant to this
  section, and has continued in violation for more than ten days after the
  manufactured home park owner or operator has  given  written  notice  of
  such  violation  to the manufactured home tenant setting forth the lease
  term or rule or regulation violated and directing that the  manufactured
  home  tenant  correct  or  cease violation of such lease term or rule or
  regulation within ten days from the receipt of  said  notice.  Upon  the
  expiration  of  such  period should the violation continue or should the
  manufactured home tenant or anyone occupying the  manufactured  home  be
  deemed a persistent violator of the lease term or rules and regulations,
  the   park   owner  or  operator  may  serve  written  notice  upon  the
  manufactured home tenant directing that he vacate  the  premises  within
  thirty days of the receipt of said notice.
    6.  (i) The manufactured home park owner or operator proposes a change
  in the use of the land comprising  the  manufactured  home  park,  or  a
  portion  thereof,  on  which  the  manufactured  home  is  located, from
  manufactured  home  lot  rentals  to  some  other  use,   provided   the
  manufactured  home  owner is given written notice of the proposed change
  of  use  and  the  manufactured  home  owner's  need  to  secure   other
  accommodations.  Whenever  a  manufactured  home  park owner or operator
  gives a notice of proposed change of use to any manufactured home owner,
  the manufactured home park owner or operator shall, at  the  same  time,
  give notice of the proposed change of use to all other manufactured home
  owners  or tenants in the manufactured home park who will be required to
  secure other accommodations as a result of such proposed change of  use.
  Eviction  proceedings  based  on  a change in use shall not be commenced
  prior to two years from the service of notice of proposed change in use.
  Such notice shall be served in the manner prescribed  in  section  seven
  hundred  thirty-five of the real property actions and proceedings law or
  by certified mail, return receipt requested.
    (ii) Where a purchaser of a manufactured home park certified that such
  purchaser did not intend to change the  use  of  the  land  pursuant  to
  paragraph  (b)  of subdivision two of section two hundred thirty-three-a
  of this article, no eviction proceedings based on a change of use  shall
  be  commenced  until the expiration of sixty months from the date of the
  closing on the sale of the park.
    (iii) (A) The manufactured home park owner or operator  shall  provide
  the  manufactured home owner a stipend of up to fifteen thousand dollars
  per manufactured home owner, pursuant to a court order.  A  warrant  for
  eviction  cannot  be  executed  until  the  stipend has been paid to the
  manufactured home owner being evicted.
    (B) The court shall calculate the stipend based upon consideration  of
  the following factors:
    (1) The cost of relocation of the manufactured home;
    (2)  The  number  of manufactured homes in the same park that would be
  receiving a stipend;
    (3) The amount the real property is being purchased for;
    (4) The value of the real property the manufactured  home  is  located
  on;
    (5)  The  value  of  the  development rights attached to real property
  parcel the manufactured home is located on; and
    (6) Any other factors the court determines are relevant in each case.
    (C)  In  the  event the manufactured home owner is not removed and the
  eviction proceeding is terminated  the  manufactured  home  owner  shall
  return  the stipend to the park owner. The weight to be afforded to each
  of the various factors is within the discretion of the trial court.
    c. If the manufactured home park owner or operator does not  have  one
  of  the  above grounds available, the manufactured home tenant may raise
  the same by affirmative defense to an action for eviction.
    d. The proceedings to evict shall be governed by  the  procedures  set
  forth in article seven of the real property actions and proceedings law,
  except  for  the  provisions of subdivision two of section seven hundred
  forty-nine of the real property actions and proceedings law which  shall
  be superseded by the provisions of this subdivision.
    1.  The  officer  to  whom the warrant is directed and delivered shall
  give at  least  ninety  days  notice,  in  writing  and  in  the  manner
  prescribed in article seven of the real property actions and proceedings
  law  for  the service of notice of petition, to the person or persons to
  be evicted or dispossessed and shall execute  the  warrant  between  the
  hours of sunrise and sunset.
    2.  The  court  may  order that such warrant be directed and delivered
  with only thirty days written notice to the  person  or  persons  to  be
  evicted  or  dispossessed  if  the conditions upon which the eviction is
  founded pose an imminent threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the
  other manufactured home tenants in the manufactured home park.
    3. The court shall order that such warrant be directed  and  delivered
  with  thirty  days written notice to the person or persons to be evicted
  or dispossessed if the condition upon which the eviction is  founded  is
  that such person is in default in the payment of rent.
    4.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions of paragraphs one and two of this
  subdivision, nor of any other general, special or  local  law,  rule  or
  regulation  to the contrary, the officer to whom the warrant is directed
  and delivered shall give seventy-two hours written notice to the  person
  or  persons  to  be  evicted  or dispossessed, if such person or persons
  rents  a  manufactured  home  in  a  manufactured  home  park   from   a
  manufactured  home park owner or operator and such officer shall execute
  such warrant between the hours of sunrise and sunset.
    e. Leases. 1. The manufactured home park owner or operator shall offer
  every manufactured home tenant prior to occupancy,  the  opportunity  to
  sign  a  lease  for  a minimum of one year, which offer shall be made in
  writing. All lease offers, including initial and renewal  leases,  shall
  include  a  rider regarding tenant rights. Such rider shall be in a form
  approved or promulgated by the commissioner  of  housing  and  community
  renewal  and  which  shall  be  made available to manufactured home park
  owners and operators.
    2. (i) On or before, as appropriate, (a) the first day of  October  of
  each  calendar year with respect to a manufactured home owner who is not
  currently a party to a written lease with a manufactured home park owner
  or operator or (b) the ninetieth day next preceding the expiration  date
  of  any  existing  written lease between a manufactured home owner and a
  manufactured home park owner or operator,  the  manufactured  home  park
  owner  or  operator  shall submit to each such manufactured home owner a
  written offer to lease for a term of at least  twelve  months  from  the
  commencement  date  thereof  unless  the manufactured home park owner or
  operator has previously  furnished  the  manufactured  home  owner  with
  written  notification  of a proposed change of use pursuant to paragraph
  six of subdivision b of this section. Any such  offer  shall  include  a
  copy  of  the  proposed  lease  containing  such  terms  and conditions,
  including provisions for rent and other  charges,  as  the  manufactured
  home  park  owner  shall  deem  appropriate;  provided  such  terms  and
  conditions  are consistent with all rules and regulations promulgated by
  the manufactured home park operator prior to the date of the  offer  and
  are  not  otherwise  prohibited or limited by applicable law. Such offer
  shall also contain a statement advising the manufactured home owner that
  if he or she fails to execute and return the lease to  the  manufactured
  home  park owner or operator within thirty days after submission of such
  lease, the manufactured home owner shall be deemed to have declined  the
  offer  of  a  lease  and  shall  not  have any right to a lease from the
  manufactured home park owner or operator for the next succeeding  twelve
  months.
    (ii)  For  purposes  of  this  paragraph, the commencement date of any
  lease offered by the manufactured home park owner  to  the  manufactured
  homeowner  shall  be  the  ninetieth day after the date upon which the
  manufactured home park owner shall  have  provided  the  offer  required
  pursuant  to this paragraph; provided, however, that no such lease shall
  be effective if, on such commencement date, the manufactured home  owner
  is  in  default  of  more  than  one  month's  rent.  In  the  event the
  manufactured home owner shall have failed to  execute  and  return  said
  lease to the manufactured home park owner or operator within thirty days
  after  it  is  submitted  to  the manufactured home owner as required by
  subparagraph (i) of this paragraph the manufactured home owner shall  be
  deemed to have declined to enter said lease.
    3.  No  lease  provision  shall  be  inconsistent  with  any  rule  or
  regulation in effect at the commencement of the lease.
    4. If a manufactured home park owner or  operator  fails  to  offer  a
  tenant  a  lease  as provided in this subdivision, the tenant shall have
  all the rights of a leaseholder and may not be evicted  for  other  than
  the  reasons  specified  in  paragraph  two, three, four, five or six of
  subdivision (b) of this section.
    5. All rent increases, including all fees, rents, charges, assessments
  and utilities, shall be subject and  pursuant  to  section  two  hundred
  thirty-three-b of this article.
    f.  Rules  and  regulations.  1.  A  manufactured  home  park owner or
  operator may promulgate rules and regulations governing  the  rental  or
  occupancy of a manufactured home lot provided such rules and regulations
  shall  not be unreasonable, arbitrary or capricious. A copy of all rules
  and regulations shall be delivered by the manufactured home  park  owner
  or operator to all manufactured home tenants at the same time such owner
  or   operator  initially  offers  the  written  lease  provided  for  in
  subdivision e of this section. A copy of the rules and regulations shall
  be posted in  a  conspicuous  place  upon  the  manufactured  home  park
  grounds.
    2.   If  a  rule  or  regulation  is  not  applied  uniformly  to  all
  manufactured home tenants of the manufactured home park there shall be a
  rebuttable presumption that such rule  or  regulation  is  unreasonable,
  arbitrary  and  capricious,  provided,  however,  that  an inconsistency
  between a rule or regulation and a  lease  term  contained  in  a  lease
  signed  before  the  date  the rule or regulation is effective shall not
  raise a rebuttable presumption that such rule is unreasonable, arbitrary
  or capricious.
    3. Any rule or regulation which does not conform to  the  requirements
  of  this section or which has not been supplied or posted as required by
  paragraph one of this subdivision shall  be  unenforceable  and  may  be
  raised  by the manufactured home tenant as an affirmative defense in any
  action to evict on the basis of a violation of such rule or regulation.
    4. No rules or regulations may be changed  by  the  manufactured  home
  park  owner or operator without specifying the date of implementation of
  said changed rules and regulations, which date shall be  no  fewer  than
  thirty days after written notice to all tenants.
    5. A mobile home park owner or operator may not prohibit the placement
  of  a  for  sale  sign  on  any mobile home. A rule or regulation may be
  promulgated limiting the maximum size of such sign;  provided,  that  it
  does  not  prohibit signs the size of which do not exceed the smaller of
  three  feet  by  two  feet  or  the  maximum  size  allowed  by  law  or
  governmental regulation or ordinance, if any.
    g.  1. No tenant shall be charged a fee for other than rent, utilities
  and charges for facilities and services available  to  the  tenant.  All
  fees,  charges  or  assessments  must  be reasonably related to services
  actually rendered.
    2. A manufactured home park owner or operator  shall  be  required  to
  fully  disclose  in  writing  all  fees, charges, assessments, including
  rental fees, rules and regulations  prior  to  entering  into  a  rental
  agreement with a prospective tenant in the manufactured home park.
    3.  No  fees,  charges, assessments or rental fees may be increased by
  manufactured home park owner or operator without specifying the date  of
  implementation  of  said fees, charges, assessments or rental fees which
  date shall be no less than ninety  days  after  written  notice  to  all
  manufactured  home tenants. Failure on the part of the manufactured home
  park  owner  or  operator  to  fully  disclose  all  fees,  charges   or
  assessments  shall  prevent the manufactured home park owner or operator
  from collecting said fees, charges or assessments, and  refusal  by  the
  manufactured  home  tenant  to  pay any undisclosed charges shall not be
  used by the manufactured home park owner or  operator  as  a  cause  for
  eviction in any court of law. Rent, utilities and charges for facilities
  and services available to the tenant may not be increased unless a lease
  has  been  offered  to  the  tenant as required by subdivision e of this
  section.
    4. (a) Whenever money shall be deposited or advanced on a contract  or
  license agreement for the use or rental of premises and the manufactured
  home, if rented, in a manufactured home park as security for performance
  of  the  contract  or  agreement  or to be applied to payments upon such
  contract or agreement  when  due,  such  money  with  interest  accruing
  thereon,  if  any,  until repaid or so applied, shall continue to be the
  money of the person making such deposit or advance and shall be a  trust
  fund  in  the possession of the person with whom such deposit or advance
  shall be made and shall not be mingled with other  funds  or  become  an
  asset of the park owner, operator or his agent.
    (b) Whenever the person receiving money so deposited or advanced shall
  deposit  such  money  in  a  banking  organization,  such  person  shall
  thereupon notify in writing each of the  persons  making  such  security
  deposit  or  advance,  giving  the  name  and  address  of  the  banking
  organization in which the deposit of security money  is  made,  and  the
  amount  of  such deposit. Deposits in a banking organization pursuant to
  the  provisions  of  this  subdivision  shall  be  made  in  a   banking
  organization  having a place of business within the state. If the person
  depositing such security money in a banking organization  shall  deposit
  same in an interest bearing account, he shall be entitled to receive, as
  administration  expenses, a sum equivalent to one percent per annum upon
  the security money so deposited, which shall be in  lieu  of  all  other
  administrative and custodial expenses. The balances of the interest paid
  by  the banking organization shall be the money of the person making the
  deposit or advance and shall either be held in trust by the person  with
  whom  such deposit or advance shall be made, until repaid or applied for
  the use or rental of the leased premises, or annually paid to the person
  making the deposit of security money.
    (c) Whenever the money so deposited or advanced is for the rental of a
  manufactured  home park lot on property on which are located six or more
  manufactured home park lots, the  person  receiving  such  money  shall,
  subject  to  the  provisions  of this section, deposit it in an interest
  bearing account in a banking organization within the state which account
  shall earn interest at a rate which shall be the prevailing rate  earned
  by other such deposits made with the banking organizations in such area.
    (d) In the event that a lease terminates other than at the time that a
  banking  organization  in  such area regularly pays interest, the person
  depositing such security money shall pay over to his  manufactured  home
  tenant  such interest as he is able to collect at the date of such lease
  termination.
    (e) Any provision of such a contract or agreement whereby a person who
  so deposits or advances money waives any provision of  this  subdivision
  is void.
    h. No manufactured home park owner shall:
    1.  Require  a  manufactured home tenant therein to purchase from said
  manufactured home park owner or operator skirting or equipment for tying
  down  manufactured  homes,  or  any  other   equipment.   However,   the
  manufactured  home  park  owner  or  operator  may  determine by rule or
  regulation the style or quality of such equipment to be purchased by the
  manufactured home tenant  from  the  vendor  of  the  manufactured  home
  tenant's choosing, providing such equipment is readily available.
    2.  Charge  any  manufactured  home  tenant  who chooses to install an
  electric or gas appliance in his manufactured  home  an  additional  fee
  solely  on  the  basis  of such installation unless such installation is
  performed by the manufactured home park owner or operator at the request
  of the manufactured home tenant, nor shall the  manufactured  home  park
  owner  or  operator restrict the installation, service or maintenance of
  any such appliance, restrict the ingress or egress of repairers to enter
  the manufactured home park for the purpose of installation,  service  or
  maintenance  of  any  such  appliance,  or  restrict  the  making of any
  interior improvement in such manufactured  home,  so  long  as  such  an
  installation  or  improvement  is in compliance with applicable building
  codes and other provisions of law and  further  provided  that  adequate
  utilities are available for such installation or improvement.
    3. Require, by contract, rule, regulation or otherwise, a manufactured
  home  dweller  to  purchase from the manufactured home park owner or any
  person acting directly or  indirectly  on  behalf  of  the  park  owner,
  commodities  or  services  incidental to placement or rental within such
  park; nor shall the park owner restrict access to the manufactured  home
  park  to  any person employed, retained or requested by the manufactured
  home  dweller  to  provide  such  commodity  or  service,   unless   the
  manufactured  home  park  owner  establishes  that  such  requirement or
  restriction is necessary to protect the property of such park owner from
  substantial harm or impairment.
    4. Require a manufactured home owner  or  a  prospective  manufactured
  home   owner   to  purchase  his  or  her  manufactured  home  from  the
  manufactured home park owner or operator, or from any person or  persons
  designated  by  the  manufactured  home  park owner or operator. Nothing
  herein shall be construed to prevent a manufactured home park  owner  or
  operator  from  requiring that any new manufactured home to be installed
  in his  or  her  manufactured  home  park  comply  with  the  rules  and
  regulations  of  said  manufactured home park or conform to the physical
  facilities then existing for installation of a manufactured home in said
  manufactured home park.
    i. 1. No manufactured home park  owner  or  operator  shall  deny  any
  manufactured  home tenant the right to sell his manufactured home within
  the manufactured home park provided the manufactured home  tenant  shall
  give  to  the  manufactured  home  park  owner  or operator twenty days'
  written   notice  of  his  intention  to  sell,  provided  that  if  the
  manufactured home owner is deceased no such  notice  shall  be  required
  from  the  administrator  or  executor  of  the home owner's estate, and
  provided further that no manufactured home park owner or operator  shall
  restrict access to the manufactured home park to any potential purchaser
  or representatives of any seller unless the manufactured home park owner
  establishes  that  such restriction is necessary to protect the property
  of such park owner or operator from substantial harm or  impairment.  No
  manufactured  home park owner or operator shall require the manufactured
  home owner or subsequent purchaser to remove the manufactured home  from
  the  manufactured home park solely on the basis of the sale thereof. The
  manufactured home park owner  or  operator  may  reserve  the  right  to
  approve  the  purchaser of said manufactured home as a manufactured home
  tenant for the remainder of the seller's or deceased tenant's  term  but
  such  permission  may  not be unreasonably withheld. If the manufactured
  home park owner or operator unreasonably  withholds  his  permission  or
  unreasonably  restricts  access  to  the  manufactured  home  park,  the
  manufactured home tenant or the executor or administrator of a  deceased
  tenant's  estate may recover the costs of the proceedings and attorneys'
  fees if it is found that the manufactured home park  owner  or  operator
  acted in bad faith by withholding permission or restricting access.
    2.  The  manufactured  home  park  owner or operator shall not exact a
  commission or fee with respect to  the  price  realized  by  the  seller
  unless  the  manufactured home park owner or operator has acted as agent
  for the manufactured home owner  in  the  sale  pursuant  to  a  written
  contract.
    3. If the ownership or management rejects a purchaser as a prospective
  tenant,  the  selling  tenant must be informed in writing of the reasons
  therefor.
    j. The owner or operator of a  manufactured  home  park  may  enter  a
  manufactured home owner's manufactured home without the prior consent of
  the  occupant  only  in  case  of  emergency. The owner or operator of a
  manufactured  home  park  may  enter  a   manufactured   home   tenant's
  manufactured home during reasonable hours on reasonable notice.
    k.  The  owner  or  operator  shall  provide  reasonable  notice where
  practicable to all manufactured home tenants who would  be  affected  by
  any  planned  disruption  of  necessary  services  caused  by the owner,
  operator or his agent.
    l. The park owner shall designate an agent on the premises or in close
  proximity to the manufactured home park to insure  the  availability  of
  emergency  response  actions  in  matters  affecting the health, safety,
  well-being and welfare of manufactured home tenants  in  the  park.  The
  designated agent's name, address and telephone number shall be posted in
  a  conspicuous location in the park, given in writing to each tenant and
  registered with appropriate county law enforcement and health  officials
  and local fire officials.
    m.  Warranty  of habitability, maintenance, disruption of services. In
  every written or oral lease  or  rental  agreement  entered  into  by  a
  manufactured  home  tenant, the manufactured home park owner or operator
  shall be deemed to covenant and warrant that the premises so  leased  or
  rented  and  the manufactured home if rented, including rental through a
  rent-to-own contract, and all areas  used  in  connection  therewith  in
  common  with  other manufactured home tenants or residents including all
  roads within the manufactured home park are fit for human habitation and
  for the uses reasonably intended by the parties and that  the  occupants
  of  such  premises  and  such  manufactured homes if rented shall not be
  subjected to any conditions  which  would  be  dangerous,  hazardous  or
  detrimental to their life, health or safety. When any such condition has
  been  caused by the misconduct of the manufactured home tenant or lessee
  or persons under his direction or control, it  shall  not  constitute  a
  breach  of  such covenants and warranties. The rights and obligations of
  the manufactured home park owner or operator and the  manufactured  home
  tenant  shall  be  governed  by  the  provisions of this subdivision and
  subdivisions two and three of section two hundred thirty-five-b of  this
  article.
    n. 1. No manufactured home park owner or operator shall serve a notice
  to  quit  upon  any  manufactured  home tenant or commence any action to
  recover real property or summary proceeding  to  recover  possession  of
  real property in retaliation for:
    (a)  A  good  faith  complaint,  by  or  in behalf of the tenant, to a
  governmental  authority  of  the  manufactured  home  park  owner's   or
  operator's  alleged  violation  of any health or safety law, regulation,
  code, or ordinance, or any law or regulation which has as its  objective
  the regulation of premises used for dwelling purposes; or
    (b)  Actions  taken in good faith, by or in behalf of the manufactured
  home tenant, to secure or enforce any rights under the lease  or  rental
  agreement,  under subdivision m of this section and subdivisions two and
  three of section two hundred thirty-five-b of this article, or under any
  other local law, law of the state of New York, or  of  its  governmental
  subdivisions,  or  of  the  United States which has as its objective the
  regulation of premises used for dwelling purposes; or
    (c) The manufactured home tenant's participation in the activities  of
  a tenant's organization.
    2.  No  manufactured  home  park owner or operator shall substantially
  alter the terms of the tenancy in retaliation for any actions set  forth
  in subparagraphs (a), (b), and (c) of paragraph one of this subdivision.
  Substantial alteration shall include, but is not limited to, the refusal
  to  continue  a  tenancy  of  the  manufactured  home  tenant  or,  upon
  expiration of the manufactured home owner's lease, to renew the lease or
  offer a new lease; provided, however,  that  a  manufactured  home  park
  owner  or operator shall not be required under this subdivision to offer
  a manufactured home owner a new lease or a  lease  renewal  for  a  term
  greater than one year.
    3.  This  subdivision  shall apply to all manufactured home parks with
  four or more manufactured homes. However, its provisions  shall  not  be
  given  effect  in any case in which it is established that the condition
  from which the complaint or action arose was caused by the  manufactured
  home  tenant, a member of the manufactured home tenant's household, or a
  guest of the manufactured home tenant. Nor shall  it  apply  in  a  case
  where  a  tenancy  was  terminated pursuant to the terms of a lease as a
  result of a bona fide transfer of ownership. The rights and  obligations
  of  the  manufactured  home  park owner or operator and the manufactured
  home tenant shall be governed by the provisions of this subdivision  and
  subdivisions  three, four and five of section two hundred twenty-three-b
  of this article.
    o. Whenever a lease shall  provide  that  in  any  action  or  summary
  proceeding  the  manufactured  home  park  owner or operator may recover
  attorney's fees and/or expenses awarded  by  a  court,  there  shall  be
  implied  in such lease a covenant by the manufactured home park owner or
  operator, to pay to the tenant the  reasonable  attorney's  fees  and/or
  expenses  incurred  by  the  tenant to the same extent as is provided in
  section two hundred thirty-four of  this  article  which  section  shall
  apply  in  its  entirety. A manufactured home park owner or operator may
  not demand that a tenant pays attorneys' fees unless such fees have been
  awarded pursuant to a court order.
    p.  Any  manufactured  home  park  owner or operator who has agreed to
  provide hot or cold water, heat, light, power, or any other  service  or
  facility  to any occupant of the manufactured home park who willfully or
  intentionally without just cause fails  to  furnish  such  water,  heat,
  light,  power,  or other service or facility, or who interferes with the
  quiet enjoyment of the leased premises, is guilty of a violation.
    q. Upon receipt of rent, fees, charges or other  assessments,  in  the
  form  of  cash  or  any  instrument other than the personal check of the
  tenant, it shall be the duty of the  manufactured  home  park  owner  or
  operator  to  provide  the  payor  with a written receipt containing the
  following:
    1. the date;
    2. the amount;
    3. the identity of the premises and the period for which paid;
    4. the signature and title of the person receiving rent.
    r. Limitation on late charges. A late charge on any rental payment  by
  a  manufactured home owner which has become due and remains unpaid shall
  not exceed and shall be enforced to the extent of three percent of  such
  delinquent  payment;  provided, however, that no charge shall be imposed
  on any rental payment by a manufactured home owner received  within  ten
  days  after  the due date. In the absence of a specific provision in the
  lease or the manufactured home park's rules  and  regulations,  no  late
  charge  on any delinquent rental payment shall be assessed or collected.
  Late  charges  may  not  be  compounded  and  shall  not  be  considered
  additional rent.
    s.  It  shall  be  a  violation  for  a  manufactured home park owner,
  operator or his agent to restrict occupancy of a  manufactured  home  or
  manufactured  home park lot intended for residential purposes by express
  lease terms or otherwise, to a manufactured home tenant or tenants or to
  such tenants and immediate family. Any such restriction in  a  lease  or
  rental  agreement  entered into or renewed before or after the effective
  date of this  subdivision  shall  be  unenforceable  as  against  public
  policy.  The rights and obligations of a manufactured home park owner or
  operator and the manufactured home  tenant  shall  be  governed  by  the
  provisions  of this subdivision and subdivisions one, three, four, five,
  six, seven, eight and nine of section two hundred thirty-five-f of  this
  article.
    t.  1.  Unless  a greater right to assign is conferred by the lease, a
  manufactured home tenant may not assign his lease  without  the  written
  consent  of  the manufactured home park owner or operator, which consent
  may  be  unconditionally  withheld  without  cause  provided  that   the
  manufactured  home park owner or operator shall release the manufactured
  home tenant from the lease upon request of the mobile home  tenant  upon
  thirty  days  notice  if  the  manufactured  home park owner or operator
  unreasonably withholds consent which release shall be the sole remedy of
  the tenant. If the owner reasonably withholds consent, there shall be no
  assignment and the manufactured home tenant shall not be  released  from
  the lease.
    2. (a) A manufactured home tenant renting space or a manufactured home
  in  a  manufactured  home  park  with  four  or  more manufactured homes
  pursuant to an existing  lease  shall  have  a  right  to  sublease  his
  premises  subject to the written consent of the park owner in advance of
  the subletting. Such consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
    (b) The manufactured home tenant shall inform  the  manufactured  home
  park  owner or operator of his intent to sublease by mailing a notice of
  such intent by certified mail, return receipt  requested.  Such  request
  shall  be  accompanied by the following information: (i) the term of the
  sublease, (ii) the name of the proposed sublessee,  (iii)  the  business
  and  permanent home address of the proposed sublessee, (iv) the tenant's
  reason for subletting, (v) the tenant's address  for  the  term  of  the
  sublease,  (vi) the written consent of any co-tenant or guarantor of the
  lease, and (vii) a copy of the proposed sublease, to which a copy of the
  manufactured  home  tenant's  lease  shall  be  attached  if  available,
  acknowledged  by  the manufactured home tenant and proposed subtenant as
  being a true copy of such sublease.
    (c)  Within  ten  days  after  the  mailing  of  such   request,   the
  manufactured  home  park owner or operator may ask the manufactured home
  tenant for additional information as will enable the  manufactured  home
  park  owner  or operator to determine if rejection of such request shall
  be unreasonable. Any such request for additional information  shall  not
  be  unduly  burdensome.  Within  thirty  days  after  the mailing of the
  request for consent, or of the additional information  reasonably  asked
  for by the manufactured home park owner or operator, whichever is later,
  the  manufactured home park owner or operator shall send a notice to the
  manufactured home tenant of his consent or, if he does not consent,  his
  reasons  therefore.  Manufactured home park owner's or operator's failure
  to send such a notice shall be deemed to be a consent  to  the  proposed
  subletting.  If  the  manufactured home park owner or operator consents,
  the premises may be sublet in  accordance  with  the  request,  but  the
  manufactured  home  tenant  thereunder, shall nevertheless remain liable
  for the performance of manufactured home tenant's obligations under said
  lease. If the  manufactured  home  park  owner  or  operator  reasonably
  withholds  consent,  there  shall  be no subletting and the manufactured
  home tenant shall not be released from the lease.  If  the  manufactured
  home   park  owner  or  operator  unreasonably  withholds  consent,  the
  manufactured home tenant may sublet in accordance with the  request  and
  may  recover  the  costs  of  the proceeding and attorneys fees if it is
  found that the manufactured home park owner or  operator  acted  in  bad
  faith  by  withholding  consent.  The  rights  and  obligations  of  the
  manufactured home park owner  or  operator  and  the  manufactured  home
  tenant  shall  be  governed  by  the  provisions of this subdivision and
  subdivisions three, five, six, seven and eight of  section  two  hundred
  twenty-six-b of this article.
    u.  In  the  event  of  a  breach by a manufactured home park owner or
  operator of any of the requirements of this  section,  the  manufactured
  home  tenant  may  commence an action for damages actually incurred as a
  result of such breach, or in an action or summary  proceeding  commenced
  by  such  manufactured home park owner or operator, may counterclaim for
  damages occasioned by such breach.
    v. 1. On and after April  first,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-nine,  the
  commissioner  of  housing and community renewal shall have the power and
  duty to enforce and  ensure  compliance  with  the  provisions  of  this
  section.  However,  the commissioner shall not have the power or duty to
  enforce manufactured home park rules and regulations  established  under
  subdivision of this section.
    2.  On  or  before  January  first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine, each
  manufactured home park owner  or  operator  shall  file  a  registration
  statement  with  the  commissioner  and  shall thereafter file an annual
  registration statement on or before January  first  of  each  succeeding
  year.   The   commissioner,  by  regulation,  shall  provide  that  such
  registration statement shall include  only  the  names  of  all  persons
  owning  an  interest  in the park, the names of all tenants of the park,
  all services provided by the park owner to the tenants and a copy of all
  current manufactured home park rules and regulations. The  reporting  of
  such information to the commissioner of taxation and finance pursuant to
  subparagraph  (B)  of  paragraph  six of subsection (eee) of section six
  hundred  six  of the tax law shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements
  of this  paragraph.  That  the  commissioner  may  not  be  the  primary
  recipient  of  such  registration  statement  shall  not be construed to
  limit, alter or diminish the ability or responsibility of  the  division
  of  housing  and  community  renewal  in  regards to enforcement of this
  section or any other  applicable  laws.  The  commissioner  may  request
  additional  or  corrected  information  to be filed by each manufactured
  home park owner or operator as he or she deems necessary  to  carry  out
  proper oversight of such manufactured home parks. The commissioner shall
  annually  make  publicly  available  on its website a report of the data
  collected pursuant to this subdivision or subparagraph (B) of  paragraph
  six  of  subsection (eee) of section six hundred six of the tax law, not
  including any personally identifiable information.
    3. Whenever there shall be a violation of this section, an application
  may be made by the commissioner of housing and community renewal in  the
  name of the people of the state of New York to a court or justice having
  jurisdiction  by  a  special proceeding to issue an injunction, and upon
  notice to the defendant of not  less  than  five  days,  to  enjoin  and
  restrain  the  continuance  of such violation; and if it shall appear to
  the satisfaction of the court or justice  that  the  defendant  has,  in
  fact,  violated  this section, an injunction may be issued by such court
  or justice, enjoining and restraining any  further  violation  and  with
  respect  to  this  subdivision,  directing  the filing of a registration
  statement. In any such proceeding, the court may make allowances to  the
  commissioner of housing and community renewal of a sum not exceeding two
  thousand   dollars  against  each  defendant,  and  direct  restitution.
  Whenever the court shall determine that a violation of this section  has
  occurred,  the  court  may  impose  a civil penalty of not more than one
  thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. Such penalty shall  be
  deposited in the manufactured home cooperative fund, created pursuant to
  section  fifty-nine-h  of the private housing finance law. In connection
  with any such proposed application,  the  commissioner  of  housing  and
  community  renewal  is authorized to take proof and make a determination
  of the relevant facts and to issue  subpoenas  in  accordance  with  the
  civil  practice  law and rules. The provisions of this subdivision shall
  not impair the rights granted under subdivision u of this section.
    w. Real property tax payments. 1.  A  manufactured  home  park  owner,
  operator  or the agent of such owner or operator shall reduce the annual
  rent paid by a manufactured home tenant for use of the land  upon  which
  such  manufactured home sits in an amount equal to the total of the real
  property taxes actually paid by such manufactured home tenant  for  such
  manufactured   home   plus  the  amount  by  which  the  taxes  on  such
  manufactured home were reduced as a result of the partial real  property
  tax  exemption  granted  to  the  manufactured  home  tenant pursuant to
  article four of the real property tax law,  provided  such  manufactured
  home tenant:
    (a)  owns a manufactured home which is separately assessed, subject to
  the provisions of paragraph two of this subdivision;
    (b) is entitled to and actually receives a partial real  property  tax
  exemption pursuant to article four of the real property tax law; and
    (c) pays the real property taxes due on such home.
    3. A manufactured home park owner or operator providing a reduction in
  rent  as  required  by  paragraph one of this subdivision may retain, in
  consideration for record keeping expenses, two percent of the amount  of
  such reduction.
    3-a.  Any  reduction required to be provided pursuant to paragraph one
  of this subdivision shall be provided as follows:
    (a)  a  reduction  in  monthly rent (prorating the reduction in twelve
  parts) shall take effect upon the first monthly rental payment due sixty
  days after the last date for the payment of real property taxes with  no
  penalty  or  interest  for  lateness  and  shall be extended to the next
  eleven monthly payments thereafter; or
    (b) with the consent of the manufactured home park owner, operator, or
  agent of such owner or operator, a reduction in rent may  be  offset  in
  the  entire  amount  of  such reduction against the first monthly rental
  payment due sixty days after the last  date  for  the  payment  of  real
  property taxes with no penalty or interest for lateness, and the balance
  thereof,  if  any, may be offset against the monthly rental payments for
  succeeding months, until exhausted; or
    (c) at the election of the manufactured home park owner, operator,  or
  agent  of  such owner or operator, the total amount of such reduction in
  rent may be paid to the tenant no later than sixty days after  the  last
  date  for the payment of real property taxes with no penalty or interest
  for lateness.
    4. The failure of a manufactured home park owner or operator to comply
  with the provisions of this subdivision shall be a violation  punishable
  by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars for each violation.
    x.  1.  Rent  and  other  fees,  charges  and  assessments  may not be
  increased by a manufactured home park owner or operator more  than  once
  in any year.
    2.   Notwithstanding   the   provisions   of  paragraph  one  of  this
  subdivision,  if  a  fee,  charge,  or  assessment  in  effect  at   the
  commencement  of a lease or tenancy is for goods or services provided by
  a party unrelated to and not controlled by the  manufactured  home  park
  owner  or  operator,  the  manufactured home park owner or operator may,
  upon the notice required in this section, provide for the pass-along  to
  the  manufactured  home  tenant  of any increases in such fee, charge or
  assessment.
    3. Any agreement modifying  any  of  the  rights  set  forth  in  this
  subdivision shall be void as contrary to public policy.
    y.  1.  No  manufactured  home  park  owner or operator shall offer or
  execute a rent-to-own contract unless the  manufactured  park  owner  or
  operator  possesses documentation of ownership of the manufactured home,
  including a certificate  of  title  to  the  home,  if  the  home  is  a
  manufactured  home subject to being titled pursuant to article forty-six
  of the vehicle and traffic law, or for mobile homes not subject to being
  titled pursuant to such law, such other documentation, which may include
  a bill of sale, or deed, sufficient to establish ownership.
    2. Every rent-to-own contract shall be in writing  and  clearly  state
  all terms, including but not limited to: a description of the home to be
  leased,  including  the  name of the manufacturer, the serial number and
  the year of manufacture; the site number upon which the home is  located
  in  the manufactured home park; an itemized statement of any payments to
  be made during the term of the contract, including the initial lot rent,
  the rental amount for the  home,  and  the  amount  of  the  rent-to-own
  payments;  the  term of the agreement; the number of payments, itemized,
  required to be made over the term of the agreement; any lien or security
  interest encumbering the manufactured or mobile home, if applicable; and
  the amount of any  additional  fees  to  be  paid  during  the  term.  A
  rent-to-own contract shall not require a manufactured home tenant to pay
  any  additional  fees  for transfer of ownership at the end of the lease
  period. A rent-to-own contract shall provide that where the  rent-to-own
  tenant  pays  all rent-to-own payments and other fees established in the
  contract during the lease term, title transferred  at  the  end  of  the
  lease term shall be free of superior interests, liens or encumbrances.
    3.  Valuations  used  to  determine  the  fair  market  value  of  the
  manufactured home at the time the rent-to-own contract is entered  into,
  shall  be  based  on  the information provided by an independent system,
  entity, publication or publications that provide  valuation  information
  for  manufactured  homes  adjusted,  as  appropriate,  by reasonable and
  identifiable regional  market  data,  such  as  location,  park-specific
  amenities, trends and comparable sales.
    4.   Every   rent-to-own   contract   shall  clearly  state  that  the
  manufactured home tenant is occupying a rented home, until ownership  is
  transferred,  and  that  the  manufactured  home park owner and operator
  shall be responsible for compliance with the warranty  of  habitability,
  including but not limited to all major repairs and capital improvements.
    5.  With the execution of every rent-to-own contract, the manufactured
  home park owner or operator shall offer the manufactured home  tenant  a
  lease  for  the  site  on  which  the  home  is  located  as provided in
  subdivision f of this section, and,  if  the  term  of  the  rent-to-own
  contract  is longer than the term of the initial site lease, shall offer
  renewal leases on the  same  terms  as  provided  to  manufactured  home
  tenants  within  the  park  pursuant  to  subdivision e of this section,
  provided that such renewal lease may not include a rent increase greater
  than that imposed on similarly situated manufactured home  tenants  that
  own their home within the park.
    6.  The  manufactured  home  park owner or operator shall provide each
  manufactured home tenant who is a party to  a  rent-to-own  contract  an
  itemized   accounting   listing   all  payments  made  pursuant  to  the
  rent-to-own contract. Such accounting shall be  provided  no  less  than
  once each year, beginning one year from the execution of the rent-to-own
  contract.  Upon  request by a manufactured home tenant, the manufactured
  home park owner or operator shall provide such an accounting within  ten
  days of such request.
    7.  Any  successor to ownership of the manufactured home park shall be
  bound by the terms of a rent-to-own  contract  entered  into  after  the
  effective date of this subdivision.
    8.  If  a  manufactured  home  tenant's  tenancy  is terminated by the
  manufactured  home  park  owner  or  operator  during  the  term  of   a
  rent-to-own  contract,  all rent-to-own payments made during the term of
  the contract shall be refunded to the manufactured  home  tenant;  if  a
  manufactured  home park owner or operator fails to refund such payments,
  in an eviction proceeding, the court may  award  the  manufactured  home
  renter  damages in the amount of the rent-to-own payments which have not
  been refunded.
    9. It is a violation of this section  for  a  manufactured  home  park
  owner or operator to make any material misrepresentation, either written
  or  oral,  regarding  any  of the terms of a rent-to-own contract, or to
  obtain, or attempt to obtain, a waiver from any manufactured home renter
  of any protection or right provided under this subdivision.
    10. (i) If a manufactured home park owner  or  operator  violates  the
  provisions  of this subdivision or wrongfully evicts a manufactured home
  tenant who is a party to a  rent-to-own  contract,  a  court  may  award
  damages   including   treble   the  economic  damages  suffered  by  the
  manufactured home tenant, which may include  all  rent-to-own  payments.
  The  court  may  also  provide for reasonable attorney fees and costs of
  litigation, and other equitable relief.
    (ii) Failure of the manufactured home park owner or operator to comply
  with  this  section  shall  give  the  manufactured  home   renter   the
  unconditional  right  to  cancel  the  rent-to-own  contract and receive
  immediate refund of all payments and deposits made on account of  or  in
  contemplation of the lease with the rent-to-own contract.
    11.  The provisions of this section apply to rent-to-own contracts and
  tenants with rent-to-own contracts.


§  233-a.  Sale of manufactured home parks. 1. Whenever used in this
  section:
    (a) The term "notify" shall mean the placing of a notice in the United
  States mail, addressed to the officers of the  manufactured  homeowners'
  association  or  the  manufactured  home  park  owner by certified mail,
  return receipt requested, or personal delivery upon the officers of  the
  manufactured  homeowners' association, or if no manufactured homeowners'
  association exists, upon all manufactured homeowners in the manufactured
  home park or the manufactured home park owner. Each such notice shall be
  deemed to have been given upon the deposit of the notice in  the  United
  States mail or upon receipt of personal delivery.
    (b)   The   term   "manufactured   homeowners'  association",  whether
  incorporated or not, shall mean an association  of  at  least  fifty-one
  percent  of  all  manufactured  homeowners  within the manufactured home
  park, who shall have given written consent  to  forming  a  manufactured
  homeowners'  association,  and  which  association has notified the park
  owner of its establishment and has provided to the park owner the  names
  and  addresses  of  the  officers of such association. The provisions of
  section two hundred twenty-three-b of this article shall  apply  to  the
  formation of a manufactured homeowners' association.
    2. (a) If a manufactured home park owner receives a bona fide offer to
  purchase a manufactured home park that such manufactured home park owner
  intends  to  accept,  or  respond with a counteroffer, such manufactured
  home park owner shall require the prospective purchaser to  provide,  in
  writing,   the   certification   required   by  paragraph  (b)  of  this
  subdivision, and shall not accept any offer  to  purchase,  nor  respond
  with a counteroffer until such manufactured home park owner has received
  such certification and met the requirements of this section.
    (b)  A  purchaser seeking to purchase a manufactured home park, or the
  land upon which a manufactured home park is located, shall provide  such
  owner  with  a  written  letter  certifying whether or not the purchaser
  will, upon the closing of the sale of the park, or within  sixty  months
  of  such  closing, give the notice required pursuant to paragraph six of
  subdivision b of section two hundred thirty-three of  this  article,  of
  its  intention  to use the land upon which the manufactured home park is
  located for a purpose other than manufactured home lot rentals.
    (c) If a manufactured home park owner takes any action  to  market  or
  offer  the  park  for  sale, or receives a bona fide offer to purchase a
  manufactured home park that such manufactured home park owner intends to
  accept or respond to with a counteroffer, a manufactured home park owner
  shall include a notice stating  that  such  acceptance  or  counteroffer
  shall be subject to the right of the homeowners of the manufactured home
  park   to   purchase   the  manufactured  home  park  pursuant  to  this
  subdivision. Notwithstanding any provision of law or  agreement  to  the
  contrary,  every  agreement  to  purchase  a manufactured home park by a
  prospective purchaser of a manufactured home park shall  be  subject  to
  the  right  of  the homeowners of the manufactured home park to purchase
  the manufactured home park pursuant to this subdivision if the purchaser
  certifies pursuant to paragraph (b) of this subdivision that he  or  she
  intends to change the use of the land.
    * 3.  (a) If a manufactured home park owner receives a bona fide offer
  to purchase a manufactured home park that such  manufactured  home  park
  owner  intends  to  accept  or  respond  to with a counteroffer, and the
  purchaser has certified pursuant to paragraph (b) of subdivision two  of
  this  section  that  he  intends  to  change  the  use of the land, such
  manufactured home park owner shall notify:
    (i) the officers of the manufactured  homeowners'  association  within
  such  park  of  all  the terms thereof; provided that the park owner has
  been  notified  of  the  establishment  of  a  manufactured  homeowners'
  association  and  been  provided  with  the  names  and addresses of the
  officers of such association; or
    (ii) if no homeowners' association exists, all manufactured homeowners
  in the manufactured home park; and
    (iii) the commissioner of housing and community renewal.
    (b) The manufactured home park owner's notification shall state:
    (i) the price;
    (ii)  the  material  terms  and  conditions  of  sale  upon which such
  manufactured home park owner would sell the park;
    (iii) that the manufactured homeowners have the right  to  organize  a
  manufactured  homeowners'  association  or  a  manufactured  homeowners'
  cooperative for the park;
    (iv) that purchase financing may be available  through  the  New  York
  state homes and community renewal; and
    (v)  that  the manufactured homeowners' association, a cooperative, or
  manufactured home owners or tenants  have  one  hundred  forty  days  to
  exercise  their  right  to  purchase  the  park  in accordance with this
  section.
    (c) (i) If a manufactured homeowners' association exists at  the  time
  of the offer, the association shall have the right to purchase the park;
  provided  that  the association shall have delivered to the manufactured
  home park owner an executed offer to purchase which meets the  identical
  price,  terms,  and  conditions of the offer or counteroffer provided in
  the notice of the manufactured home park owner within one hundred  forty
  days  of receipt of notice from the manufactured home park owner, unless
  otherwise agreed to in writing. During this time period, the park  owner
  shall not accept a final unconditional offer to purchase the park.
    (ii)  If  an  offer  to  purchase  by the association is not delivered
  within such one hundred forty day period, then, unless  the  park  owner
  thereafter  elects  to  offer to sell the park at a price lower than the
  price specified in the notice to the homeowners' association or at terms
  substantially different from those presented  to  the  association,  the
  park owner has no further obligations under this section.
    (iii)  If  the  park  owner,  after such one hundred forty day period,
  elects to offer to sell the  park  at  a  price  lower  than  the  price
  specified  in  the notice given or at terms substantially different from
  those previously presented to  the  association,  then  the  association
  shall  be entitled to notice thereof and shall have an additional thirty
  days after receipt of notice of the revised terms to deliver to the park
  owner an executed offer to  purchase  which  meets  the  revised  price,
  terms, and conditions as presented by the park owner.
    (d) (i) If there is no existing homeowners' association at the time of
  the  offer,  the  homeowners  shall have the right to purchase the park;
  provided the following conditions are met:
    (A) The manufactured  homeowners  shall  have  the  right  to  form  a
  manufactured homeowners' association, whether incorporated or not.
    (B)  Such  homeowners'  association  shall  include at least fifty-one
  percent of all manufactured homeowners, who  shall  have  given  written
  consent   to   forming   a  manufactured  homeowners'  association.  The
  provisions of section two hundred twenty-three-b of this  article  shall
  apply to the formation of a manufactured homeowners' association.
    (C)  The  association,  acting  through its officers, shall have given
  notice to the park owner of its formation, the names  and  addresses  of
  its  officers,  and  delivered an executed offer to purchase the park at
  the identical price, terms, and conditions of the offer presented in the
  notification given by the park owner within one hundred  forty  days  of
  receipt  of  notice  from  the park owner, unless otherwise agreed to in
  writing. During this time period, the park  owner  shall  not  accept  a
  final unconditional offer to purchase the park.
    (ii)  If  the  homeowners  fail  to  form  a  manufactured homeowners'
  association, or if upon the  formation  of  a  manufactured  homeowners'
  association,  the  association  does  not  deliver  an executed offer to
  purchase as set forth in paragraph (a) of this  subdivision  within  the
  one  hundred  forty  day  period,  then, unless the park owner elects to
  offer the park at a price lower than the price specified in  the  notice
  previously  presented  to  the homeowners, the park owner has no further
  obligation under this section; and
    (iii) If the park owner thereafter elects to sell the park at a  price
  lower  than  the  price  specified in the notice to the homeowners or at
  terms substantially different from those previously presented, then  the
  association shall have an additional thirty days after receipt of notice
  of  the  revised terms to deliver to the park owner an executed offer to
  purchase which  meets  the  revised  price,  terms,  and  conditions  as
  presented by the park owner.
    * NB There are 2 sb 3's
    * 3. This section does not apply to:
    (a)  Any  conveyance  of  an  interest  in  a  manufactured  home park
  incidental to the financing of such manufactured home park.
    (b) The purchase of a manufactured home park by a governmental  entity
  under its powers of eminent domain.
    * NB There are 2 sb 3's
    4.   Nothing  in  this  section  shall  be  construed  to  compel  the
  manufactured home  park  owner  to  divide  the  land  and  sell  it  to
  individual manufactured homeowners.
    * NB Effective until April 22, 2024
    * §  233-a.  Sale of manufactured home parks. 1. Whenever used in this
  section:
    (a) The term "notify" shall mean the placing of a notice in the United
  States mail, addressed to the officers of the  manufactured  homeowners'
  association  or  the  manufactured  home  park  owner by certified mail,
  return receipt requested, or personal delivery upon the officers of  the
  manufactured  homeowners' association, or if no manufactured homeowners'
  association exists, upon all manufactured homeowners in the manufactured
  home park or the manufactured home park owner. Each such notice shall be
  deemed to have been given upon the deposit of the notice in  the  United
  States mail or upon receipt of personal delivery.
    (b)   The   term   "manufactured   homeowners'  association",  whether
  incorporated or not,  shall  mean  an  association  greater  than  fifty
  percent  of  all  manufactured  homeowners  within the manufactured home
  park, who shall have given written consent  to  forming  a  manufactured
  homeowners'  association,  and  which  association has notified the park
  owner of its establishment and has provided to the park owner the  names
  and  addresses  of  the  officers of such association. The provisions of
  section two hundred twenty-three-b of this article shall  apply  to  the
  formation of a manufactured homeowners' association.
    2.  If  a  manufactured  home park owner takes any action to market or
  offer the park for sale, or receives a bona fide  offer  to  purchase  a
  manufactured home park that such manufactured home park owner intends to
  accept or respond to with a counteroffer, a manufactured home park owner
  shall  include  a  notice  stating  that such acceptance or counteroffer
  shall be subject to the right of the homeowners of the manufactured home
  park  to  purchase  the  manufactured  home  park   pursuant   to   this
  subdivision.  Notwithstanding  any  provision of law or agreement to the
  contrary, every agreement to purchase a  manufactured  home  park  by  a
  prospective  purchaser  of  a manufactured home park shall be subject to
  the right of the homeowners of the manufactured home  park  to  purchase
  the manufactured home park pursuant to this subdivision.
    3. (a) If a manufactured home park owner receives a bona fide offer to
  purchase a manufactured home park that such manufactured home park owner
  intends  to  accept or respond to with a counteroffer, such manufactured
  home park owner shall notify:
    (i) the officers of the manufactured  homeowners'  association  within
  such  park  of  all  the terms thereof; provided that the park owner has
  been  notified  of  the  establishment  of  a  manufactured  homeowners'
  association  and  been  provided  with  the  names  and addresses of the
  officers of such association; or
    (ii) if no homeowners' association exists, all manufactured homeowners
  in the manufactured home park; and
    (iii) the commissioner of housing and community renewal.
    (b) The manufactured home park owner's notification shall state:
    (i) the price;
    (ii) the material  terms  and  conditions  of  sale  upon  which  such
  manufactured home park owner would sell the park;
    (iii)  that  the  manufactured homeowners have the right to organize a
  manufactured  homeowners'  association  or  a  manufactured  homeowners'
  cooperative for the park;
    (iv)  that  purchase  financing  may be available through the New York
  state homes and community renewal; and
    (v) that the manufactured homeowners' association, a  cooperative,  or
  manufactured  home  owners  or  tenants  have  one hundred forty days to
  exercise their right to  purchase  the  park  in  accordance  with  this
  section.
    (c)  (i)  If a manufactured homeowners' association exists at the time
  of the offer, the association shall, within sixty  days  of  receipt  of
  notice from the park owner, deliver to the park owner a notice of intent
  to  make  an offer to purchase the park. If such notice is not delivered
  within the sixty days, the park owner has no  further  obligation  under
  this section.
    (ii)  If the manufactured homeowners' association delivers such intent
  to the park owner as required by subparagraph (i) of this paragraph, the
  association shall have the right to purchase the park; provided that the
  association shall have delivered to the manufactured home park owner  an
  executed  offer  to purchase which meets the identical price, terms, and
  conditions of the offer or counteroffer provided in the  notice  of  the
  manufactured home park owner within one hundred forty days of receipt of
  notice from the manufactured home park owner, unless otherwise agreed to
  in  writing.  During this time period, the park owner shall not accept a
  final unconditional offer to purchase the park.
    (iii) If an offer to purchase by  the  association  is  not  delivered
  within  such  one  hundred forty day period, then, unless the park owner
  thereafter elects to offer to sell the park at a price  lower  than  the
  price specified in the notice to the homeowners' association or at terms
  substantially  different  from  those  presented to the association, the
  park owner has no further obligations under this section.
    (iv) If the park owner, after  such  one  hundred  forty  day  period,
  elects  to  offer  to  sell  the  park  at  a price lower than the price
  specified in the notice given or at terms substantially  different  from
  those  previously  presented  to  the  association, then the association
  shall be entitled to notice thereof and shall have an additional  thirty
  days after receipt of notice of the revised terms to deliver to the park
  owner  an  executed  offer  to  purchase  which meets the revised price,
  terms, and conditions as presented by the park owner.
    (d) (i) If there is no existing homeowners' association at the time of
  the offer, the homeowners shall, within sixty days of receipt of  notice
  from  the  park  owner,  deliver to the park owner a notice of intent to
  make an offer to purchase the  park.  Such  notice  must  be  signed  by
  greater  than  fifty  percent of all the manufactured home owners within
  the manufactured home park. If such notice is not delivered  within  the
  sixty days, the park owner has no further obligation under this section.
  If  such  notice  is properly provided within sixty days, the homeowners
  shall have the right  to  purchase  the  park;  provided  the  following
  conditions are met:
    (A)  The  manufactured  homeowners  shall  have  the  right  to form a
  manufactured homeowners' association, whether incorporated or not.
    (B) Such homeowners' association  shall  include  greater  than  fifty
  percent  of  all  manufactured  homeowners, who shall have given written
  consent  to  forming  a  manufactured   homeowners'   association.   The
  provisions  of  section two hundred twenty-three-b of this article shall
  apply to the formation of a manufactured homeowners' association.
    (C) The association, acting through its  officers,  shall  have  given
  notice  to  the  park owner of its formation, the names and addresses of
  its officers, and delivered an executed offer to purchase  the  park  at
  the identical price, terms, and conditions of the offer presented in the
  notification  given  by  the park owner within one hundred forty days of
  receipt of notice from the park owner, unless  otherwise  agreed  to  in
  writing.  During  this  time  period,  the park owner shall not accept a
  final unconditional offer to purchase the park;
    (ii) If  the  homeowners  fail  to  form  a  manufactured  homeowners'
  association,  or  if  upon  the  formation of a manufactured homeowners'
  association, the association does  not  deliver  an  executed  offer  to
  purchase  as  set  forth in paragraph (a) of this subdivision within the
  one hundred forty day period, then, unless  the  park  owner  elects  to
  offer  the  park at a price lower than the price specified in the notice
  previously presented to the homeowners, the park owner  has  no  further
  obligation under this section; and
    (iii)  If the park owner thereafter elects to sell the park at a price
  lower than the price specified in the notice to  the  homeowners  or  at
  terms  substantially different from those previously presented, then the
  association shall have an additional thirty days after receipt of notice
  of the revised terms to deliver to the park owner an executed  offer  to
  purchase  which  meets  the  revised  price,  terms,  and  conditions as
  presented by the park owner.
    4. This section does not apply to:
    (a) Any  conveyance  of  an  interest  in  a  manufactured  home  park
  incidental to the financing of such manufactured home park.
    (b)  The purchase of a manufactured home park by a governmental entity
  under its powers of eminent domain.
    5.  Nothing  in  this  section  shall  be  construed  to  compel   the
  manufactured  home  park  owner  to  divide  the  land  and  sell  it to
  individual manufactured homeowners.
    * NB Effective April 22, 2024
§  233-b. Manufactured home parks; rent increases. 1. The provisions
  of this section shall apply to  all  manufactured  homes  located  in  a
  manufactured home park as defined in section two hundred thirty-three of
  this  article,  however  manufactured homes located in manufactured home
  parks that are subject to a regulatory  agreement  with  a  governmental
  entity  to  preserve  affordable  housing  or that otherwise limits rent
  increases are exempt from the provisions of this section.
    2. Increases in rent shall not exceed a three percent  increase  above
  the  rent since the current rent became effective. In this section, rent
  shall mean all costs, including all rent,  fees,  charges,  assessments,
  and utilities. Notwithstanding the above, a manufactured home park owner
  is  permitted  to increase the rent in excess of three percent above the
  rent since the current rent became effective, due to:
    (a)  Increases  in  the  manufactured  home  park  owner's   operating
  expenses.
    (b)  Increases in the manufactured home park owner's property taxes on
  such park.
    (c)  Increases  in  costs  which  are  directly  related  to   capital
  improvements in the park.
    3.  An  increase above three percent may be challenged by an aggrieved
  manufactured homeowner as unjustified. Multiple  aggrieved  manufactured
  homeowners  may join in the same action where there is a common question
  of law and fact.
    4.  Within  ninety  days  of  the  proposed  increase,  an   aggrieved
  manufactured  homeowner  may challenge such increase by filing an action
  in the court of appropriate subject matter jurisdiction where  the  real
  property  is  located  seeking  a  declaratory  judgment  that  the rent
  increase is unjustifiable.
    5. In any proceeding under this section there shall be an irrebuttable
  presumption that a rent increase is justifiable when the amount of  such
  increase  does not exceed the tenant's pro-rata share in operating costs
  and  property  taxes  for  the  manufactured  home  park  in  which  the
  manufactured home owner resides.
    6.  (a)  In  determining  whether  a rent increase is permissible, the
  court shall consider the provisions of paragraphs (a), (b)  and  (c)  of
  subdivision  two  of  this  section.  Notwithstanding  the  above,  rent
  increases shall not exceed six percent above the rent since the  current
  rent  became effective, except upon the approval of a temporary hardship
  application by  the  court.  In  addition  to  the  provisions  of  this
  paragraph and paragraphs (b) and (c) of this subdivision the court shall
  take  into  account  the  following  factors when determining whether to
  grant a temporary hardship application:
    (i) The amount of increase being sought by the park owners;
    (ii) The ability of the manufactured home owner to pay  such  increase
  including whether the increase would have an unreasonable adverse impact
  on the manufactured home owner;
    (iii)  The  amount  of time and notice the manufactured home owner may
  need in order to pay a temporary rent increase;
    (iv) The duration the  park  owners  intend  for  the  temporary  rent
  increase to last;
    (v)  The cause of the hardship the rent increase is being requested to
  alleviate, including whether the hardship was due  to  owner  negligence
  and malfeasance;
    (vi)  The  ability of the park owners to utilize other means besides a
  rent increase to alleviate said hardship;
    (vii) The likelihood that the property the manufactured home  park  is
  located  on  will go into foreclosure if a temporary rent increase above
  six percent is not granted;
    (viii) Any other factor that will jeopardize the ability of  the  park
  to legally operate.
    (b)  A  court  order  approving a temporary hardship application shall
  state for each manufactured home owner:
    (i) The amount of the rent increase;
    (ii) The date the rent increase is to take effect;
    (iii) The date the increase is to end;
    (iv) The amount the rent will return to; and
    (v) The court's findings as to the factors necessitating  a  temporary
  increase.
    (c) Upon a finding by the court that the manufactured home park should
  be  granted  a hardship exemption, the amount of any rent increase shall
  be the minimum amount to alleviate the hardship.  An  order  granting  a
  temporary  rent  increase shall not exceed six months. The order must be
  served on the manufactured home  owners  and  all  known  legal  tenants
  pursuant to the rules of civil procedure within thirty days of the court
  order, the cost of which shall be on the manufactured home park owner.
    7.  The court may condition its approval of any rent increase upon the
  redress of conditions in the manufactured home park which  threaten  the
  health and safety of the manufactured home tenant.
    8.  While  a  challenge to a rent increase pursuant to this section is
  pending, manufactured home park tenants shall pay the amount of the rent
  increase to the manufactured home park owner who shall hold such amounts
  in escrow pending a mediated agreement between the parties  or  a  final
  decision  from  the courts, provided, however, that no manufactured home
  park tenant shall be evicted for non-payment of the rent increase  prior
  to  the final disposition of the matter by the court in the county where
  the manufactured home park is located. Failure by the manufactured  home
  park  owner  to  place  such challenged rent increase in escrow shall be
  punishable by a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars.  If
  the  petitioners appeal, the manufactured home park owner may remove the
  rent increase funds from escrow, mingle such funds with any other funds,
  and commence  a  nonpayment  proceeding  in  the  court  of  appropriate
  jurisdiction  against a tenant who has not paid the increase of rent. If
  the court enters a final judgment declaring the rent  increases  or  any
  part thereof unjustifiable and impermissible, the manufactured home park
  owner  shall  refund  the  amount  of the impermissible increase to each
  tenant household.
    * NB There are 2 § 233-b's


§ 233-b. Campgrounds. a. Whenever used in this section:
    1. "Campground" means any parcel or tract of land, including buildings
  or other structures, where five or more campsites are made available for
  use  as  temporary  living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or
  seasonal use. For  purposes  of  this  section,  campgrounds  shall  not
  include land owned by the state of New York.
    2.  "Campground  owner" means the owner or operator of a campground or
  an agent of such owner or operator.
    3. "Guest" means a person who  occupies  a  campsite  pursuant  to  an
  agreement with a term of more than one week.
    b.  1.  A  campground  owner  may  request any law enforcement officer
  remove any guest who willfully denies other guests their right to  quiet
  enjoyment  of  the  campground, including, but not limited, to any guest
  who:
    (a) disturbs, threatens or endangers other guests;
    (b) is less than twenty-one years of age and possesses alcohol;
    (c) possesses illegal drugs;
    (d) violates any state or local law; or
    (e) violates any other lawful rule or  regulation  of  the  campground
  that enhances the safety and quiet enjoyment of its guests and is posted
  in  a  conspicuous  place  or  made  a  part  of  the  guest's occupancy
  agreement.
    2. the right to request a guest to be removed by any  law  enforcement
  officer  can  only  be exercised after the campground owner or its agent
  has provided the guest with written warning  that  his  or  her  conduct
  shall  result in a removal from the campground if it is repeated. In the
  event that such conduct is repeated and the guest fails  to  vacate  the
  campground  upon being requested to do so, the campground owner may only
  cause the guest to be removed by a law enforcement officer, who may cite
  the guest with trespass.
    c. A person who is removed from a campground pursuant to subdivision b
  of this section shall be entitled to a refund of the unused  portion  of
  any prepaid fees, less any amount otherwise owed to the campground owner
  or  deducted  for  damages,  which unused portion of prepaid fees may be
  prorated at a rate that is based upon the  daily  rate  charged  by  the
  campground owner.
    d. A campground owner may remove property belonging to a person who is
  removed from a campground pursuant to subdivision b of this section from
  a campsite and such property, whether removed from a campsite or allowed
  to  remain  on  a  campsite,  shall be deemed to be placed in storage. A
  campground owner shall provide the owner of such  property  thirty  days
  written  notice,  by certified mail, return receipt requested, to remove
  such property and dispose of such property pursuant to article  nine  of
  the lien law in the event the owner fails to remove such property within
  the thirty-day period of time.
    * NB There are 2 § 233-b's


§  234.  Right  to  recover  attorneys'  fees  in  actions  or summary
  proceedings arising out of leases of residential property. 1. Whenever a
  lease of residential property  shall  provide  that  in  any  action  or
  summary  proceeding  the  landlord  may  recover  attorneys' fees and/or
  expenses incurred as the result of the failure of the tenant to  perform
  any  covenant or agreement contained in such lease, or that amounts paid
  by the landlord therefor shall be paid by the tenant as additional rent,
  there shall be implied in such lease a covenant by the landlord  to  pay
  to the tenant the reasonable attorneys' fees and/or expenses incurred by
  the  tenant  as the result of the failure of the landlord to perform any
  covenant or agreement on its part to be performed under the lease or  in
  the  successful defense of any action or summary proceeding commenced by
  the landlord against the  tenant  arising  out  of  the  lease,  and  an
  agreement  that  such  fees and expenses may be recovered as provided by
  law  in  an  action  commenced  against  the  landlord  or  by  way   of
  counterclaim  in  any  action  or  summary  proceeding  commenced by the
  landlord against the tenant. A landlord may not recover attorneys'  fees
  upon  a  default  judgment.  Any waiver of this section shall be void as
  against public policy.
    2. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one of this  section,
  where  a tenant is a dwelling unit owner or shareholder of a cooperative
  housing  corporation,  other  than  a  cooperative  housing  corporation
  subject  to the provisions of article two, article four, article five or
  article eleven of the private housing finance law, attorney's  fees  may
  be  awarded to either party in the event of default judgment if recovery
  of attorney's fees is provided for in the proprietary lease or occupancy
  Agreement.


§  234-a.  Unauthorized  legal  fees.  (a)  An  owner, lessor or agent
  thereof shall be prohibited from assessing a lessee any  fee,  surcharge
  or  other charges for legal services in connection with the operation or
  rental of a residential unit unless the owner, lessor or agent  has  the
  legal  authority  to  do so pursuant to a court order. The provisions of
  this subdivision shall not apply  to  a  shareholder  of  a  cooperative
  housing  corporation,  provided,  however,  that  the provisions of this
  subdivision shall apply with respect to any tenant or subtenant of  such
  a shareholder.
    (b)  Legal services include, but are not limited to, court fees, legal
  representation, attorney fees, notary public charges, and administrative
  fees  incurred  by  the  owner,  lessor  or  agent  in  connection  with
  management of the building, including actions and proceedings in a court
  of law.
    (c) Any agreement or assessment contrary to this section shall be void
  as contrary to public policy.


§   235.   Wilful   violations.   1.   Any   lessor,  agent,  manager,
  superintendent or janitor of any building, or part thereof, the lease or
  rental agreement whereof by its terms, expressed  or  implied,  requires
  the  furnishing  of  hot  or  cold  water,  heat, light, power, elevator
  service, telephone service or any  other  service  or  facility  to  any
  occupant  of  said  building,  who  wilfully  or  intentionally fails to
  furnish such water, heat,  light,  power,  elevator  service,  telephone
  service  or  other  service  or  facility  at any time when the same are
  necessary to the proper or customary  use  of  such  building,  or  part
  thereof,  or  any  lessor, agent, manager, superintendent or janitor who
  wilfully and intentionally interferes with the quiet  enjoyment  of  the
  leased premises by such occupant, is guilty of a violation.
    2.  Any  lessor,  agent,  manager,  superintendent  or  janitor of any
  building, or part thereof, who wilfully or intentionally acts to  prevent
  or  obstruct  the delivery of fuel oil ordered in compliance with either
  section three hundred two-c of the  multiple  dwelling  law  or  section
  three  hunded five-c of the multiple residence law or the refiring of an
  oil burner after such a delivery shall be guilty of a violation.


§ 235-a. Tenant right to offset payments and entitlement to damages in
  certain  cases.  1.  In  any  case  in  which a residential tenant shall
  lawfully make a payment to a utility company pursuant to the  provisions
  of  sections  thirty-three,  thirty-four  and one hundred sixteen of the
  public service law, or to a utility company as  defined  in  subdivision
  twenty-three of section two of the public service law, public authority,
  water-works  corporation,  as  defined  in  subdivision  twenty-seven of
  section two of the public service law, or  municipal  water  system,  as
  prescribed in section eighty-nine-l of the public service law, for water
  service which a landlord is responsible for but has failed or refused to
  provide  payment  therefor,  such  payment  shall be deductible from any
  future payment of rent.
    2. Any owner (as defined in the  multiple  dwelling  law  or  multiple
  residence  law)  of  a  multiple dwelling responsible for the payment of
  charges for gas,  electric,  steam  or  water  service  who  causes  the
  discontinuance  of that service by failure or refusal to pay the charges
  for past service shall be liable for compensatory and  punitive  damages
  to any tenant whose utility service is so discontinued.
    * 3. Nothing contained in this section and no payment made pursuant to
  this section shall be deemed to discharge the liability of a renter with
  an  interest  in  real  property  pursuant to subdivision two of section
  three hundred four of the real property tax law  from  taxes  levied  on
  such interest.
    * NB (Effective pending ruling by Commissioner of Internal Revenue)


§  235-b.  Warranty of habitability. 1. In every written or oral lease
  or rental agreement for residential  premises  the  landlord  or  lessor
  shall  be  deemed to covenant and warrant that the premises so leased or
  rented and all areas used in connection therewith in common  with  other
  tenants  or  residents  are  fit  for  human habitation and for the uses
  reasonably intended by the  parties  and  that  the  occupants  of  such
  premises  shall  not  be  subjected  to  any  conditions  which would be
  dangerous, hazardous or detrimental to their  life,  health  or  safety.
  When  any such condition has been caused by the misconduct of the tenant
  or lessee or persons under  his  direction  or  control,  it  shall  not
  constitute a breach of such covenants and warranties.
    2.  Any  agreement  by  a  lessee  or  tenant of a dwelling waiving or
  modifying his rights as set forth in  this  section  shall  be  void  as
  contrary to public policy.
    3.  In  determining  the  amount of damages sustained by a tenant as a
  result of a breach of the warranty set forth in the section, the court;
    (a) need not require any expert testimony; and
    (b) shall, to the extent the warranty is breached or cannot  be  cured
  by  reason  of  a  strike  or  other  labor  dispute which is not caused
  primarily by the individual landlord or  lessor  and  such  damages  are
  attributable  to such strike, exclude recovery to such extent, except to
  the extent of the net savings, if any, to  the  landlord  or  lessor  by
  reason  of  such  strike  or  labor  dispute  allocable  to the tenant's
  premises, provided, however, that the landlord or lesser has made a good
  faith attempt, where practicable, to cure the breach.
    (c) where the premises is subject to regulation pursuant to the  local
  emergency  housing rent control law, the emergency tenant protection act
  of nineteen seventy-four, the rent stabilization law of nineteen hundred
  sixty-nine or the city rent and rehabilitation law,  reduce  the  amount
  awarded  hereunder  by the total amount of any rent reduction ordered by
  the state division of housing and community  renewal  pursuant  to  such
  laws or act, awarded to the tenant, from the effective date of such rent
  reduction order, that relates to one or more matters for which relief is
  awarded hereunder.


§ 235-bb. Certificates of occupancy; required disclosure to tenant. 1.
  Prior  to  executing  a  residential  lease  or  rental agreement with a
  tenant, the owner of real property consisting of three or  fewer  rental
  units shall provide conspicuous notice in bold face type as to whether a
  certificate  of  occupancy,  if  such certificate is required by law, is
  currently valid for the dwelling unit subject to  the  lease  or  rental
  agreement.  Owners  who  provide  the  tenant with an actual copy of the
  valid certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to have complied with the
  requirements of this subdivision.
    2. Any agreement by a  lessee  or  tenant  of  premises  for  dwelling
  purposes  waiving  or  modifying  his or her rights as set forth in this
  section shall be void as contrary to public policy.


§  235-c.  Unconscionable lease or clause. 1. If the court as a matter
  of law  finds  a  lease  or  any  clause  of  the  lease  to  have  been
  unconscionable  at  the time it was made the court may refuse to enforce
  the lease, or it may enforce the remainder  of  the  lease  without  the
  unconscionable  clause,  or  it  may  so  limit  the  application of any
  unconscionable clause as to avoid any unconscionable result.
    2. When it is claimed or appears to the court  that  a  lease  or  any
  clause  thereof  may  be  unconscionable the parties shall be afforded a
  reasonable opportunity to present evidence as to  its  setting,  purpose
  and effect to aid the court in making the determination.


§  235-d.  Harassment.  1. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
  within a city having a population of one million or more,  it  shall  be
  unlawful  and shall constitute harassment for any landlord of a building
  which at any time was occupied for manufacturing or warehouse  purposes,
  or  other  person  acting  on  his  behalf,  to  engage in any course of
  conduct, including, but  not  limited  to  intentional  interruption  or
  discontinuance  or  willful  failure  to  restore  services  customarily
  provided or required by written lease or other rental  agreement,  which
  interferes  with  or  disturbs  the comfort, repose, peace or quiet of a
  tenant in the tenant's use or occupancy of rental space if such  conduct
  is  intended  to  cause  the  tenant  (i)  to  vacate a building or part
  thereof; or (ii) to surrender or waive any rights of such  tenant  under
  the tenant's written lease or other rental agreement.
    2.  The  lawful termination of a tenancy or lawful refusal to renew or
  extend a written lease or other rental agreement  shall  not  constitute
  harassment for purposes of this section.
    3.  As  used  in this section the term "tenant" means only a person or
  business occupying or residing at the premises  pursuant  to  a  written
  lease  or  other  rental  agreement,  if  such premises are located in a
  building which at any time was occupied for manufacturing  or  warehouse
  purposes  and  a  certificate  of  occupancy for residential use of such
  building is not in effect at the  time  of  the  last  alleged  acts  or
  incidents upon which the harassment claim is based.
    4. A tenant may apply to the supreme court for an order enjoining acts
  or  practices  which constitute harassment under subdivision one of this
  section; and upon sufficient showing, the  supreme  court  may  issue  a
  temporary or permanent injunction, restraining order or other order, all
  of  which  may,  as  the  court  determines in the exercise of its sound
  discretion, be granted without bond. In the event  the  court  issues  a
  preliminary  injunction it shall make provision for an expeditious trial
  of the underlying action.
    5. The powers and remedies set forth  in  this  section  shall  be  in
  addition  to  all  other  powers  and remedies in relation to harassment
  including the award  of  damages.  Nothing  contained  herein  shall  be
  construed  to  amend, repeal, modify or affect any existing local law or
  ordinance, or provision of the charter or  administrative  code  of  the
  city of New York, or to limit or restrict the power of the city to amend
  or  modify any existing local law, ordinance or provision of the charter
  or administrative code, or to restrict  or  limit  any  power  otherwise
  conferred by law with respect to harassment.
    6.  Any  agreement  by  a  tenant  in  a written lease or other rental
  agreement waiving or modifying his rights as set forth in  this  section
  shall be void as contrary to public policy.


§  235-e.  Duty  to provide a written receipt. (a) Upon the receipt of
  the payment of rent for residential premises in the form of cash, or any
  instrument other than the personal check of the lessee, it shall be  the
  duty  of  the  lessor,  or any agent of the lessor authorized to receive
  rent, to provide the  lessee  with  a  written  receipt  containing  the
  following:
    1. The date;
    2. The amount;
    3. The identity of the premises and period for which paid; and
    4. The signature and title of the person receiving the rent.
    (b)  A lessee may request, in writing, that a lessor provide a receipt
  for rent paid by personal check. If such request is made, the lessor, or
  any agent of the lessor authorized to receive rent,  shall  provide  the
  lessee  with  the  receipt described in subdivision (a) of this section.
  Such request shall, unless otherwise specified by the lessee, remain  in
  effect  for  the  duration  of  such  lessee's tenancy. The lessor shall
  maintain a record of all cash receipts  for  rent  for  at  least  three
  years.
    (c)  If a payment of rent is personally transmitted to a lessor, or an
  agent of a lessor authorized to  receive  rent,  the  receipt  for  such
  payment shall be issued immediately to a lessee. If a payment of rent is
  transmitted  indirectly  to a lessor, or an agent of a lessor authorized
  to receive rent, a lessee  shall  be  provided  with  a  receipt  within
  fifteen days of such lessor or agent's receipt of a rent payment.
    (d)  If  a lessor, or an agent of a lessor authorized to receive rent,
  fails to receive payment for rent within five days of the date specified
  in a lease agreement, such lessor or agent shall  send  the  lessee,  by
  certified  mail,  a  written  notice stating the failure to receive such
  rent payment. The failure of a  lessor,  or  any  agent  of  the  lessor
  authorized to receive rent, to provide a lessee with a written notice of
  the  non-payment  of  rent may be used as an affirmative defense by such
  lessee in an eviction proceeding  based  on  the  non-payment  of  rent.
  Notwithstanding  the provisions of this subdivision, a lessor which is a
  cooperative  housing  corporation,  other  than  a  cooperative  housing
  corporation  subject  to  the  provisions  of article two, article four,
  article five or article eleven of the private housing finance  law,  may
  provide  for  a method of sending notice by mail other than by certified
  mail, as long as such method of sending notice is provided  for  in  the
  proprietary  lease  or occupancy agreement, and the lessee is a dwelling
  unit owner or shareholder of such cooperative housing corporation.


§  235-f.  Unlawful  restrictions  on  occupancy.  1.  As used in this
  section, the terms:
    (a) "Tenant"  means  a  person  occupying  or  entitled  to  occupy  a
  residential rental premises who is either a party to the lease or rental
  agreement  for  such  premises  or is a statutory tenant pursuant to the
  emergency housing rent control law or the city rent  and  rehabilitation
  law or article seven-c of the multiple dwelling law.
    (b)  "Occupant"  means  a person, other than a tenant or a member of a
  tenant's immediate family, occupying a premises with the consent of  the
  tenant or tenants.
    2.  It  shall  be  unlawful  for  a  landlord to restrict occupancy of
  residential premises, by express lease terms or otherwise, to  a  tenant
  or tenants or to such tenants and immediate family. Any such restriction
  in  a  lease or rental agreement entered into or renewed before or after
  the effective date of this section shall  be  unenforceable  as  against
  public policy.
    3. Any lease or rental agreement for residential premises entered into
  by  one  tenant  shall  be  construed to permit occupancy by the tenant,
  immediate family of the tenant, one additional occupant,  and  dependent
  children of the occupant provided that the tenant or the tenant's spouse
  occupies the premises as his primary residence.
    4. Any lease or rental agreement for residential premises entered into
  by  two  or  more  tenants  shall  be  construed  to permit occupancy by
  tenants, immediate family of tenants, occupants and  dependent  children
  of  occupants;  provided that the total number of tenants and occupants,
  excluding occupants' dependent children, does not exceed the  number  of
  tenants  specified in the current lease or rental agreement, and that at
  least one tenant or a tenants'  spouse  occupies  the  premises  as  his
  primary residence.
    5.  The  tenant  shall inform the landlord of the name of any occupant
  within thirty days following  the  commencement  of  occupancy  by  such
  person or within thirty days following a request by the landlord.
    6.  No  occupant nor occupant's dependent child shall, without express
  written permission of the  landlord,  acquire  any  right  to  continued
  occupancy  in  the event that the tenant vacates the premises or acquire
  any other rights of tenancy; provided that nothing in this section shall
  be construed to reduce or impair any right or remedy otherwise available
  to any person residing in any housing  accommodation  on  the  effective
  date of this section which accrued prior to such date.
    7.  Any provision of a lease or rental agreement purporting to waive a
  provision of this section is null and void.
    8. Nothing in this section  shall  be  construed  as  invalidating  or
  impairing  the  operation  of,  or  the  right of a landlord to restrict
  occupancy in  order  to  comply  with  federal,  state  or  local  laws,
  regulations, ordinances or codes.
    9. Any person aggrieved by a violation of this section may maintain an
  action in any court of competent jurisdiction for:
    (a) an injunction to enjoin and restrain such unlawful practice;
    (b)  actual  damages  sustained as a result of such unlawful practice;
  and
    (c) court costs.


§  235-g.  Electronic  billing  and/or  payment of rent. 1. A landlord
  shall not require a lessee or tenant to use an electronic billing and/or
  payment system as the only method for the payment of  rent.  A  landlord
  shall  not  assess  any  fee or other charge for a lessee or tenant that
  chooses not to use an electronic billing and/or payment system.
    2. Any agreement by a lessee  or  tenant  of  a  dwelling  waiving  or
  modifying  his  or her rights as set forth in this section shall be void
  as contrary to public policy.


§  235-h.  Waiver  of right to bring a declaratory judgment action. No
  commercial lease shall contain any provision waiving or prohibiting  the
  right  of any tenant to bring a declaratory judgment action with respect
  to any provision, term  or  condition  of  such  commercial  lease.  The
  inclusion  of  any  such waiver provision in a commercial lease shall be
  null and void as against public policy.


§  235-i.  Unreasonable  tenant  fees  for  reproductions  of  keys. A
  landlord shall not charge a tenant a fee for the reproduction of keys to
  a single dwelling greater than one hundred ten  percent  of  the  actual
  cost  of  reproduction,  provided  such  limitation shall not apply if a
  tenant requires the reproduction of keys for a single dwelling more than
  three times in a calendar year.


§  236.  Assignment of lease of a deceased tenant. Notwithstanding any
  contrary provision contained in any lease hereafter made  which  affects
  premises  demised  for  residential  use,  or partly for residential and
  partly for  professional  use,  the  executor,  administrator  or  legal
  representative  of a deceased tenant under such a lease, may request the
  landlord thereunder to consent to the assignment of such a lease, or  to
  the  subletting  of  the premises demised thereby. Such request shall be
  accompanied by the written consent thereto of any co-tenant or guarantor
  of such lease and a statement of the name, business and  home  addresses
  of the proposed assignee or sublessee. Within ten days after the mailing
  of  such request, the landlord may ask the sender thereof for additional
  information as will enable the landlord to  determine  if  rejection  of
  such request shall be unreasonable. Within thirty days after the mailing
  of  the request for consent, or of the additional information reasonably
  asked for by the landlord, whichever is later, the landlord shall send a
  notice to the sender thereof of his election to terminate said lease  or
  to grant or refuse his consent. Landlord's failure to send such a notice
  shall  be  deemed  to  be  a  consent  to  the  proposed  assignment  or
  subletting. If the landlord consents, said  lease  may  be  assigned  in
  accordance with the request provided a written agreement by the assignee
  assuming  the performance of the tenant's obligations under the lease is
  delivered to  the  landlord  in  form  reasonably  satisfactory  to  the
  landlord,  or the premises may be sublet in accordance with the request,
  as the case may be, but the estate of the deceased tenant, and any other
  tenant thereunder, shall nevertheless remain liable for the  performance
  of  tenant's  obligations  under  said lease. If the landlord terminates
  said lease or unreasonably refuses his  consent,  said  lease  shall  be
  deemed  terminated,  and the estate of the deceased tenant and any other
  tenant thereunder shall be discharged from further liability  thereunder
  as  of  the last day of the calendar month during which the landlord was
  required hereunder to exercise his option. If  the  landlord  reasonably
  refuses his consent, said lease shall continue in full force and effect,
  subject to the right to make further requests for consent hereunder. Any
  request,  notice  or  communication  required  or authorized to be given
  hereunder shall be sent by registered or certified mail, return  receipt
  requested.  This  act  shall  not  apply to a proprietary lease, viz.: a
  lease to, or held by, a tenant entitled thereto by reason  of  ownership
  of  stock  in a corporate owner of premises which operates the same on a
  cooperative basis. Any waiver of any part of this section shall be  void
  as against public policy.


§  237.  Discrimination in leases with respect to bearing of children.
  Any person, firm or corporation owning or having in charge any apartment
  house, tenement house or other building or mobile  home  park  used  for
  dwelling  purposes  who  shall,  in any lease of any or part of any such
  building or mobile home park,  have  a  clause  therein  providing  that
  during  the term thereof the tenants shall remain childless or shall not
  bear children, shall be guilty of a violation.


§  237-a.  Discrimination  against  children  in  dwelling  houses and
  manufactured home parks. a. Any person, firm or  corporation  owning  or
  having  in  charge any apartment house, tenement house or other building
  or manufactured home park used for dwelling purposes who shall refuse to
  rent any or part of any such building or manufactured home park  to  any
  person  or  family,  or  who  discriminates in the terms, conditions, or
  privileges of any such rental, solely on the ground that such person  or
  family  has or have a child or children shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
  and on conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not  less  than
  fifty  nor  more  than  one  hundred dollars for each offense; provided,
  however, the prohibition  against  discrimination  against  children  in
  dwelling  houses  and  manufactured home parks contained in this section
  shall not apply to:
    (1)  housing  units  for  senior  citizens  subsidized,  insured,   or
  guaranteed by the federal government; or
    (2)  one  or two family owner occupied dwelling houses or manufactured
  homes; or
    (3) manufactured home parks intended and  operated  for  occupancy  by
  persons fifty-five years of age or older. In determining whether housing
  is  intended  and  operated for occupancy by persons fifty-five years of
  age or older, Sec. 807(b)(2)(c)(42 U.S.C. 3607(b)(2)(c)) of the  federal
  Fair Housing Act of 1988, as amended, shall apply.
    b. Civil liability:
    (1)  where  discriminatory  conduct  prohibited  by  this  section has
  occurred, an aggrieved individual shall have a cause of  action  in  any
  court   of   appropriate   jurisdiction  for  damages,  declaratory  and
  injunctive relief;
    (2) in all actions brought under this section,  reasonable  attorney's
  fees  as  determined  by  the  court  may  be  awarded  to  a prevailing
  Plaintiff.


§  238.  Agreements or contracts for privileges to deal with occupants
  of tenements, apartment houses or  bungalow  colonies.  1.  A  contract,
  agreement  or  arrangement  entered  into or executed by and between the
  owner or prospective owner of an apartment house, tenement  or  what  is
  commonly known as a bungalow colony connected with common or joint means
  of  ingress  and  egress,  whether  such  apartment  house,  tenement or
  bungalow colony is in existence or in process of construction or  to  be
  constructed  in  the  future,  or  any  person in possession or claiming
  possession of such apartment house, tenement or bungalow colony, or  any
  part  thereof, including the common or joint means of ingress or egress,
  or any of the  agents,  employees  or  servants  of  such  an  owner  or
  possessors  thereof  and  a dealer in or seller of fuel, ice or food, or
  his agents, employees or representatives for the purpose  of  giving  to
  such  dealer  or seller the privilege of selling or delivering fuel, ice
  or food, to the persons occupying or to  occupy  such  apartment  house,
  tenement  or  bungalow  colony,  or  any part thereof, is against public
  policy and void.
    2. Any person who shall, directly or indirectly, either as  the  owner
  or  prospective  owner  of  such  apartment  house, tenement or bungalow
  colony, or any part thereof, including the  common  or  joint  means  of
  ingress or egress, or as an agent, employee or servant of such an owner,
  or  any  person  in  possession or claiming possession of such apartment
  house, tenement or bungalow colony, or any part thereof,  including  the
  common  or  joint means of ingress or egress, accept any money, property
  or thing of value for permitting or giving to any person, or his agents,
  employees or representatives, the privilege  of  selling  or  delivering
  fuel,  ice or food, to the persons occupying or to occupy such apartment
  house, tenement or bungalow colony, or any part thereof, and any  person
  who  shall, directly or indirectly, either as a seller of, or dealer in,
  fuel, ice or food, as an agent,  employee,  or  representative  of  such
  seller or dealer, pay or give any money, property or thing of value, for
  such  privilege  shall  be  guilty of a misdemeanor. If a corporation is
  convicted of a violation of this section, it shall be punished by a fine
  of not less than fifty nor more than one thousand dollars.
    3. A person occupying an apartment house, tenement or bungalow colony,
  or any part thereof, to whom  fuel,  ice  or  food,  shall  be  sold  or
  delivered  by  a  seller  or  dealer  who  has  paid or given any money,
  property or thing of value for the privilege of  selling  or  delivering
  fuel,  ice or food, to the persons occupying or to occupy such apartment
  house, tenement or bungalow colony, or any part thereof, may recover  of
  such  seller  or  dealer  for  his  benefit a penalty, in the sum of two
  hundred and fifty dollars, in a civil  action  brought  in  a  court  of
  competent jurisdiction.


§  238-a.  Limitation  on  fees. In relation to a residential dwelling
  unit:
    1. (a) Except in instances where statutes or regulations provide for a
  payment, fee or charge, no landlord, lessor, sub-lessor or  grantor  may
  demand  any  payment,  fee,  or  charge  for  the  processing, review or
  acceptance of an application, or demand any other payment, fee or charge
  before or at the beginning of the tenancy, except background checks  and
  credit checks as provided by paragraph (b) of this subdivision, provided
  that  this  subdivision  shall  not  apply  to  entrance fees charged by
  continuing care retirement  communities  licensed  pursuant  to  article
  forty-six  or  forty-six-A  of  the  public  health law, assisted living
  providers licensed pursuant to article forty-six-B of the public  health
  law,  adult  care  facilities  licensed pursuant to article seven of the
  social services law, senior residential communities that have  submitted
  an  offering plan to the attorney general, or not-for-profit independent
  retirement  communities  that   offer   personal   emergency   response,
  housekeeping,  transportation  and  meals to their residents. Nothing in
  this paragraph shall prohibit a cooperative housing  corporation,  other
  than  a  cooperative  housing  corporation  subject to the provisions of
  article two, article four, article five or article eleven of the private
  housing finance law,  from  demanding  from  a  prospective  tenant  any
  payment, fee or charge which is necessary to compensate a managing agent
  and/or  transfer  agent for the processing, review or acceptance of such
  prospective tenant's application where  such  prospective  tenant  would
  become  a dwelling unit owner or shareholder of such cooperative housing
  corporation.
    (b) A landlord, lessor, sub-lessor or grantor may charge a fee or fees
  to reimburse costs associated with conducting  a  background  check  and
  credit  check, provided the cumulative fee or fees for such checks is no
  more than the actual cost of the background check and  credit  check  or
  twenty  dollars, whichever is less, and the landlord, lessor, sub-lessor
  or grantor shall waive the fee or fees if the potential tenant  provides
  a  copy  of a background check or credit check conducted within the past
  thirty days. The landlord, lessor, sub-lessor or grantor may not collect
  the fee or fees unless  the  landlord,  lessor,  sub-lessor  or  grantor
  provides  the  potential  tenant  with a copy of the background check or
  credit check and the receipt or invoice from the entity  conducting  the
  background check or credit check. Notwithstanding the provisions of this
  paragraph,  a  cooperative  housing  corporation  shall  be permitted to
  charge a fee or fees to reimburse costs  associated  with  conducting  a
  background check and credit check in excess of twenty dollars, where the
  potential  tenant  would  become a dwelling unit owner or shareholder of
  such cooperative housing corporation, provided  the  cumulative  fee  or
  fees  for such checks is no more than the actual cost of such background
  check and/or credit check. Further, with regard to a cooperative housing
  corporation subject to the provisions  of  article  two,  article  four,
  article  five  or article eleven of the private housing finance law, all
  such fees must be reasonable and approved by the agency supervising such
  cooperative housing corporation.
    2. No landlord, lessor, sub-lessor or grantor may demand any  payment,
  fee,  or  charge for the late payment of rent unless the payment of rent
  has not been made within five days of the date  it  was  due,  and  such
  payment,  fee,  or charge shall not exceed fifty dollars or five percent
  of the monthly rent, whichever is less; provided a  cooperative  housing
  corporation, other than a cooperative housing corporation subject to the
  provisions  of article two, article four, article five or article eleven
  of the private housing finance law,  shall  be  permitted  to  charge  a
  tenant  that is a dwelling unit owner or shareholder of such cooperative
  housing corporation a  fee  of  up  to  eight  percent  of  the  monthly
  maintenance  fee  for the late payment of the monthly maintenance fee if
  the proprietary lease or occupancy agreement provides for such fee.
    3.  Any  provision  of  a  lease  or  contract waiving or limiting the
  provisions of this section shall be void as against public policy.


ARTICLE 7A
                          PORTABLE KEROSENE HEATERS
  Section 239.   Legislative findings.
          239-a. Definitions.
          239-b. Only  approved  portable  kerosene  heaters  permitted in
                   structures.
          239-c. Approval by the secretary of state.
          239-d. Sale of unapproved portable kerosene heaters.
          239-e. Portable  kerosene   heaters   prohibited   in   multiple
                   dwellings.
          239-f. Penalties for violation.
          239-g. Application of article.


§  239.  Legislative  findings.  The  legislature  recognizes that the
  ever-increasing cost of home heating has resulted in widespread consumer
  interest in the use of portable kerosene heaters.  Because  there  is  a
  wide  variety  of  kerosene  heaters,  including  different  designs and
  intended purposes, the public interest requires that those heaters which
  are  used  in  residential  structures  meet  certain  safety  standards
  designed  to  insure  that  they  are  reasonably safe for that purpose.
  Accordingly, it is the intent of this article to protect the  public  by
  establishing  standards  which  will  permit  the use of reasonably safe
  heaters in residential structures.


§  239-a.  Definitions.  As  used  in this article the following terms
  shall mean and include:
    1. "Structure." Any building or completed  construction  of  any  kind
  including but not limited to, private dwellings or to any structure used
  for  business,  commercial  or  industrial  purposes,  but not including
  multiple dwellings, buildings  under  construction,  or  buildings  used
  solely for agricultural purposes.
    2.  "Multiple  dwelling."  A  multiple dwelling is a dwelling which is
  either rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or is occupied as
  the residence or home of three or more families living independently  of
  each  other  and  shall include, dwelling portions of hospitals, nursing
  homes, convents, monasteries, asylums and public institutions.
    3. "Owner." The owner of the freehold of any real property (as defined
  in section two of the real property law), or of a lesser estate therein,
  a mortgagee or  vendee  in  possession,  assignee  of  rents,  receiver,
  executor,   trustee,  lessee,  agent,  or  any  other  person,  firm  or
  corporation, directly or indirectly in control of real property.
    4. "Person." The term person shall include  the  owner,  mortgagee  or
  vendee  in  possession,  assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee,
  lessee, agent or any other person,  firm  or  corporation,  directly  or
  indirectly in control of a structure or part thereof.
    5.  "Listed." Any portable kerosene heater which has been tested by an
  independent,  nationally  recognized  testing  or   inspection   agency,
  acceptable  to  the  secretary of state and which has been determined to
  meet a generally accepted standard for such heaters. Such  determination
  shall  be  evidenced  by  either  the  inclusion of the heater on a list
  published by such agency or by the heater bearing the  listing  mark  of
  such agency.
    6. "Portable kerosene heater." Any non-flue connected, self-contained,
  self-supporting,  kerosene-fueled  heating  appliance  equipped  with an
  integral reservoir, designed to be carried from one location to another.
    7. "Approved portable kerosene heater." Any listed  portable  kerosene
  heater which:
    (a) has a fuel capacity of not more than two gallons;
    (b)  emits  no  more  than  .04 percent carbon monoxide in an air free
  sample of flue gases at maximum heat output and no more than .08 percent
  at recommended low-fire setting;
    (c) has a minimum tipping angle of no more than  thirty-three  degrees
  from the vertical with a full fuel reservoir;
    (d)  has an automatic shutoff safety device or inherent design feature
  which extinguishes the heating flame upon tipover in not more  than  ten
  seconds;
    (e) includes as standard equipment a pump or siphon for refueling;
    (f)  is  packaged  with  instructions advising the purchaser of proper
  maintenance and operation;
    (g) bears labeling, in conspicuous letters, cautioning  and  informing
  the purchaser as to:
    (i)  the need for an adequate source of ventilation when the heater is
  in operation;
    (ii) the use of only suitable fuel for the heater;
    (iii) proper manner of refueling;
    (iv) proper placement and handling of the heater  when  in  operation;
  and
    (v) proper procedures for lighting, flame regulation and extinguishing
  the heater;
    (h)  after  April  first,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-two,  meets  such
  additional standards, if any, as may be contained  in  reasonable  rules
  and  regulations  adopted  by the secretary of state pursuant to section
  two hundred thirty-nine-c of this article.


§   239-b.  Only  approved  portable  kerosene  heaters  permitted  in
  structures. Portable kerosene heaters which do not meet the requirements
  of subdivision seven  of  section  two  hundred  thirty-nine-a  of  this
  article  are  prohibited  in  structures.  It  shall be unlawful for any
  person (1) to use  any  portable  kerosene  heater  except  an  approved
  portable kerosene heater in any portion of a structure, or (2) being the
  owner  of such structure, to provide or place or cause to be provided or
  placed in any portion of  a  structure,  any  portable  kerosene  heater
  except  an  approved portable kerosene heater for use by any occupant of
  such structure.


§  239-c.  Approval  by  the  secretary  of  state. After April first,
  nineteen hundred  eighty-two,  no  portable  kerosene  heater  shall  be
  offered for sale in this state for use in a structure unless it has been
  approved  by  the  secretary  of  state  or his designee. In determining
  whether to approve a portable kerosene heater for sale, the secretary of
  state shall consider whether the heater  meets  (1)  the  standards  set
  forth  in subdivision seven of section two hundred thirty-nine-a of this
  article, and (2) any additional standards which the secretary  of  state
  reasonably  believes  are  required  to  effectuate the purposes of this
  article as set forth in section two hundred thirty-nine of this article.
  The secretary of state may promulgate reasonable rules  and  regulations
  setting  forth  the procedure by which portable kerosene heaters will be
  reviewed for approval.


§  239-d. Sale of unapproved portable kerosene heaters. All unapproved
  portable kerosene heaters offered for sale  in  this  state  shall  have
  printed  thereon  or  attached  thereto and on the package in which such
  heater is sold the following statement: "This heater is not approved for
  residential or commercial use." There shall also be printed  thereon  or
  attached  thereto  and  on the package in which such heater is sold such
  other information as may be required by the secretary of state.


§  239-e.  Portable kerosene heaters prohibited in multiple dwellings.
  It shall be unlawful to use any portable kerosene heater in  a  multiple
  Dwelling.


§  239-f.  Penalties  for  violation. Any person who shall violate any
  provision of this article shall be guilty of a  misdemeanor,  punishable
  for  each  offense  by  a  fine  not exceeding one hundred dollars or by
  imprisonment for a period of not more than ninety days.


§  239-g.  Application  of  article.  1.  This  article  shall  not be
  applicable to any city having a population in  excess  of  five  hundred
  thousand.
    2.  Nothing  in  this article shall be construed to permit the sale or
  use of any portable kerosene heater in any municipality  in  which  such
  use or sale is restricted or prohibited by any general, special or local
  law or rule or regulation.


ARTICLE 8
                          CONVEYANCES AND MORTGAGES
  Section 240.   Definitions and use of terms.
          240-b. Certain conveyances authorized; effect thereof.
          240-c. Joint tenancy severance.
          241.   Ancient conveyances abolished.
          242.   Disclosure prior to the sale of real property.
          243.   Grant of fee or freehold.
          244.   When grant takes effect.
          245.   Estate which passes by grant or devise.
          246.   Certain deeds declared grants.
          247.   Conveyance  by tenant for life or years of greater estate
                   than possessed.
          248.   Effect of conveyance where property is leased.
          249.   Convenants in mortgages.
          251.   Convenants not implied.
          252.   Lineal and collateral warranties abolished.
          253.   Construction  of  convenants  in   grants   of   freehold
                   interests.
          254.   Construction  of  clauses and convenants in mortgages and
                   bonds or notes.
          254-a. Right of election of mortgagee in certain cases.
          254-b. Limitation on late charges.
          254-c. Right to a copy of real property appraisals and  consumer
                   reports in certain cases.
          254-d  Fees  by  mortgagee  for  direct payment of real property
                   taxes by mortgagor prohibited.
          255.   Construction of grant of appurtenances  and  of  all  the
                   rights and estate of grantor.
          256.   Construction  of grant in executor's or trustee's deed of
                   appurtenances,  and  of  the  estate  of  testator  and
                   grantor.
          257.   Convenants  bind representatives of grantor and mortgagor
                   and inure to the benefit of whom.
          258.   Short forms of deeds and mortgages.
          259-c. Provision in lease of real property for waiver  of  trial
                   by  jury  in  actions  for  personal injury or property
                   damage.
          260.   Lands adversely held may be conveyed or mortgaged.
          261.   Maintenance of telegraph or other electric  wires  raises
                   no presumption of grant.
          265.   Fraudulent intent, question of fact.
          265-a. Home equity theft prevention.
          265-b. Distressed property consulting contracts.
          266.   Rights   of   purchaser   or  incumbrancer  for  valuable
                   consideration protected.
          267.   Conveyances with power to revoke, determine or alter.
          268.   Disaffirmance of fraudulent act by executor and others.
          269.   When remainderman may pay interest owed by life tenant.
          270.   Powers of courts of equity not abridged.
          271.   Construction of convenants in mortgages on leases of real
                   property and bonds or notes.
          272.   Construction of grant of appurtenances, and  all  of  the
                   rights and estate of the mortgagor.
          273.   What form of mortgage on lease of real property.
          274.   Transfers   and   mortgages  of  interest  in  decedents'
                   estates.
          274-a. Certificate of principal amount unpaid  on  mortgages  of
                   real property.
          275.   Certificate of discharge of mortgage required.
          276.   Effect  of  certain  easements  on the right to invest in
                   mortgages.
          277.   Modification and extension of mortgage investment.
          277-a. Powers  of  fiduciaries  and  others  holding  guaranteed
                   mortgages or mortgage investments.
          278.   Exchange of mortgage investment.
          278-a. Sale  or  exchange  of  certain real property or mortgage
                   investments therein authorized.
          279.   Graduated payment mortgage.
          280.   Reverse mortgage loans for persons sixty years of age  or
                   older.
          280-a. Reverse  mortgage  loans for persons seventy years of age
                   or older.
          280-b. Federal home equity conversion mortgage regulation.
          280-d. Federal  home  equity  conversion  mortgage  default  and
                   foreclosure regulation.
          281.   Credit line mortgage.
          282.   Mortgagor's  right  to recover attorneys' fees in actions
                   or  proceedings  arising   out   of   foreclosures   of
                   residential property.


§  240.  Definitions  and  use of terms. 1. The term "heirs," or other
  words of inheritance, are not requisite to create or convey an estate in
  fee.
    2. The term "conveyance," as used  in  this  article,  includes  every
  instrument,  in  writing, except a will, by which any estate or interest
  in real property is created, transferred, assigned or surrendered.
    3. Every instrument creating, transferring, assigning or  surrendering
  an  estate  or  interest in real property must be construed according to
  the intent of the parties, so far as such intent can  be  gathered  from
  the whole instrument, and is consistent with the rules of law.
    4.  The  terms  "estate" and "interest in real property" include every
  such estate and interest,  freehold  or  chattel,  legal  or  equitable,
  present or future, vested or contingent.


§ 240-b. Certain conveyances authorized; effect thereof. 1. Any person
  or persons owning real property or an interest in real property which he
  or  they  have  power to convey, may effectively convey such property or
  interest by a conveyance naming himself or themselves and another person
  or persons, or one or more of themselves and  another  person  or  other
  persons,  as  grantees,  and  the  conveyance  has the same effect as to
  whether it creates an estate in severalty, a joint tenancy, or a tenancy
  by the entirety, or tenancy in common, as if it were a conveyance from a
  stranger who owned the property or interest  to  the  persons  named  as
  grantees in the conveyance.
    2. Any two or more persons owning real property or an interest in real
  property  which  they  have power to convey, may effectively convey such
  property or interest by a conveyance naming one, or more  than  one,  or
  all  such  persons, as grantees, and the conveyance has the same effect,
  as to whether it creates an estate in severalty, or a joint tenancy,  or
  a  tenancy  by  the  entirety,  or  tenancy  in  common, as if it were a
  conveyance from a stranger who owned the property  or  interest  to  the
  persons named as grantees in the conveyance.
    3.  As  used  in  this  section,  "person" may be a married person and
  "persons" may be persons married to each other.


§ 240-c. Joint tenancy severance. 1. In addition to any other means by
  which a joint tenancy with right of survivorship may be severed, a joint
  tenant  may  unilaterally sever a joint tenancy in real property without
  consent of any non-severing joint tenant or tenants by:
    (a) Execution and delivery of a deed that conveys legal title  to  the
  severing  joint  tenant's  interest  to  a  third person, whether or not
  pursuant to an agreement requiring the third person  to  reconvey  legal
  title to the severing joint tenant; or
    (b)  Execution  of  a  written instrument that evidences the intent to
  sever the joint tenancy, including a deed that names the severing tenant
  as the direct grantee of the severing tenant's interest.
    2. No severance of a joint tenancy pursuant to subdivision one of this
  section shall terminate the right of survivorship  of  any  non-severing
  joint  tenant or tenants as to the severing tenant's interest unless the
  deed or written instrument effecting the severance is recorded, prior to
  the death of the severing tenant, in the county where the real  property
  is located.
    3. Nothing in this section shall limit the manner or effect of:
    (a)  A  severance  of a joint tenancy pursuant to a written instrument
  executed by all joint tenants, or pursuant to a written agreement of all
  joint tenants.
    (b) A severance of a joint tenancy effected by a  deed  from  a  joint
  tenant to another joint tenant.
    (c) A severance ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction.


§  241. Ancient conveyances abolished. The conveyance of real property
  by feoffment, with livery of seizin, or by fines, or common  recoveries,
  is abolished.


§  242.  Disclosure  prior  to  the  sale of real property. 1. (a) Any
  person, firm, company, partnership or corporation offering to sell  real
  property  to which no utility electric service is provided shall provide
  written notice to  the  prospective  purchaser  or  to  the  prospective
  purchaser's  agent,  clearly  indicating this fact. Such notice shall be
  provided prior to accepting a purchase offer.
    (b) Any prospective or actual purchaser who has suffered a loss due to
  a violation of this section is entitled to recover  any  actual  damages
  incurred from the person offering to sell said real property.
    (c)  The  provisions  of this subdivision shall not apply in instances
  where the real property being  sold  lies  within  the  applicable  free
  footage  allowance  or  service  lateral specified by the public service
  commission in rule, regulation or public utility tariff.
    2. Disclosure prior to the sale of  real  property  to  which  utility
  surcharge payments attach. (a) Any person, firm, company, partnership or
  corporation  offering  to  sell real property against which an electric,
  gas or water utility surcharge is assessed for the purpose of  defraying
  the  costs  associated with an electric, gas or water line extension, or
  for  the  purpose  of  defraying  the  costs  associated  with   related
  facilities, shall provide written notice to the prospective purchaser or
  the prospective purchaser's agent, stating as follows: "This property is
  subject  to  an  electric,  gas  and/or  water  utility  surcharge".  In
  addition, such notice shall also state, the  type  and  purpose  of  the
  surcharge,  the  amount  of  the surcharge and whether such surcharge is
  payable on a monthly, yearly  or  other  basis.  Such  notice  shall  be
  provided by the seller prior to accepting a purchase offer.
    (b) Any prospective or actual purchaser who has suffered a loss due to
  a  violation  of  this  subdivision  is  entitled  to recover any actual
  damages incurred from the person offering to sell or selling  said  real
  property.
    3.  Any  person, firm, company, partnership or corporation offering to
  sell real property on which uncapped natural gas wells are situated, and
  of which such person, firm,  company,  partnership  or  corporation  has
  actual  knowledge,  shall inform any purchaser of the existence of these
  wells prior to entering into a contract for the  sale/purchase  of  such
  property.
    4.  Disclosure  prior  to  the  sale of real property to which a green
  jobs-green New York on-bill recovery charge  applies.  (a)  Any  person,
  firm, company, partnership or corporation offering to sell real property
  which  is subject to a green jobs-green New York on-bill recovery charge
  pursuant to title nine-A of article eight of the public authorities  law
  shall  provide  written  notice  to  the  prospective  purchaser  or the
  prospective purchaser's agent, stating as  follows:  "This  property  is
  subject  to  a  green jobs-green New York on-bill recovery charge". Such
  notice shall also state the total amount of  the  original  charge,  the
  payment schedule and the approximate remaining balance, a description of
  the  energy efficiency services performed, including improvements to the
  property, and an explanation of the benefit of the green jobs-green  New
  York qualified energy efficiency services. Such notice shall be provided
  by the seller prior to accepting a purchase offer.
    (b) Any prospective or actual purchaser who has suffered a loss due to
  a  violation  of  this  subdivision  is  entitled  to recover any actual
  damages incurred from the person offering to sell or selling  said  real
  Property.


§  243.  Grant  of  fee  or  freehold. A grant in fee or of a freehold
  estate, must be subscribed  by  the  person  from  whom  the  estate  or
  interest  conveyed is intended to pass, or by his lawful agent thereunto
  authorized in writing. If not duly  acknowledged  before  its  delivery,
  according  to the provisions of this chapter, its execution and delivery
  must be attested by at least one witness, or, if  not  so  attested,  it
  does  not  take effect as against a subsequent purchaser or incumbrancer
  until so acknowledged.


§  244.  When  grant takes effect. A grant takes effect, so as to vest
  the estate or interest intended to be conveyed, only from its  delivery;
  and  all  the  rules of law, now in force, in respect to the delivery of
  deeds, apply to grants hereafter executed.


§  245.  Estate  which passes by grant or devise. A grant or devise of
  real property passes all the  estate  or  interest  of  the  grantor  or
  testator  unless the intent to pass a less estate or interest appears by
  the express terms of such grant or devise or  by  necessary  implication
  therefrom.  A  greater  estate or interest does not pass by any grant or
  conveyance, than the grantor possessed or could lawfully convey, at  the
  time of the delivery of the deeds; except that every grant is conclusive
  against  the  grantor and his heirs claiming from him by descent, and as
  against a subsequent purchaser or incumbrancer  from  such  grantor,  or
  from  such  heirs claiming as such, other than a subsequent purchaser or
  incumbrancer in  good  faith  and  for  a  valuable  consideration,  who
  acquires  a  superior  title  by  a  conveyance that has been first duly
  Recorded.


§  246.  Certain deeds declared grants. Deeds of bargain and sale, and
  of lease and release, may continue to be used;  and  are  to  be  deemed
  grants, subject to all the provisions of law in relation thereto.


§  247.  Conveyance by tenant for life or years of greater estate than
  possessed.   A conveyance made by a tenant  for  life  or  years,  of  a
  greater  estate than he possesses, or can lawfully convey, does not work
  a forfeiture of his estate, but passes to the  grantee  all  the  title,
  estate or interest which such tenant can lawfully convey.


§ 248. Effect of conveyance where property is leased. An attornment to
  a  grantee  is  not  requisite  to  the validity of a conveyance of real
  property occupied by a tenant, or of the rents or  profits  thereof,  or
  any other interest therein. But the payment of rent to a grantor, by his
  tenant,  before  notice  of  the  conveyance, binds the grantee; and the
  tenant is not liable to such grantee, before such notice, for the breach
  of any condition of the lease.


§  249.  Covenants  in mortgages. A mortgage of real property does not
  imply a covenant for the payment of the sum intended to be secured;  and
  where such covenant is not expressed in the mortgage, or a bond or other
  separate  instrument  to  secure  such  payment  has not been given, the
  remedies of the mortgagee are confined to the property mentioned in  the
  Mortgage.




§  251.  Covenants  not  implied.  A  covenant  is  not  implied  in a
  conveyance of real property, whether the conveyance contains any special
  covenant or not.


§   252.  Lineal  and  collateral  warranties  abolished.  Lineal  and
  collateral warranties, with all their incidents,  have  been  abolished;
  but  the  heirs  and  devisees  of  a person, who has made a covenant or
  agreement, are answerable thereon, to the extent of  the  real  property
  descended  or devised to them, in the cases and in the manner prescribed
  by law.


§  253.  Construction of covenants in grants of freehold interests. In
  grants of freehold interests in real property, the following or  similar
  covenants must be construed as follows:
    1.  Seizin.--  A  covenant  that  the  grantor  "is seized of the said
  premises (described) in fee simple, and has good  right  to  convey  the
  same,"  must  be  construed as meaning that such grantor, at the time of
  the execution and delivery of the conveyance, is lawfully  seized  of  a
  good,  absolute and indefeasible estate of inheritance in fee simple, of
  and in  all  and  singular  the  premises  thereby  conveyed,  with  the
  tenements,  hereditaments  and  appurtenances thereto belonging, and has
  good right, full power and lawful authority to grant and convey the same
  by the said conveyance.
    2. Quiet enjoyment.-- A covenant that the grantee "shall quietly enjoy
  the said premises," must be construed as meaning that such grantee,  his
  heirs,  successors  and assigns, shall and may, at all times thereafter,
  peaceably and quietly have, hold, use, occupy,  possess  and  enjoy  the
  said   premises,   and   every   part   and  parcel  thereof,  with  the
  appurtenances, without any let, suit, trouble, molestation, eviction, or
  disturbance of the grantor, his heirs, successors  or  assigns,  or  any
  person or persons lawfully claiming or to claim the same.
    3. Freedom from incumbrances.-- A covenant "that the said premises are
  free from incumbrances," must be construed as meaning that such premises
  are  free, clear, discharged and unincumbered of and from all former and
  other  gifts,  grants,  titles,  charges,  estates,  judgments,   taxes,
  assessments, liens and incumbrances, of what nature or kind soever.
    4.  Further  assurance.-- A covenant that the grantor will "execute or
  procure any further necessary assurance of the title to said  premises,"
  must  be  construed  as  meaning  that  the  grantor  and  his heirs, or
  successors, and all and every person or persons whomsoever  lawfully  or
  equitably  deriving  any  estate, right, title or interest of, in, or to
  the premises conveyed by, from, under, or in  trust  for  him  or  them,
  shall  and  will  at  any  time  or times thereafter upon the reasonable
  request, and at the proper costs and charges of the grantee, his  heirs,
  successors and assigns, make, do, and execute, or cause to be made, done
  and executed, all and every such further and other lawful and reasonable
  acts,  conveyances  and  assurances  in  the law for the better and more
  effectually vesting and confirming the premises thereby  granted  or  so
  intended  to be, in and to the grantee, his heirs, successors or assigns
  forever, as by the grantee, his heirs, successors or assigns, or his  or
  their  counsel  learned  in  the  law,  shall  be  reasonably advised or
  required.
    5. Warranty of title.-- A covenant  that  the  grantor  "will  forever
  warrant  the  title"  to the said premises, must be construed as meaning
  that the grantor and his heirs, or successors, the premises granted, and
  every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances, unto the grantee,
  his heirs, successors or assigns, against the grantor and his  heirs  or
  successors,  and  against  all  and  every  person or persons whomsoever
  lawfully claiming or to claim  the  same  shall  and  will  warrant  and
  forever defend.
    6.  Grantor has not incumbered.-- A covenant that the grantor "has not
  done  or  suffered  anything  whereby  the  said  premises   have   been
  incumbered," must be construed as meaning that the grantor has not made,
  done,  committed, executed, or suffered any act or acts, thing or things
  whatsoever, whereby  or  by  means  whereof,  the  above  mentioned  and
  described  premises,  or  any part or parcel thereof, now are, or at any
  time hereafter shall or may be impeached, charged or incumbered  in  any
  manner or way whatsoever.


§ 254. Construction of clauses and covenants in mortgages and bonds or
  notes.  In  mortgages  of  real property, and in bonds and notes secured
  thereby or in assignments of  mortgages  and  bonds  and  mortgages  and
  notes,  or  in  agreements to extend or to modify the terms of mortgages
  and bonds and mortgages and notes, the following or similar clauses  and
  covenants must be construed as follows:
    1.  Clauses of mortgage. The words "This mortgage, made the ..........
  (A) ........ day of ........ (B) ........, nineteen hundred and ........
  (C) ........, between ........ (D) ........, the mortgagor, and ........
  (E) ........., residing  at  .........  (F)  .........,  the  mortgagee,
  Witnesseth,  that to secure the payment of an indebtedness in the sum of
  ........  (G) ........ dollars, lawful money of the United States, to be
  paid on the ........ (H) ........ day of ........ (I) ........, nineteen
  hundred and ........ (J) ........, with interest thereon to be  computed
  from  ......... (K)  ........  at the rate of ........ (L) ........  per
  centum per annum, and to be paid ........ (M) ........, according  to  a
  certain  bond,  note  or  obligation  bearing  even  date  herewith, the
  mortgagor hereby mortgages to  the  mortgagee  (description),"  must  be
  construed  as  equivalent  in meaning to the words "This indenture, made
  the ........ (A1) ...... day of  .......  (B1)  ........,  in  the  year
  nineteen  hundred  and  ........    (C1)  ........  between ....... (D1)
  ........, party of the first part, and ....... (E1) ........, of .......
  (F1) ........, party of the second part.
    "Whereas, the said ........ (D1) ........ is justly  indebted  to  the
  said  party  of  the  second  part  in the sum of ........ (G1) ........
  dollars, lawful money of the United States, secured to be  paid  by  his
  certain   bond,   note   or  obligation,  bearing  even  date  herewith,
  conditioned for the payment of the said sum of .........  (G1)  ........
  dollars,  on  the  ........  (H1)  .......  day  of ....... (I1) .......
  nineteen hundred and ........ (J1) ........ and the interest thereon, to
  be computed from ........ (K1) ........, at the  rate  of  .......  (L1)
  ....... per centum per annum, and to be paid ....... (M1) .........
    "It  being  thereby  expressly  agreed  that  the  whole  of  the said
  principal sum shall become due after  default  in  the  payment  of  any
  installment of principal, interest, taxes or assessments, as hereinafter
  provided.
  "Now  this  indenture witnesseth, that the said party of the first part,
  for the better securing the payment of the said sum of  money  mentioned
  in  the  condition  of  the said bond, note or obligation, with interest
  thereon, and also for and in consideration of one dollar,  paid  by  the
  said   party   of  the  second  part,  the  receipt  whereof  is  hereby
  acknowledged, doth hereby grant and release unto the said party  of  the
  second  part,  and  to  his  heirs  (or successors) and assigns for ever
  (description), together with the appurtenances, and all the  estate  and
  rights  of the party of the first part in and to said premises, together
  with all fixtures and articles of personal property attached to, or used
  in connection with, the premises. To have and to hold the above  granted
  premises  unto  the said party of the second part, his heirs and assigns
  forever. Provided, always, that if the said party of the first part, his
  heirs, executors or administrators, shall pay unto the said party of the
  second part, his executors, administrators or assigns, the said  sum  of
  money  mentioned  in the condition of the said bond, note or obligation,
  and the interest thereon, at the time and in the manner mentioned in the
  said condition, that then these presents, and the estate hereby granted,
  shall cease, determine and be void."
    (Explanation: Whatever words are inserted in the  blank  spaces  above
  marked  (A),  (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), (G), (H), (I), (J), (K), (L), and
  (M)  respectively,  shall  be  construed  as  being  inserted   in   the
  corresponding  blank  spaces  above marked (A1), (B1), (C1), (D1), (E1),
  (F1), (G1), (H1), (I1), (J1), (K1), (L1) and (M1) respectively.)
    2.  Covenant  that  whole  sum  shall become due. A covenant "that the
  whole of the said principal sum and interest shall  become  due  at  the
  option of the mortgagee: after default in the payment of any installment
  of  principal  or of interest for  ....... days; or after default in the
  payment of any tax, water  rate  or  assessment  for ....... days  after
  notice  and  demand;  or after default after notice and demand either in
  assigning and delivering the policies  insuring  the  buildings  against
  loss  by  fire or in reimbursing the mortgagee for premiums paid on such
  insurance, as hereinbefore provided; or after default  upon  request  in
  furnishing a statement of the amount due on the mortgage and whether any
  offsets  or  defenses  exist  against  the mortgage debt, as hereinafter
  provided," must be construed as meaning that should any default be  made
  in  the  payment of any installment of principal or of any part thereof,
  or in the payment of the said interest, or any part thereof, on any  day
  whereon  the  same  is  made  payable,  or should any tax, water rate or
  assessment, and/or any installment of  any  assessment  which  has  been
  divided  into  annual  installments pursuant to provision of law in such
  cases made and provided which now is or may be  hereafter  imposed  upon
  the  premises  hereinafter  described, become due or payable, and should
  the said installment of principal  or  interest  remain  unpaid  and  in
  arrear  for  the  space  of ....... days,  or  such  tax,  water rate or
  assessment  or  annual  installment  remain   unpaid   and   in   arrear
  for ....... days  after  written notice by the mortgagee or obligee, his
  executors, administrators, successors  or  assigns,  that  such  tax  or
  assessment  and/or  annual  installment  is  unpaid,  and demand for the
  payment thereof, or should any default be made after notice  and  demand
  either  in  assigning and delivering the policies insuring the buildings
  against loss by fire or in reimbursing the mortgagee for  premiums  paid
  on  such  insurance, as hereinafter provided, or upon failure to furnish
  such statement of the amount due on the mortgage and whether any offsets
  or defenses exist against the mortgage debt,  as  hereinafter  provided,
  after  the  expiration  of ....... days  in  case  the  request  is made
  personally, or after the expiration of ....... days after the mailing of
  such request in case  the  request  is  made  by  mail,  then  and  from
  thenceforth,  that  is  to  say,  after  the lapse of either one of said
  periods, as the case may be,  the  aforesaid  principal  sum,  with  all
  arrearage  of  interest  thereon,  shall,  at  the  option  of  the said
  mortgagee or  obligee,  his  executors,  administrators,  successors  or
  assigns,  become and be due and payable immediately thereafter, although
  the period above limited for the  payment  thereof  may  not  then  have
  expired, anything thereinbefore contained to the contrary thereof in any
  wise notwithstanding.
    3.  Covenant  to pay indebtedness. In default of payment, mortgagee to
  have power to  sell.  A  covenant  "that  the  mortgagor  will  pay  the
  indebtedness,  as  hereinbefore  provided," must be construed as meaning
  that the mortgagor for himself, his heirs, executors and  administrators
  or  successors,  doth  covenant  and  agree to pay to the mortgagee, his
  executors, administrators, successors and assigns, the principal sum  of
  money  secured  by  said  mortgage,  and  also  the  interest thereon as
  provided by said mortgage. And if default shall be made in  the  payment
  of  the  principal  sum or the interest that may grow due thereon, or of
  any part thereof, or in case of any other default, that  then  and  from
  thenceforth  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the  mortgagee,  his executors,
  administrators or successors to enter into and upon all and singular the
  premises granted, or intended so to be, and to sell and dispose  of  the
  same,  and  all  benefit and equity of redemption of the said mortgagor,
  his heirs, executors, administrators, successors or assigns therein,  at
  public auction, according to the act in such case made and provided, and
  as  the  attorney  of  the  mortgagor  for that purpose duly authorized,
  constituted  and  appointed,  to  make  and  deliver to the purchaser or
  purchasers thereof a good and sufficient deed or deeds of conveyance for
  the same in fee simple (or otherwise; as the case may be) and out of the
  money arising from such sale, to retain the principal and interest which
  shall then be due, together with the costs and charges of  advertisement
  and   sale   of  the  said  premises,  rendering  the  overplus  of  the
  purchase-money, if any there shall be, unto the  mortgagor,  his  heirs,
  executors,  administrators,  successors  or assigns, which sale so to be
  made shall forever be a perpetual bar both in law and equity against the
  mortgagor, his heirs, successors and  assigns,  and  against  all  other
  persons  claiming or to claim the premises, or any part thereof by, from
  or under him, them or any of them.
    4. Mortgagor to keep buildings  insured.  (a)  A  covenant  "that  the
  mortgagor  will  keep the buildings on the premises insured against loss
  by fire for the benefit of  the  mortgagee;  that  he  will  assign  and
  deliver  the  policies  to the mortgagee; and that he will reimburse the
  mortgagee for any premiums paid for insurance made by the  mortgagee  on
  the  mortgagor's default in so insuring the buildings or in so assigning
  and delivering the policies," shall be construed  as  meaning  that  the
  mortgagor,  his  heirs, successors and assigns will, during all the time
  until the money  secured  by  the  mortgage  shall  be  fully  paid  and
  satisfied,  keep  the  buildings erected on the premises insured against
  loss or damage by fire, to an amount to be approved by the mortgagee not
  exceeding in  the  aggregate  one  hundred  per  centum  of  their  full
  insurable  value  and  in  a  company or companies to be approved by the
  mortgagee, and will assign and deliver the policy or  policies  of  such
  insurance to the mortgagee, his executors, administrators, successors or
  assigns,  which  policy  or  policies  shall  have  endorsed thereon the
  standard New York mortgagee clause in the name of the mortgagee, so  and
  in  such  manner  and form that he and they shall at all time and times,
  until the full payment of said moneys, have and hold the said policy  or
  policies  as  a  collateral and further security for the payment of said
  moneys, and in default of so doing, that the mortgagee or his executors,
  administrators, successors or assigns, may make such insurance from year
  to year, in an amount in the aggregate not  exceeding  one  hundred  per
  centum  of  the  full  insurable  value of said buildings erected on the
  mortgaged premises for the purposes aforesaid, and pay  the  premium  or
  premiums therefor, and that the mortgagor will pay to the mortgagee, his
  executors,  administrators,  successors  or  assigns,  such  premium  or
  premiums so paid, with interest from the time of payment, on demand, and
  that the same shall be deemed to be secured by the mortgage,  and  shall
  be  collectible  thereupon  and  thereby in like manner as the principal
  moneys, and that should  the  mortgagee  by  reason  of  such  insurance
  against  loss  by  fire  receive  any sum or sums of money for damage by
  fire, and should the mortgagee retain such insurance  money  instead  of
  paying  it  over  to  the mortgagor, the mortgagee's right to retain the
  same and his duty to apply it in payment of or on  account  of  the  sum
  secured  by  the  mortgage  and in satisfaction or reduction of the lien
  thereof shall be limited and qualified as hereafter  in  this  paragraph
  provided.  Said  insurance  money  so received by the mortgagee shall be
  held by him as trust funds until paid over  or  applied  as  hereinafter
  provided.  If the mortgagor shall notify the mortgagee in writing within
  thirty days after the fire that the mortgaged premises have been damaged
  thereby, and shall thereafter make good the  damage  by  means  of  such
  repairs,  restoration  or  rebuilding as may be necessary to restore the
  buildings to their condition prior to the damage, then upon presentation
  to the mortgagee within three years after the fire  of  proof  that  the
  damage  has been fully made good (and if he so demands in writing within
  thirty  days after such presentation of proof, then upon presentation to
  the mortgagee within thirty days after such demand of proof also of  the
  actual  cost  of  such  repairs,  restoration  and rebuilding and of the
  reasonable value of any part of the work so performed by the  mortgagor)
  the  mortgagee,  unless  he  rejects  the  proof  submitted  to  him  as
  insufficient, shall pay over to the mortgagor so much of said  insurance
  money  theretofore  received  by  the  mortgagee  as does not exceed the
  lesser of (1) the reasonable  cost  of  such  repairs,  restoration  and
  rebuilding  or  (2)  the  total  amount  actually  paid  therefor by the
  mortgagor, together with the reasonable value of any part  of  the  work
  done  by him. Such proof shall be deemed sufficient unless, within sixty
  days after presentation of all such proof to the mortgagee as aforesaid,
  he shall notify the mortgagor in writing that the proof is rejected. Any
  excess of said insurance  money  over  the  amount  so  payable  to  the
  mortgagor  shall  be  applied  in  reduction  of  the  principal  of the
  mortgage. Provided, however, that if and so long  as  there  exists  any
  default  by  the  mortgagor  in  the  performance of any of the terms or
  provisions of the mortgage on his part to  be  performed  the  mortgagee
  shall  not be obligated to pay over any of said insurance money received
  by him. If the mortgagor shall fail to comply with any of the  foregoing
  provisions  within  the time or times hereinabove limited, or shall fail
  within sixty days after rejection of the proof so submitted to  commence
  an  action  against  the  mortgagee to recover so much of said insurance
  money as is payable to the mortgagor as hereinabove provided, or if  the
  entire  principal of the mortgage shall have become payable by reason of
  default or maturity, the mortgagee shall apply said insurance  money  in
  satisfaction  or  reduction  of  the  principal of the mortgage; and any
  excess of said insurance money over the amount required to  satisfy  the
  mortgage  shall  be paid to the mortgagor. Unless the court, in any such
  action, shall determine that the  mortgagee's  rejection  of  the  proof
  submitted  by  the mortgagor prior to the commencement of the action was
  unreasonable,  the  mortgagee  may  offset  the  reasonable  amount,  as
  determined  by the court, of his expense incident to the litigation, and
  may reimburse himself out of the  insurance  money  for  the  amount  so
  determined. The term "mortgage," as hereinabove used, shall be deemed to
  include agreements extending or otherwise in any way modifying the terms
  or  provisions  of  an  existing  mortgage.  The  term  "mortgagor,"  as
  hereinabove used, shall mean  the  owner  for  the  time  being  of  the
  mortgaged  fee  or  the  junior  mortgagee actually in possession of the
  mortgaged property, or the tenant for the time being  in  possession  of
  the   property  under  a  lease  which  has  been  mortgaged.  The  term
  "mortgagee," as  hereinabove  used,  shall  be  deemed  to  include  the
  successors in interest of the mortgagee. In the event that there be more
  than  one  mortgage  covering  the  same premises, such covenant must be
  construed as hereinbefore prescribed in this paragraph, except that  the
  mortgagor,  his  heirs,  successors  and  assigns,  notwithstanding such
  foregoing provisions, may not be required to provide such insurance,  as
  to  all  the  mortgagees  combined,  in  the preferential order of their
  priority, for a total amount of more than one hundred per  cent  of  the
  insurable  value  of  the  buildings  on  the  premises, and a second or
  subordinate mortgagee shall be entitled to  exercise  the  rights  of  a
  mortgagee  with  respect  to  the  procurement of such insurance and the
  holding of the policy or policies thereof as hereinbefore prescribed  in
  this  paragraph  only  when  and  to  the extent that the mortgagor, his
  heirs, successors or assigns, as the case may be, does or do not furnish
  satisfactory proof of such maximum insurance for  the  benefit  of  such
  second  or subordinate mortgagee and one or more other mortgagees in the
  preferential order of their priority in  a  company  or  companies  duly
  authorized to do business in this state.
    The   limitations   and  qualifications  hereinabove  imposed  on  the
  mortgagee's right to retain proceeds of a fire  insurance  policy  shall
  apply  only  to  mortgages  or extensions or other modifications thereof
  made after the effective date of this act.
    (b) A covenant "that the mortgagor will  keep  the  buildings  on  the
  premises insured against loss by flood if the premises are located in an
  area  identified by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development as an
  area having special flood hazards and in which flood insurance has  been
  made  available  under  the  National  Flood  Insurance  Act of nineteen
  hundred sixty-eight; that he will assign and deliver the policies to the
  mortgagee; and that he will reimburse the  mortgagee  for  any  premiums
  paid  for  insurance made by the mortgagee on the mortgagor's default in
  so insuring  the  buildings  or  in  so  assigning  and  delivering  the
  policies,"  shall be construed as meaning that the mortgagor, his heirs,
  successors and assigns will, during all the time until the money secured
  by the mortgage shall be fully paid and satisfied,  keep  the  buildings
  erected on the premises insured against loss or damage by flood provided
  the  premises  are  located  in  an  area identified by the Secretary of
  Housing and Urban Development of the United States  as  an  area  having
  special  flood  hazards  and in which flood insurance is available under
  the National Flood Insurance Act of nineteen hundred sixty-eight, to  an
  amount  at least equal to the outstanding principal balance of the money
  secured by the mortgage or the maximum limit of coverage available  with
  respect  to  the  buildings  under said Act, whichever is less, and in a
  company or companies to be approved by the mortgagee and will assign and
  deliver the policy or policies of such insurance to the  mortgagee,  his
  executors,  administrators,  successors  or  assigns,  which  policy  or
  policies shall have endorsed thereon the  standard  New  York  mortgagee
  clause in the name of the mortgagee, so and in such manner and form that
  he  and they shall at all time and times, until the full payment of said
  money, have and hold the said policy or policies  as  a  collateral  and
  further  security  for  the  payment of said money, and in default of so
  doing, that the mortgagee or his executors,  administrators,  successors
  or  assigns  may make such insurance from year to year, in the amount as
  aforesaid, and pay the  premium  or  premiums  therefor,  and  that  the
  mortgagor  will  pay  to  the  mortgagee, his executors, administrators,
  successors or assigns, such premium or premiums so paid,  with  interest
  from  the  time of payment, on demand, and that the same shall be deemed
  to be secured by the mortgage, and shall be  collectible  thereupon  and
  thereby  in  like  manner  as  the principal moneys, and that should the
  mortgagee by reason of such insurance receive any sum or sums  of  money
  for  damage  by flood, the provisions for retention, holding application
  and payment of said insurance money shall be as set forth  in  paragraph
  (a)  above  with  respect  to  loss  by  fire.  The  term "mortgage," as
  hereinabove used, shall be deemed to  include  agreements  extending  or
  otherwise  in  any  way modifying the terms or provisions of an existing
  mortgage. The term "mortgagor," as  hereinabove  used,  shall  mean  the
  owner  for  the  time being of the mortgaged fee or the junior mortgagee
  actually in possession of the mortgaged property, or the tenant for  the
  time  being  in  possession of the property under a lease which has been
  mortgaged. The term "mortgagee," as hereinabove used, shall be deemed to
  include the successors in interest of the mortgagee. In the  event  that
  there  be  more  than  one  mortgage  covering  the  same premises, such
  covenant must be construed as hereinbefore prescribed in this  paragraph
  except   that   the   mortgagor,  his  heirs,  successors  and  assigns,
  notwithstanding such  foregoing  provisions,  may  not  be  required  to
  provide  such  insurance,  as  to  all  the  mortgagees combined, in the
  preferential  order  of  their priority, for a total amount greater than
  the outstanding principal balance of the money secured by  the  mortgage
  or the maximum limit of coverage available with respect to the premises,
  whichever  is  less,  and  a  second  or  subordinate mortgagee shall be
  entitled to exercise the rights of  a  mortgagee  with  respect  to  the
  procurement  of such insurance and the holding of the policy or policies
  thereof as hereinbefore prescribed in this paragraph only  when  and  to
  the  extent that the mortgagor, his heirs, successors or assigns, as the
  case may be, does or do not furnish satisfactory proof of  such  maximum
  insurance  for  the  benefit of such second or subordinate mortgagee and
  one or more other mortgagees in the preferential order of their priority
  in a company or companies duly authorized to do business in this state.
    The  limitations  and  qualifications  hereinabove  imposed   on   the
  mortgagee's  right  to retain proceeds of a flood insurance policy shall
  apply only to mortgages or extensions  or  other  modifications  thereof
  made after the effective date of this act.
    4-a.  Mortgagor  to  maintain premises and all improvements thereon in
  good condition or repair. (a) A covenant contained in a mortgage on real
  property improved by a residence for four  families  or  more  that  the
  mortgagor  will  maintain  the  premises and all improvements thereon in
  "good condition or repair"  shall  be  construed  as  meaning  that  the
  mortgagor,  his  heirs, successors and assigns will, during all the time
  until the money  secured  by  the  mortgage  shall  be  fully  paid  and
  satisfied,  keep  the  premises  and  the  building or buildings erected
  thereon in good  condition  and  repair  and  free  from  violations  of
  applicable  municipal or state laws, codes or regulations concerning the
  state of such condition and/or repair. Upon a finding and  certification
  by  any  such  government  or its agency of a violation of any such law,
  code or regulation involving a serious danger to the health  and  safety
  of  the occupants of such mortgaged premises and upon the service of one
  copy thereof on the owner of record,  or  upon  the  appointment  of  an
  administrator  pursuant  to article seven-A of the real property actions
  and proceedings law, such mortgagee may declare the  entire  balance  of
  the  principal  sum  secured by such mortgage, together with all accrued
  interest, immediately due and payable upon the following conditions: the
  mortgagee shall allow the mortgagor a reasonable opportunity to  correct
  the  violation or, in the case of an administrator appointed pursuant to
  article seven-A of the real property actions  and  proceedings  law,  to
  have  such administrator removed; the mortgagee may commence foreclosure
  proceedings upon failure of  the  mortgagor  to  make  such  corrections
  within  the  time period mandated by local law, rule or code enforcement
  agency, provided, however, no such  action  shall  be  commenced  within
  thirty  days of the expiration of the period, if any, specified by local
  law, rule or  code  enforcement  regulation,  or,  in  the  case  of  an
  administrator appointed pursuant to article seven-A of the real property
  actions  and  proceedings  law,  the  mortgagee may commence foreclosure
  proceedings no earlier than sixty days after  the  appointment  of  such
  administrator.
    (b)  Should any such mortgagee commence a foreclosure proceeding based
  upon such violation and not complete the same because such violation had
  been cured, the mortgagee shall be entitled to  recover  all  reasonable
  attorney's  fees  and  disbursements  incurred  in  the bringing of such
  proceeding.
    (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the mortgagee  and
  the mortgagor shall retain all existing interest and rights.
    5. Mortgagor to warrant title. A covenant "that the mortgagor warrants
  the  title  to  the  premises,"  must  be  construed as meaning that the
  mortgagor warrants that he has good title to said  premises  and  has  a
  right  to  mortgage the same and that the mortgagor shall and will make,
  execute, acknowledge and deliver in due form of law, all such further or
  other  deeds  or  assurances  as may at any time hereafter be reasonably
  desired or required for the more fully  and  effectually  conveying  the
  premises  by  the mortgage described, and thereby granted or intended so
  to  be,  unto  the  said  mortgagee,  his   executors,   administrators,
  successors or assigns, for the purpose aforesaid, and unto all and every
  person  or  persons,  corporation  or corporations, deriving any estate,
  right, title or interest therein, under the said indenture of  mortgage,
  or  the  power  of sale therein contained, and the said granted premises
  against the said mortgagor, and all persons claiming  through  him  will
  warrant and defend.
    6.  Mortgagor to pay all taxes, assessments or water rates. A covenant
  "that the mortgagor will pay all taxes, assessments or water  rates  and
  in default thereof, the mortgagee may pay the same" must be construed as
  meaning that until the amount hereby secured is paid, the mortgagor will
  pay  all  taxes,  assessments  and  water rates which may be assessed or
  become liens on said premises, and in default thereof the holder of this
  mortgage may pay the same, and the mortgagor will repay  the  same  with
  interest,  and  the  same shall be liens on said premises and secured by
  the mortgage.
    7.  Statement  of  amount  due.  A  covenant   "that   the   mortgagor
  within ......   days  upon  request in person or within ...... days upon
  request by mail will furnish a written statement  duly  acknowledged  of
  the  amount  due  on  this  mortgage and whether any offsets or defenses
  exist against the mortgage debt" must be construed as meaning  that  the
  mortgagor,  and  any  subsequent  owner of the premises described herein
  upon request, made either personally or by mail,  shall  certify,  by  a
  writing  duly acknowledged, to the mortgagee or to any proposed assignee
  of this mortgage, the amount of principal and  interest  then  owing  on
  this  mortgage  and  whether  any  offsets or defenses exist against the
  mortgage debt within ..... days in case the request is made  personally,
  or  within ...... days  after  the  mailing  of such request in case the
  request is made by mail.
    8. Notice and demand. A covenant "that notice and  demand  or  request
  may  be  made in writing and may be served in person or by mail" must be
  construed as meaning that every  provision  for  notice  and  demand  or
  request  shall  be  deemed  fulfilled  by  written  notice and demand or
  request personally served on one or more of the persons who shall at the
  time hold the record title  to  the  premises,  or  on  their  heirs  or
  successors,  or  mailed  by  depositing it in any post-office station or
  letter-box, enclosed in a post-paid envelope addressed to such person or
  persons, or their heirs or successors, at his, their or its  address  to
  the mortgagee last known.
    9.  Power of attorney to assignee. The word "assign" or other words of
  assignment, when contained in an assignment of a mortgage  and  bond  or
  mortgage and note, must be construed as having included in their meaning
  that the assignor does thereby make, constitute and appoint the assignee
  the  true and lawful attorney, irrevocable, of the assignor, in the name
  of the assignor, or otherwise, but at the proper costs  and  charges  of
  the  assignee,  to  have, use and take all lawful ways and means for the
  recovery of the money and interest secured by the said mortgage and bond
  or mortgage and note, and in case of payment to discharge  the  same  as
  fully as the assignor might or could do if the assignment were not made.
    10.  Mortgagee  entitled  to appointment of receiver. A covenant "that
  the holder of this mortgage, in any action to  foreclose  it,  shall  be
  entitled to the appointment of a receiver," must be construed as meaning
  that  the  mortgagee, his heirs, successors or assigns, in any action to
  foreclose  the  mortgage,  shall be entitled, without notice and without
  regard to adequacy of any security of the debt, to the appointment of  a
  receiver  of  the  rents  and  profits  of  the  premises covered by the
  mortgage; and the rents and profits in  the  event  of  any  default  or
  defaults   in  paying  the  principal,  interest,  taxes,  water  rents,
  assessments or premiums of insurance, are assigned to the holder of  the
  mortgage as further security for the payment of the indebtedness.


§ 254-a. Right of election of mortgagee in certain cases. If a bond or
  note,  or the mortgage on real property, improved by a one to six family
  residence occupied by the owner, securing the payment of same,  contains
  (1)  a  provision  whereby the mortgagee retains the right to accelerate
  the due date for payment of the balance of principal upon a transfer  or
  sale  of  such  real  property  or  by  alienation of title of such real
  property due to an act or operation of law,  and  (2)  a  provision  for
  payment  of  any  charge,  however  denominated,  in  the  nature  of  a
  prepayment fee and if a mortgagor sells or transfers his property or  if
  title  to  the  mortgaged property is transferred by act or operation of
  law and the purchaser requests permission to assume the mortgage or take
  the mortgaged premises subject to the mortgage, but the  mortgagee  does
  not  consent  to such request and thereby necessitates prepayment of the
  mortgage, the mortgagee shall  not  levy  a  prepayment  fee;  provided,
  however,  that  the  provisions  of  this section shall not apply to the
  extent  such  provisions  are  inconsistent  with  any  federal  law  or
  Regulation.


§  254-b.  Limitation  on  late  charges. 1. If a bond or note, or the
  mortgage on real property, heretofore or hereafter made, improved  by  a
  one  to six family residence occupied by the owner, securing the payment
  of same, or a note representing a loan for the purpose of financing  the
  purchase  of  an  ownership  interest  in, and proprietary lease from, a
  corporation or partnership formed for the  purpose  of  the  cooperative
  ownership  of  residential real estate, contains a provision whereby the
  mortgagee or lender retains the right to collect a late  charge  on  any
  instalment  which  has become due and remains unpaid, such charge on any
  such delinquent instalment, regardless  of  the  period  it  remains  in
  default,  shall  not  exceed and shall only be enforced to the extent of
  two percent of such delinquent instalment; provided,  however,  that  no
  charge shall be imposed on any instalment paid within fifteen days after
  the  due  date.  No  such late charge shall be deducted from any regular
  instalment payment by the mortgagor or borrower, but shall be separately
  charged and collected by the mortgagee or lender. In the  absence  of  a
  specific  provision  in  a  bond, note or mortgage no late charge on any
  delinquent  instalment  shall  be  assessed  or  collected.   The   term
  "instalment"  shall  include amounts representing interest, amortization
  of principal and payments in respect of insurance  premiums,  taxes  and
  utility  charges  if  the bond, note or mortgage provides for collection
  thereof by the mortgagee.
    2. The provisions in this section shall  not  apply  to  any  loan  or
  forbearance  insured  by the federal housing commissioner or for which a
  commitment to insure has been made by the federal  housing  commissioner
  or  to  any  loan  or  forbearance insured or guaranteed pursuant to the
  provisions of an act of congress entitled "Servicemen's Readjustment Act
  of  1944",  or  to  the  extent  the  provisions  of  this  section  are
  inconsistent with any other federal law or regulation.
    3.  If  any  provision  of  this  section,  or the application of such
  provision to any  individual,  company,  corporation,  or  circumstance,
  shall   be  held  invalid,  the  remainder  of  this  section,  and  the
  application of such section to individuals, companies, corporations,  or
  circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be
  affected thereby.


§  254-c.    Right  to a copy of real property appraisals and consumer
  reports in certain cases. 1. Any lender who requires an applicant for  a
  loan  or forbearance, which is to be secured primarily by an interest in
  real property, to bear the cost of either an appraisal of said  property
  or  the cost of obtaining a consumer report subject to the provisions of
  article twenty-five of the general business law as a  condition  to  the
  processing   of   the  application  or  the  granting  of  the  loan  or
  forbearance, shall, upon the written request of such applicant,  provide
  to  him  a copy of said appraisal or consumer report as the case may be,
  at no additional cost.
    2. "Lender" as used in this section shall mean and include  any  bank,
  trust company, national bank, savings bank, federal mutual savings bank,
  savings  and  loan  association,  federal  savings and loan association,
  private banker, credit union, federal credit union, investment  company,
  insurance company, pension fund, mortgage banker or any other entity.
    3.  If  any  provision  of  this  section,  or the application of such
  provision to any individual, company, corporation or circumstance, shall
  be held invalid, the remainder of this section, and the  application  of
  such  section  to individuals, companies, corporations, or circumstances
  other than those to which it is held  invalid,  shall  not  be  affected
  Thereby.


§  254-d.  Fees by mortgagee for direct payment of real property taxes
  by mortgagor prohibited. No mortgagor on a loan secured primarily by  an
  interest  in  real  property  shall  be  charged  a fee by the mortgagee
  because the parties have  agreed  that  the  mortgagor  shall  pay  real
  property taxes on such real property directly to the taxing authority or
  authorities and not in escrow to the mortgagee or the mortgagee's agent.


§  255.  Construction  of grant of appurtenances and of all the rights
  and estate of grantor.  In any grant or mortgage of  freehold  interests
  in  real estate, the words, "together with the appurtenances and all the
  estate and rights of the grantor in  and  to  said  premises,"  must  be
  construed  as  meaning,  together  with  all and singular the tenements,
  hereditaments and  appurtenances  thereunto  belonging,  or  in  anywise
  appertaining,   and   the   reversion   and  reversions,  remainder  and
  remainders, rents, issues and profits thereof, and also all the  estate,
  right,  title,  interest, dower and right of dower, curtesy and right of
  curtesy, property, possession, claim and demand whatsoever, both in  law
  and  in  equity,  of  the  said  grantor  of, in and to the said granted
  premises and every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances.


§  256.  Construction  of  grant  in  executor's  or trustee's deed of
  appurtenances, and of the estate of testator and grantor.   In any  deed
  by an executor of, or trustee under a will, the words "together with the
  appurtenances and also all the estate which the said testator had at the
  time  of his decease in said premises, and also the estate therein which
  said grantor  has  or  has  power  to  convey  or  dispose  of,  whether
  individually  or by virtue of said will or otherwise," must be construed
  as meaning, together with all and singular the tenements,  hereditaments
  and  appurtenances  thereunto belonging, or in anywise appertaining, and
  the reversion and reversions, remainder and  remainders,  rents,  issues
  and  profits  thereof;  and also all the estate, right, title, interest,
  property, possession, claim and  demand  whatsoever,  both  in  law  and
  equity,  which the said testator had in his lifetime, and at the time of
  his decease, or which the said grantor has or has  power  to  convey  or
  dispose  of, whether individually or by virtue of the said last will and
  testament or otherwise, of, in and to the  said  granted  premises,  and
  every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances.


§  257.  Covenants  bind  representatives of grantor and mortgagor and
  inure to the benefit of whom.  All covenants contained in any  grant  or
  mortgage  of  real  estate  bind  the  heirs, executors, administrators,
  successors and assigns, of the grantor or mortgagor, and  inure  to  the
  benefit  of the heirs, executors, administrators, successors and assigns
  of the grantee or mortgagee in the same manner and to the  same  extent,
  and  with  like  effect  as  if  such  heirs, executors, administrators,
  successors and assigns were so named in such covenants, unless otherwise
  in said grant or mortgage expressly provided.


§  258.  Short  forms of deeds and mortgages. The use of the following
  forms of instruments for the conveyance and mortgage of real property is
  lawful, but this section does not prevent or invalidate the use of other
  forms:
                                 SCHEDULE A.
 
                          DEED WITH FULL COVENANTS.
  Statutory Form A.                                           (Individual)
    This indenture, made the ...... day of ........ nineteen  hundred  and
  ......,  between  .............  (insert  residence)  party of the first
  part, and .............. (insert residence) party of the second part,
    Witnesseth, that the party of the  first  part,  in  consideration  of
  ............  dollars,  lawful  money  of the United States, paid by the
  party of the second part, does hereby grant and release unto  the  party
  of  the  second  part,  ...........  and  assigns forever, all .........
  (description), together with the appurtenances and all  the  estate  and
  rights of the party of the first part in and to said premises,
    To  have and to hold the premises herein granted unto the party of the
  second part, ............ and assigns  forever.  And  said  ............
  covenants as follows:
    First.  That  said  ............  is  seized  of  said premises in fee
  simple, and has good right to convey the same;
    Second. That the party of the second part shall quietly enjoy the said
  premises;
    Third. That the said premises are free from incumbrances;
    Fourth. That the party of the first part will execute or  procure  any
  further necessary assurance of the title to said premises;
    Fifth.  That  said ............ will forever warrant the title to said
  premises.
    In witness whereof, the party of the first part has hereunto  set  his
  hand and seal the day and year first above written.
    In presence of:
                                 SCHEDULE B.
 
                          DEED WITH FULL COVENANTS.
  Statutory Form AA.                                         (Corporation)
    This  indenture,  made the ...... day of ..........., nineteen hundred
  and ............., between ............, a corporation  organized  under
  the  laws  of  ........,  party  of the first part, and ................
  (insert residence), party of the second part:
    Witnesseth, that the party of the  first  part,  in  consideration  of
  .......... dollars, lawful money of the United States, paid by the party
  of  the second part, does hereby grant and release unto the party of the
  second  part,  ............  and  assigns  forever,   all   ............
  (description),  together  with  the appurtenances and all the estate and
  rights of the party of the first part in and to said premises,
    To have and to hold the premises herein granted unto the party of  the
  second  part,  ............  and  assigns  forever. And the party of the
  first part covenants as follows:
    First. That the party of the first part is seized of the said premises
  in fee simple, and has good right to convey the same;
    Second. That the party of the second part shall quietly enjoy the said
  premises;
    Third. That the said premises are free from incumbrances;
    Fourth. That the party of the first part will execute or  procure  any
  further necessary assurance of the title to said premises;
    Fifth. That the party of the first part will forever warrant the title
  to said premises.
    In  witness  whereof,  the  party  of  the  first  part has caused its
  corporate seal to be hereunto affixed, and these presents to  be  signed
  by its duly authorized officer the day and year first above written.
 
                                 SCHEDULE C.
 
                           BARGAIN AND SALE DEED.
  Statutory Form B.                      Without Covenant against Grantor.
                                                  (Individual)
    This  indenture,  made the ....... day of .........., nineteen hundred
  and ..........., between .........., (insert  residence)  party  of  the
  first  part,  and  ...........,  (insert  residence) party of the second
  part:
    Witnesseth, that the party of the  first  part,  in  consideration  of
  ....... dollars, lawful money of the United States, paid by the party of
  the  second  part,  does  hereby grant and release unto the party of the
  second   part,   .........   and   assigns   forever,   all   ..........
  (description),  together  with  the appurtenances and all the estate and
  rights of the party of the first part in and to said premises,
    To have and to hold the above granted premises unto the party  of  the
  second part, .......... and assigns forever.
    In  witness  whereof, the party of the first part has hereunto set his
  hand and seal the day and year first above written.
    In presence of:
                                 SCHEDULE D.
 
                           BARGAIN AND SALE DEED.
  Statutory Form BB.                     Without Covenant against Grantor.
                                                  (Corporation)
    This indenture, made the ......... day of ........,  nineteen  hundred
  and  .........,  between  ..........,  a corporation organized under the
  laws of ........., party of  the  first  part,  and  ..........  (insert
  residence), party of the second part:
    Witnesseth,  that  the  party  of  the first part, in consideration of
  ....... dollars, lawful money of the United States, paid by the party of
  the second part, does hereby grant and release unto  the  party  of  the
  second   part,   .........   and   assigns   forever,   all   ..........
  (description), together with the appurtenances and all  the  estate  and
  rights of the party of the first part in and to said premises,
    To  have and to hold the premises herein granted unto the party of the
  second part, ......... and assigns forever.
    In witness whereof, the  party  of  the  first  part  has  caused  its
  corporate  seal  to be hereunto affixed, and these presents to be signed
  by its duly authorized officer the day and year first above written.
 
                                 SCHEDULE E.
 
                           BARGAIN AND SALE DEED.
  Statutory Form C.                         With Covenant against Grantor.
                                                    (Individual)
    This indenture, made  the  .........  day  of  ............,  nineteen
  hundred  and  .........., between ..........., (insert residence), party
  of the first part, and ..........., (insert  residence),  party  of  the
  second part:
    Witnesseth,  that  the  party  of  the first part, in consideration of
  ....... dollars, lawful money of the United States, paid by the party of
  the second part, does hereby grant and release unto  the  party  of  the
  second   part,   his   heirs   and   assigns   forever,  all  ..........
  (description), together with the appurtenances and all  the  estate  and
  rights of the party of the first part in and to said premises.
    To  have and to hold the premises herein granted unto the party of the
  second part, his heirs and assigns forever. And the party of  the  first
  part  covenants  that  he  has not done or suffered anything whereby the
  said premises have been incumbered in any way whatever.
    In witness whereof, the party of the first part has hereunto  set  his
  hand and seal the day and year first above written.
    In presence of:
                                 SCHEDULE F.
 
                           BARGAIN AND SALE DEED.
  Statutory Form CC.                        With Covenant against Grantor.
                                                    (Corporation)
    This  indenture,  made the ....... day of .........., nineteen hundred
  and ..........., between ............, a corporation organized under the
  laws of ........, party of the first part, and ................, (insert
  residence), party of the second part:
    Witnesseth, that the party of the  first  part,  in  consideration  of
  ........  dollars,  lawful money of the United States, paid by the party
  of the second part, does hereby grant and release unto the party of  the
  second    part,    ...................    and   assigns   forever,   all
  .................. (description), together with  the  appurtenances  and
  all  the estate and rights of the party of the first part in and to said
  premises.
    To have and to hold the premises herein granted unto the party of  the
  second  part, ................ and assigns forever. And the party of the
  first part covenants that it has not done or suffered  anything  whereby
  the said premises have been incumbered in any way whatever.
    In  witness  whereof,  the  party  of  the  first  part has caused its
  corporate seal to be hereunto affixed and these presents to be signed by
  its duly authorized officer the day and year first above written.
 
                                 SCHEDULE G.
 
                               QUITCLAIM DEED.
  Statutory Form D.                                           (Individual)
    This indenture, made the ....... day of ..........., nineteen  hundred
  and  ..........,  between  ..............., (insert residence), party of
  the first part, and .............., (insert  residence),  party  of  the
  second part:
    Witnesseth,  that  the  party  of  the first part, in consideration of
  ........... dollars, lawful money of the  United  States,  paid  by  the
  party  of  the  second  part, does hereby remise, release, and quitclaim
  unto the party of the second part, ............... and assigns  forever,
  all  (description),  together  with the appurtenances and all the estate
  and rights of the party of the first part in and to said premises.
    To have and to hold the premises herein granted unto the party of  the
  second part, ............ and assigns forever.
    In  witness  whereof, the party of the first part has hereunto set his
  hand and seal the day and year first above written.
    In presence of:
                                 SCHEDULE H.
 
                               QUITCLAIM DEED.
  Statutory Form DD.                                         (Corporation)
    This indenture, made the ....... day of ..........., nineteen  hundred
  and  ..........,  between ..............., a corporation organized under
  the   laws   of   ..........,   party   of   the   first    part,    and
  ....................  (insert residence), party of the second part:
    Witnesseth,  that  the  party  of  the first part, in consideration of
  ....... dollars, lawful money of the United States, paid by the party of
  the second part, does hereby remise,  release  and  quitclaim  unto  the
  party   of   the  second  part,  his  heirs  and  assigns  forever,  all
  ............  (description), together with the appurtenances and all the
  estate and rights of the  party  of  the  first  part  in  and  to  said
  premises.
    To  have and to hold the premises herein granted unto the party of the
  second part, his heirs and assigns forever.
    In witness whereof, the  party  of  the  first  part  has  caused  its
  corporate seal to be hereunto affixed and these presents to be signed by
  its duly authorized officer the day and year first above written.
 
                                 SCHEDULE I.
 
                              EXECUTOR'S DEED.
  Statutory Form E.
    This  indenture,  made  the  ........  day of .............., nineteen
  hundred  and  ...........,  between   .............   as   executor   of
  ...........  the  last  will  and  testament  of  ............,  late of
  .........., deceased, party of the first part, and ...........,  (insert
  residence) party of the second part:
    Witnesseth,  that  the party of the first part, by virtue of the power
  and authority to him given in and by the said last will  and  testament,
  and  in consideration of ........... dollars, lawful money of the United
  States, paid by the party of the second  part,  does  hereby  grant  and
  release  unto  the  party of the second part, ............ his heirs and
  assigns  forever,  all  ...........  (description),  together  with  the
  appurtenances,  and  also  all the estate which the said testator had at
  the time of his decease in said premises, and also the  estate  therein,
  which  the party of the first part has or has power to convey or dispose
  of, whether individually, or by virtue of said will or otherwise.
    To have and to hold the premises herein granted unto the party of  the
  second part, ........... and assigns forever.
    And  the  party  of  the  first part covenants that he has not done or
  suffered anything whereby the said premises have been incumbered in  any
  way whatever.
    In  witness  whereof, the party of the first part has hereunto set his
  hand and seal the day and year first above written.
    In presence of:
 
                                 SCHEDULE J.
 
                       REFEREE'S DEED IN FORECLOSURE.
  Statutory Form F.
    This deed, made the ........ day of  .............,  nineteen  hundred
  and  ..........,  between  ...........,  referee  duly  appointed in the
  action  hereinafter  mentioned,  grantor,  and   .............   (insert
  residence), grantee:
    Witnesseth,  that  the  grantor,  the  referee  appointed in an action
  between ..........., plaintiffs, and .........., defendants, foreclosing
  a mortgage recorded on the ....... day of ........., in  the  office  of
  the  ...........  of  the  county  of  ...........,  in liber ....... of
  mortgages, at page ........, in pursuance of a  judgment  entered  at  a
  special  term  of the ........., on the ......... day of .........., and
  in consideration of ......... dollars paid by  the  grantee,  being  the
  highest  sum  bid at the sale under said judgment, does hereby grant and
  convey unto the grantee, all (description),
    To  have  and  to  hold  the premises herein granted unto the grantee,
  ........... and assigns forever.
    In witness whereof, the grantor has hereunto set his hand and seal.
    In presence of:
                                 SCHEDULE K.
 
                        REFEREE'S DEED IN PARTITION.
  Statutory Form G.
    This deed, made the ......... day of ..........., nineteen hundred and
  .........., between ..........., referee duly appointed  in  the  action
  hereinafter  mentioned,  grantor,  and ............, (insert residence),
  grantee:
    Witnesseth, that the grantor, the referee appointed in  an  action  in
  partition between .........., plaintiffs, and .........., defendants, in
  pursuance  of a judgment entered at a special term of the .........., on
  the ....... day of ........., and in consideration of .......... dollars
  paid by the grantee, being the highest sum bid at the  sale  under  said
  judgment,   does   hereby   grant   and  convey  unto  the  grantee  all
  (description),
    To have and to hold the premises  herein  granted  unto  the  grantee,
  .......... and assigns forever.
    In witness whereof, the grantor has hereunto set his hand and seal.
    In presence of:
                                 SCHEDULE L.
 
                            ASSIGNMENT OF LEASE.
  Statutory Form H.
    Know   that  ..........,  assignor,  in  consideration  of  ..........
  dollars, paid by .........., assignee, hereby assigns unto the assignee,
  a certain lease made by .........., to .........., dated  the  .........
  day  of  ........, and recorded on the ....... day of .........., in the
  office of the .......... of the county of .........., in  liber  .......
  of conveyances, at page ........, covering premises .........., together
  with the premises therein described, and the buildings thereon, with the
  appurtenances,
    To have and to hold the same unto the assignee, ......... and assigns,
  from  the  ........  day of .........., nineteen hundred and ..........,
  for all the rest of ......... years mentioned in the said lease, subject
  to the rents, covenants, conditions and provisos therein also mentioned.
    And the assignor hereby covenants that the said assigned premises  are
  free from incumbrances.
    In  witness  whereof,  the assignor has hereunto set his hand and seal
  this ....... day of .........., nineteen hundred and .........
    In presence of:
                                 SCHEDULE M
 
                                  MORTGAGE
  Statutory Form M.
    This mortgage, made the ........ day of ..........., nineteen  hundred
  and   ............,  between  ...............,  (insert  residence)  the
  mortgagor, and .............. (insert residence), the mortgagee.
    Witnesseth, that to secure the payment of an indebtedness in  the  sum
  of  .........  dollars, lawful money of the United States, to be paid on
  the ........ day of ..........., nineteen hundred and ...........,  with
  interest  thereon  to  be  computed  from  ..........,  at  the  rate of
  .........  per centum per annum, and to be paid  ...........,  according
  to  a  certain  bond  or  obligation  bearing  even  date  herewith, the
  mortgagor hereby mortgages to the mortgagee (description).
    And the mortgagor covenants with the mortgagee as follows:
    1.  That  the  mortgagor  will  pay  the  indebtedness as hereinbefore
  provided.
    2. That the mortgagor will keep the buildings on the premises  insured
  against  loss  by  fire  for  the benefit of the mortgagee; that he will
  assign and deliver the policies to  the  mortgagee;  and  that  he  will
  reimburse  the mortgagee for any premiums paid for insurance made by the
  mortgagee on the mortgagor's default in so insuring the buildings or  in
  so assigning and delivering the policies.
    3.  That  no  building  on the premises shall be removed or demolished
  without the consent of the mortgagee.
    4. That the whole of said principal sum and interest shall become  due
  at  the  option  of  the  mortgagee: after default in the payment of any
  installment of principal or of interest for ..........  days;  or  after
  default  in  the  payment  of  any  tax,  water  rate  or assessment for
  .........  days after notice and demand; or after default  after  notice
  and  demand either in assigning and delivering the policies insuring the
  buildings against loss by fire  or  in  reimbursing  the  mortgagee  for
  premiums  paid  on  such  insurance,  as hereinbefore provided; or after
  default upon request in furnishing a statement of the amount due on  the
  mortgage  and whether any offsets or defenses exist against the mortgage
  debt, as hereinafter provided.
    5. That the holder of this mortgage, in any action  to  foreclose  it,
  shall be entitled to the appointment of a receiver.
    6.  That the mortgagor will pay all taxes, assessments or water rates,
  and in default thereof, the mortgagee may pay the same.
    7. That the mortgagor within ......... days upon request in person  or
  within  .........  days  upon  request  by  mail  will furnish a written
  statement duly acknowledged of the  amount  due  on  this  mortgage  and
  whether any offsets or defenses exist against the mortgage debt.
    8.  That  notice  and  demand  or request may be in writing and may be
  served in person or by mail.
    9. That the mortgagor warrants the title to the premises.
    In witness whereof  this  mortgage  has  been  duly  executed  by  the
  mortgagor.
    In presence of:
                                 SCHEDULE N
 
                              BOND AND MORTGAGE
  Statutory Form MN.
    This bond and mortgage, made the ........ day of ................... ,
  nineteen hundred and ............, between  .......................... ,
                                                    (insert residence)
  herein referred to as the mortgagor, and  ............................ ,
                                                    (insert residence)
  herein referred to as the mortgagee.
    Witnesseth, that the mortgagor, do hereby acknowledge ................
  to  be indebted to the mortgagee in the sum of ................ dollars,
  lawful money of the United States, which the mortgagor do  hereby  agree
  and bind ................ to pay to the mortgagee ..................  on
  the ...... day of ..............., nineteen hundred and ...............,
  with  interest  thereon  to  be  computed  from .......................,
  at  the  rate   of ........... per centum per annum,   and  to  be  paid
  ........................................................................
        (insert terms of payment of interest and/or principal)
  and to secure the payment of which  the mortgagor  hereby  mortgages to
  the mortgagee  .........................................................
                                                         (description)
    And the mortgagor covenants with the mortgagee as follows:
    1.  That  the  mortgagor  will  pay  the  indebtedness as hereinbefore
  provided.
    2. That the mortgagor will keep the buildings on the premises  insured
  against  loss  by  fire  for  the benefit of the mortgagee; that he will
  assign and deliver the policies to  the  mortgagee;  and  that  he  will
  reimburse  the mortgagee for any premiums paid for insurance made by the
  mortgagee on the mortgagor's default in so insuring the buildings or  in
  so assigning and delivering the policies.
    3.  That  no  building  on the premises shall be removed or demolished
  without the consent of the mortgagee.
    4. That the whole of said principal sum and interest shall become  due
  at  the  option  of  the  mortgagee: after default in the payment of any
  installment of principal or of interest for ..........  days;  or  after
  default  in  the  payment  of  any  tax,  water  rate  or assessment for
  .........  days after notice and demand; or after default  after  notice
  and  demand either in assigning and delivering the policies insuring the
  buildings against loss by fire  or  in  reimbursing  the  mortgagee  for
  premiums  paid  on  such  insurance,  as hereinbefore provided; or after
  default upon request in furnishing a statement of the amount due on  the
  bond  and mortgage and whether any offsets or defenses exist against the
  mortgage debt, as hereinafter provided.
    5. That the holder of  this  bond  and  mortgage,  in  any  action  to
  foreclose  the  mortgage,  shall  be  entitled  to  the appointment of a
  receiver.
    6. That the mortgagor will pay all taxes, assessments or water  rates,
  and in default thereof, the mortgagee may pay the same.
    7.  That the mortgagor within ......... days upon request in person or
  within ......... days upon  request  by  mail  will  furnish  a  written
  statement  duly acknowledged of the amount due on this bond and mortgage
  and whether any offsets or defenses exist against the mortgage debt.
    8. That notice and demand or request may be  in  writing  and  may  be
  served in person or by mail.
    9. That the mortgagor warrants the title to the premises.
    In  witness  whereof  this  bond and mortgage has been duly signed and
  sealed by the mortgagor.
    In the presence of:
                                 SCHEDULE O.
 
                           ASSIGNMENT OF MORTGAGE.
  Statutory Form I.                                      Without Covenant.
    Know that .........., assignor, in consideration of  .......  dollars,
  paid  by  ............,  assignee,  hereby  assigns unto the assignee, a
  certain mortgage made by ..........., given to secure payment of the sum
  of ........ dollars and interest, dated the ........ day of ...........,
  recorded on the ........ day  of  ...........,  in  the  office  of  the
  .......... of the county of ........., in liber ....... of mortgages, at
  page  ........,  covering  premises  ....... , together with the bond or
  obligation described in said mortgage, and the moneys due  and  to  grow
  due thereon with the interest,
    To have and to hold the same unto the assignee, and to the successors,
  legal representatives and assigns of the assignee forever.
    In  witness  whereof,  the assignor has hereunto set his hand and seal
  this ........ day of ..........., nineteen hundred and ...........
    In presence of:
                                 SCHEDULE P
                           ASSIGNMENT OF MORTGAGE
  Statutory form J.                                          With covenant
    Know that ..........., assignor, in consideration of ........ dollars,
  paid  by  ..........,  assignee,  hereby  assigns  unto  the assignee, a
  certain mortgage made by ............, given to secure  payment  of  the
  sum  of  .........  dollars  and  interest,  dated  the  .......  day of
  ..........., recorded on the .......... day of  ..............,  in  the
  office  of  the  ..............  of  the county of ..........., in liber
  ....... of mortgages, at page .......,  covering  premises  ...........,
  together with the bond or obligation described in said mortgage, and the
  moneys due and to grow due thereon with the interest,
    To have and to hold the same unto the assignee, and to the successors,
  legal representatives and assigns of the assignee forever.
    And the assignor covenants that there is now owing upon said mortgage,
  without   offset   or   defense  of  any  kind,  the  principal  sum  of
  .............  dollars, with interest thereon at ....... per centum  per
  annum   from   the  .......  day  of  .........,  nineteen  hundred  and
  ...........
    In witness whereof, the assignor has hereunto set his  hand  and  seal
  this ....... day of ........, nineteen hundred and ............
  In presence of:
                                 SCHEDULE Q
 
                    RELEASE OF PART OF MORTGAGED PREMISES
  Statutory form K.
    This indenture, made the ....... day of ........, nineteen hundred and
  .........,  between  ..........,  party of the first part, and ........,
  party of the second part,
    Whereas, ............. by indenture  of  mortgage,  bearing  date  the
  .......   day of ........., nineteen hundred and .........., recorded in
  the office of the .......... of the county of  .............,  in  liber
  .......  of  mortgages,  of  section  ........,  page  ........,  on the
  ........ day of .........., nineteen hundred and ............,  for  the
  consideration  therein mentioned, and to secure the payment of the money
  therein specified, did mortgage certain lands and tenements of which the
  lands hereinafter described are part, unto ............,
    And whereas, the party of the first part, at the request of the  party
  of  the  second  part,  has  agreed  to  give up and surrender the lands
  hereinafter described unto the party of the second part, and to hold and
  retain the residue of the mortgaged lands  as  security  for  the  money
  remaining due on said mortgage,
    Now  this  indenture  witnesseth, that the party of the first part, in
  pursuance of said agreement, and in consideration  of  .......  dollars,
  lawful  money  of  the United States, ............. paid by the party of
  the second part, does grant, release and quitclaim unto the party of the
  second part, all that part of said mortgaged lands described as follows:
  ........................................... (description),
    Together with the hereditaments and appurtenances thereunto belonging,
  and all the right, title and interest of the party of  the  first  part,
  of, in and to the same, to the intent that the lands hereby released may
  be  discharged from said mortgage, and that the rest of the land in said
  mortgage specified may remain mortgaged to the party of the  first  part
  as heretofore,
    To  have  and  to  hold  the  lands  and  premises hereby released and
  quitclaimed to the party of the second part, ............  and  assigns,
  to  ..........  and  their  own  proper use, benefit and behoof forever,
  free, clear and discharged of and from all lien and claim under  and  by
  virtue of the indenture of mortgage aforesaid.
    In  witness whereof, the party of the first part has signed and sealed
  these presents the day and year first above written.
  In presence of:
                                 SCHEDULE R.
 
                          SATISFACTION OF MORTGAGE.
  Statutory Form L.
    Know  all men by these presents, that ....... do hereby certify that a
  certain indenture of mortgage, bearing date the ....... day of ........,
  nineteen hundred and ..........., made and executed by  ...........,  to
  secure  payment of the principal sum of .......... dollars and interest,
  and duly recorded in the office of the ............  of  the  county  of
  .............,  in liber ....... of mortgages, of section ........, page
  ......,  on  the  .......  day  of  ...........,  nineteen  hundred  and
  ...........,  is paid, and do hereby consent that the same be discharged
  of record.
    Dated the ....... day of ........, nineteen hundred and ..........
    In presence of:


§  259-c.  Provision  in lease of real property for waiver of trial by
  jury in actions for personal injury or property damage. Any provision in
  a lease, executed after the effective date of this act, that a trial  by
  jury  is  waived  in  any  action, proceeding or counterclaim brought by
  either of the parties thereto  against  the  other  in  any  action  for
  personal injury or property damage, is null and void.


§  260.  Lands  adversely held may be conveyed or mortgaged. No grant,
  conveyance or mortgage of real property or  interest  therein  shall  be
  void  for  the reason that at the time of the delivery thereof such real
  property is in the actual possession of a person claiming under a  title
  adverse to that of the grantor.


§  261.  Maintenance  of  telegraph  or other electric wires raises no
  presumption of grant. Whenever any wire or cable used for any telegraph,
  telephone, electric light or other electric purpose, or for the  purpose
  of  communication  otherwise than by the aid of electricity, is or shall
  be attached to, or does or shall extend upon or  over  any  building  or
  land,  no  lapse of time whatever shall raise a presumption of any grant
  of, or justify a prescription of any perpetual right to, such attachment
  or extension.


§ 265. Fraudulent intent, question of fact. The question of fraudulent
  intent  in a case arising under this article, shall be deemed a question
  of fact and not of law; and a conveyance or charge shall not be adjudged
  fraudulent as against creditors, purchasers or incumbrancers, solely  on
  the ground that it was not founded on a valuable consideration.


§  265-a.  Home  equity theft prevention. 1. (a) The legislature finds
  and declares that homeowners who are in default on their mortgages or in
  foreclosure may be vulnerable to fraud, deception, and unfair dealing by
  home equity purchasers. The  recent  rapid  escalation  of  home  values
  throughout  urban and rural areas has resulted in a significant increase
  in home equity, which constitutes the greatest financial asset  held  by
  many  homeowners  of  this  state.  During  the  time period between the
  default on  the  mortgage  and  the  scheduled  foreclosure  sale  date,
  homeowners   in   financial  distress,  especially  poor,  elderly,  and
  financially unsophisticated homeowners,  are  vulnerable  to  aggressive
  "equity  purchasers"  who  induce  homeowners  to sell their homes for a
  small fraction of their fair market values, or in some cases  even  sign
  away  their  homes,  through the use of schemes which often involve oral
  and  written  misrepresentations,  deceit,   intimidation,   and   other
  unreasonable commercial practices.
    (b)  The  legislature  declares  that  it is the express policy of the
  state to preserve and guard the precious asset of home equity,  and  the
  social as well as the economic value of homeownership.
    (c)  The  legislature  further finds that equity purchasers may have a
  significant impact upon the economy and well-being of this state and its
  local communities, and therefore the  provisions  of  this  section  are
  necessary to promote the public welfare.
    (d) The intent and purposes of this section are to provide a homeowner
  with  information necessary to make an informed and intelligent decision
  regarding the sale  or  transfer  of  his  or  her  home  to  an  equity
  purchaser;  to require that the sales agreement be expressed in writing;
  to safeguard equity sellers against deceit and  financial  hardship;  to
  ensure,  foster  and  encourage fair dealing in the sale and purchase of
  homes in foreclosure or default; to prohibit representations  that  tend
  to  mislead; to prohibit or restrict unfair contract terms; to provide a
  cooling off period for equity sellers who enter into covered  contracts;
  to  afford  equity  sellers  a  reasonable and meaningful opportunity to
  rescind sales to equity purchasers; and to  preserve  and  protect  home
  equity for the homeowners of this state.
    2. The following definitions shall apply to this section:
    (a)  "Bona  fide  purchaser  or  encumbrancer  for value" means anyone
  acting in good faith who purchases the residential  real  property  from
  the  equity  purchaser for valuable consideration or provides the equity
  purchaser with a mortgage or provides a subsequent bona  fide  purchaser
  with  a  mortgage,  provided  that he or she had no notice of the equity
  seller's continuing right to, or equity in, the property  prior  to  the
  acquisition of title or encumbrance, or of any violation of this section
  by the equity purchaser as related to the subject property.
    (b)  "Business day" means any calendar day except Sunday or the public
  holidays as set forth in section twenty-four of the general construction
  law.
    (c) "Covered contract" means any contract, agreement, or  arrangement,
  or  any  term  thereof,  between  an  equity purchaser and equity seller
  which:
    (i) is incident to the sale of a residence in foreclosure; or
    (ii) is incident to the sale of a residence in foreclosure or  default
  where  such  contract,  agreement or arrangement includes a reconveyance
  arrangement; or
    (iii) is incident to the sale of a residence that  is  the  collateral
  for  a "distressed home loan" as defined in paragraph (d) of subdivision
  one of section two hundred sixty-five-b of this article.
    For purposes of this  section,  any  reference  to  the  "sale"  of  a
  residence  by  an  equity  seller to an equity purchaser shall include a
  transaction where an  equity  seller  receives  consideration  from  the
  equity purchaser, and a transaction involving a transfer of title to the
  equity  purchaser  where  no  consideration  is  provided  to the equity
  seller.
    (d)  "Default"  means  that  the  equity  seller is two months or more
  behind in his or her mortgage payments.
    (e) "Equity purchaser" means any person who or entity  which  acquires
  title  to any residence in foreclosure or, where applicable, default, or
  the  representative  of  such  person  or  entity  as  defined  in  this
  subdivision, except a person who acquires such title as follows:
    (i)  to  use,  and  who  uses,  such  property  as  his or her primary
  residence;
    (ii) by a deed from a referee in a foreclosure sale conducted pursuant
  to article thirteen of the real property actions and proceedings law;
    (iii) at any sale of property authorized by statute;
    (iv) by order or judgment of any court;
    (v) from a spouse, or from a parent, grandparent, child, grandchild or
  sibling of such person or such person's spouse;
    (vi) as a not-for-profit housing organization or as a  public  housing
  agency; or
    (vii) a bona fide purchaser or encumbrancer for value.
    (f)  "Equity seller" means a natural person who is a property owner or
  homeowner at the time of the equity sale.
    * (g) "Foreclosure" means that there is an active lis pendens filed in
  court pursuant to article thirteen of  the  real  property  actions  and
  proceedings law against the subject property, or the subject property is
  on an active property tax lien sale list.
    * NB Effective until December 14, 2023
    * (g)  "Foreclosure"  means that there is an active notice of pendency
  filed in court pursuant to article thirteen of the real property actions
  and proceedings law, or a foreclosure action pursuant to article  eleven
  or  thirteen  of  the real property actions and proceedings law has been
  commenced against the subject  property,  or  an  action  to  enforce  a
  mortgage  note has been commenced against the borrower whose property is
  secured by a mortgage loan, or the subject  property  is  on  an  active
  property tax or utility lien sale list.
    * NB Effective December 14, 2023
    (h)  "Property  owner"  or  "homeowner"  means any or all record title
  owners of  the  residential  real  property  in  foreclosure  or,  where
  applicable, default at the time of the equity sale.
    (i) "Reconveyance arrangement" means:
    (i)  the  transfer  of title to residential real property by an equity
  seller who is in default or foreclosure, either by transfer of  interest
  from  an  equity  seller  to  an  equity  purchaser  or by creation of a
  mortgage or other lien or encumbrance during  the  time  of  default  or
  foreclosure  that  allows  the  equity  purchaser  to  obtain  legal  or
  equitable title to all or part of the property, and
    (ii) the subsequent conveyance, or promise of a subsequent conveyance,
  of an interest back to the equity seller by the  equity  purchaser  that
  allows  the  equity  seller  to regain possession of the property, which
  interest shall include but not  be  limited  to  a  purchase  agreement,
  option to purchase, or lease.
    (j)  "Representative"  means  a  person  who  in  any manner solicits,
  induces, arranges, or causes any equity  seller  to  transfer  title  or
  solicits any member of the equity seller's family or household to induce
  or  cause  any  equity  seller  to  transfer  title  to the residence in
  foreclosure or, where applicable, default to the equity purchaser.
    (k) "Residence" and "residential real property" means residential real
  property consisting of one- to four-family dwelling units, one of  which
  the  equity  seller  occupies or occupied at a time immediately prior to
  the equity sale as his or her primary residence.
    3.  Every covered contract and notice of cancellation attached thereto
  shall be written in letters of a size equal  to  at  least  twelve-point
  bold  type,  in English or in both English and Spanish if Spanish is the
  primary language of the equity seller, and shall be fully completed  and
  signed  and  dated  by  the  equity  seller  and  equity  purchaser. Any
  instrument of conveyance shall become effective no sooner than  midnight
  of  the  fifth business day after the date on which the covered contract
  is executed.
    4. All covered contracts shall contain the  entire  agreement  of  the
  parties and shall include, but not be limited to, the following terms:
    (a) The name, business address, and the telephone number of the equity
  purchaser;
    (b)  The address of the residence in foreclosure or, where applicable,
  default;
    (c) The total consideration to be given by  the  equity  purchaser  in
  connection with or incident to the sale;
    (d)   A  complete  description  of  the  terms  of  payment  or  other
  consideration including, but not limited to, any services of any  nature
  which  the  equity  purchaser  represents he or she will perform for the
  equity seller before or after the sale;
    (e) The time, if any, at which physical possession of the residence is
  to be transferred to the equity purchaser and the residence  vacated  by
  the equity seller;
    (f) The terms of any rental or lease agreement;
    (g) The terms of any reconveyance arrangement;
    (h)  A  notice  of  cancellation  as  provided  in  paragraph  (a)  of
  subdivision six of this section; and
    (i) The following notice shall appear on  the  contract  in  immediate
  proximity  to  the  space reserved for the equity seller's signature and
  shall be in at least fourteen-point bold type if the covered contract is
  printed or in capital letters if the  covered  contract  is  typed.  The
  notice  must  contain  the name of the equity purchaser and the date and
  time by which the covered contract must be cancelled. The  notice  shall
  be completed by the equity purchaser:
                      "NOTICE REQUIRED BY NEW YORK LAW
  You   may   cancel   this  contract  at  any  time  before  midnight  of
  ________________________________________.
                                     (Date)
  ________________________________________________________________________
                         (Name of Equity Purchaser)
  or anyone working for ____________________________ CANNOT ask you to
                         (Name of Equity Purchaser)
  sign or have you sign any deed or any other document until your right to
  cancel this contract has ended.   See attached  notice  of  cancellation
  form  for  an  explanation  of  this right. You should always consult an
  attorney or community organization before signing  any  legal  documents
  concerning  your  home. It is advisable that you find your own attorney,
  and not consult with an attorney who has been provided  to  you  by  the
  purchaser.  The  law  requires  that  this  contract  contain the entire
  agreement. You should not rely upon any other written or oral  agreement
  or promise."
    The  equity  purchaser  shall  accurately  enter the date on which the
  right to cancel ends. The covered  contract  required  by  this  section
  shall  survive delivery of any instrument of conveyance of the residence
  in foreclosure or, where applicable, default, and shall have  no  effect
  on persons other than the parties to the covered contract.
    5. (a) In addition to the right of rescission described in subdivision
  eight  of  this  section,  the equity seller has the right to cancel any
  covered  contract  with  an  equity  purchaser  until  midnight  of  the
  fourteenth business day following the day on which the equity seller and
  equity  purchaser  sign  a  covered  contract  that  complies  with this
  section.
    (b) Cancellation occurs when the equity seller, or a representative of
  the equity seller, personally delivers written notice of cancellation to
  the address specified in the covered contract  or  sends  a  letter  via
  facsimile  or  other means of written communication, United States mail,
  or through an established commercial letter delivery service, indicating
  cancellation to the business address of the equity purchaser  listed  on
  the  covered  contract.  Proof of facsimile delivery or proof of mailing
  creates  a  presumption  that  the  notice  of  cancellation  has   been
  delivered.
    (c)  A  notice  of cancellation given by the equity seller pursuant to
  paragraph (a) of this subdivision need not take the particular  form  as
  provided  with the covered contract and, however expressed, is effective
  if it indicates the intention of the equity seller not to  be  bound  by
  the covered contract.
    (d)  Within  ten  days  following  receipt of a notice of cancellation
  given in accordance with this subdivision, the  equity  purchaser  shall
  return  without  condition  any  original covered contract and any other
  documents signed by the equity seller  as  well  as  any  fee  or  other
  consideration  received  by the equity purchaser from the equity seller.
  Cancellation of the contract shall release  the  equity  seller  of  all
  obligations to pay fees to the equity purchaser.
    6.  (a)  The covered contract shall be accompanied by a form completed
  by the equity purchaser in duplicate, captioned "notice of cancellation"
  in at least twelve-point bold type if the covered contract is printed or
  in capital letters if the covered contract is typed. This form shall  be
  attached  to the covered contract, shall be easily detachable, and shall
  contain in type of at least twelve-point  if  the  covered  contract  is
  printed  or  in  capital  letters  if the covered contract is typed, the
  following statement written in the same language as used in the  covered
  contract:
                           "NOTICE OF CANCELLATION
   This contract was entered into on ____________________________________
                    (Enter date covered contract signed)
  You  may  cancel  this  contract for the sale of your house, without any
  penalty   or   obligation,   at   any   time    before    midnight    of
  ___________________________. (Enter date)
  To  cancel  this transaction, personally deliver a signed and dated copy
  of this cancellation notice, or send  it  by  facsimile,  United  States
  mail,  or  an established commercial letter delivery service, indicating
  cancellation to ____________________________________________________, at
  (Name of purchaser) ___________________________________
  (Street address of purchaser's place of business and facsimile number if
  any) NOT LATER THAN midnight of _______________________________________.
                                      (Enter date)
  If you wish to cancel this contract,  sign  and  date  both  copies  and
  return one copy immediately to the purchaser.
  I hereby cancel this transaction.
  __________________________________/_______________________________"
    (Seller's signature)                         (Date)
    (b)  The  equity  purchaser  shall provide each equity seller with two
  copies of the covered contract and attached notice of cancellation.  The
  equity  purchaser  shall accurately enter the date on which the right to
  cancel ends.
    7.  (a)  Before midnight of the fourteenth business day after the date
  on which the covered contract is executed, the  equity  purchaser  shall
  not do any of the following:
    (i)  accept  from  any  equity  seller  an execution of, or induce any
  equity seller to execute, any instrument of conveyance of  any  interest
  in the residence in foreclosure or, where applicable, default;
    (ii)  record  with  the  county clerk any document, including, but not
  limited to, any instrument of conveyance, signed by the equity seller;
    (iii) transfer or encumber or purport  to  transfer  or  encumber  any
  interest  in  the residence in foreclosure or, where applicable, default
  to any third party;
    (iv) pay the equity seller any consideration; or
    (v) suggest, encourage, or provide any form which  allows  the  equity
  seller  to  waive  his  or  her  right  to  cancel or rescind under this
  section.
    (b) An equity purchaser shall make no false  or  misleading  statement
  regarding   the   value  of  the  residence  in  foreclosure  or,  where
  applicable, default; the amount  of  proceeds  the  equity  seller  will
  receive after a foreclosure sale; the timing of the judicial foreclosure
  process;  any  contract  term; the equity seller's rights or obligations
  incident to or arising out of the sale transaction; the  nature  of  any
  document  which  the equity purchaser induces the equity seller to sign;
  or any other false or misleading statement concerning the  sale  of  the
  residence  in  foreclosure  or, where applicable, default, or concerning
  the reconveyance arrangement.
    (c) An equity purchaser is prohibited from representing,  directly  or
  indirectly, that:
    (i)  the  equity purchaser is acting as an advisor or a consultant, or
  in any other manner represents that the equity purchaser  is  acting  on
  behalf of the equity seller;
    (ii)  the  equity  purchaser  has  certification or licensure that the
  equity purchaser does not have, or that the equity purchaser  is  not  a
  member of a licensed profession if he or she is actually such a member;
    (iii)  the equity purchaser is assisting the equity seller to save the
  house unless the equity  purchaser  has  a  good  faith  basis  for  the
  representation; or
    (iv) the equity purchaser is assisting the equity seller in preventing
  a  completed  foreclosure  unless  the equity purchaser has a good faith
  basis for the representation.
    (d) It is unlawful for any equity purchaser to initiate,  enter  into,
  negotiate, or consummate any covered contract involving residential real
  property  in  foreclosure  or,  where applicable, default if such equity
  purchaser, by the terms of such covered contract, takes undue  advantage
  of the equity seller.
    8.   (a)  Any  transaction  involving  residential  real  property  in
  foreclosure or, where applicable, default which is in material violation
  of subdivision three, four, six, seven or  eleven  of  this  section  is
  voidable  and  the  transaction  may  be  rescinded by the equity seller
  within two years of the date of the recording of the conveyance  of  the
  residential real property in foreclosure or, where applicable, default.
    (b)  Such rescission shall be effected by giving written notice to the
  equity purchaser and his or her successor in interest, if the  successor
  is  not  a bona fide purchaser or encumbrancer for value as set forth in
  paragraph (c) of this subdivision, and by recording such notice with the
  county clerk of the county in which the property is located, within  two
  years  of  the  date  of  the  recording of the conveyance to the equity
  purchaser. The notice of rescission shall contain the name of the equity
  seller and the name of the equity purchaser in addition to any successor
  in  interest  holding  record title to the residential real property and
  shall particularly describe such residential real property.  The  equity
  purchaser and his or her successor in interest if the successor is not a
  bona  fide purchaser or encumbrancer for value as set forth in paragraph
  (c) of this subdivision, shall have twenty days after  the  delivery  of
  the  notice in which to reconvey title to the property free and clear of
  encumbrances created subsequent to the rescinded transaction  and  which
  are  due  to  the actions of the equity purchaser. As a condition of the
  reconveyance of title, the equity seller  shall  return  to  the  equity
  purchaser  any  consideration received from the equity purchaser as part
  of the original transaction. Upon failure to reconvey title within  such
  time,  the  equity  seller may bring an action to enforce the rescission
  and for cancellation of the covered contract and deed.
    (c) The provisions of this subdivision shall not affect  the  interest
  of  a  bona fide purchaser or encumbrancer for value if such purchase or
  encumbrance occurred prior to the recording of the notice of  rescission
  pursuant  to  paragraph  (b)  of  this  subdivision.  Knowledge that the
  property  was  residential  real  property  in  foreclosure  or,   where
  applicable,  default  shall  not  impair  the  status of such persons or
  entities as bona  fide  purchasers  or  encumbrancers  for  value.  This
  subdivision  shall  not  be deemed to abrogate any duty of inquiry which
  exists as to rights  or  interests  of  persons  in  possession  of  the
  residential real property in foreclosure or, where applicable, default.
    (d)  In  any  action  brought to enforce a rescission pursuant to this
  section, a court may award to  a  prevailing  equity  seller  costs  and
  reasonable attorneys' fees.
    9. An equity seller may bring an action for the recovery of damages or
  equitable  relief  against  an  equity  purchaser  for  a  violation  of
  subdivision three, four, six, seven or eleven of this section.  A  court
  may  award  to a prevailing equity seller actual damages plus reasonable
  attorneys' fees and costs. In addition, the court  may  award  equitable
  relief, or increase the award in an amount not to exceed three times the
  equity  seller's  actual damages, or both, if the court deems such award
  proper. Any action brought pursuant to this section shall  be  commenced
  within six years after the date of the alleged violation.
    10.  (a)(i) Any equity purchaser who, with intent to defraud, violates
  subdivision seven of this section or engages in any practice which would
  operate as a criminal fraud or deceit upon an equity seller shall,  upon
  conviction,  be  guilty of a class E felony and subject to a fine of not
  more than twenty-five thousand dollars, imprisonment in accordance  with
  the penal law, or both.
    (ii)  Any equity purchaser who knowingly violates subdivision seven of
  this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a class A  misdemeanor
  and  subject  to  a  fine of not more than twenty-five thousand dollars,
  imprisonment in accordance with the penal law, or both. A second offense
  within five years shall be a class E felony and subject to a fine of not
  more than twenty-five thousand dollars, imprisonment in accordance  with
  the penal law, or both.
    (b)  An  equity  purchaser  who,  when  acting in good faith, violates
  subdivision seven of this section, shall not be deemed to have  violated
  such subdivision if the equity purchaser:
    (i) establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that the compliance
  failure  was  not  intentional  and  resulted  from  a  bona  fide error
  notwithstanding the maintenance  of  procedures  reasonably  adapted  to
  avoid such errors;
    (ii)  notifies  the  equity  seller within ninety days of the contract
  date of the compliance failure; and
    (iii)  makes  appropriate  restitution  to  the  equity   seller   and
  appropriate  adjustments  to  the  transaction within ninety days of the
  contract date.   Examples of bona  fide  errors  include,  but  are  not
  limited to, clerical, calculation, computer malfunction and programming,
  and  printing  errors.    An  error  of legal judgment with respect to a
  person's obligations under this section is not a bona fide error, nor is
  a failure to provide notices or other material information  required  by
  this section.
    11. (a) In any transaction in which an equity seller purports to grant
  a  residence  in  foreclosure  or  default to an equity purchaser by any
  instrument which appears to be an absolute conveyance  and  reserves  to
  himself  or  herself  or  is  given by the equity purchaser an option to
  repurchase,  such  transaction  shall  create  a  presumption  that  the
  transaction  is  a  loan transaction, which may be overcome by clear and
  convincing evidence to the contrary, and  that  the  purported  absolute
  conveyance is a mortgage.
    (b)   An   equity  purchaser  shall  not  enter  into  a  reconveyance
  arrangement unless:
    (i) The equity purchaser verifies by  appropriate  documentation  that
  the  equity  seller has or is likely to have a reasonable ability to pay
  for the subsequent conveyance of an interest back to the equity  seller.
  In  the case of a lease with an option to purchase, payment ability also
  includes the reasonable ability to purchase the property within the term
  of the option to purchase. There is a rebuttable  presumption  that  the
  equity  purchaser  has  not  verified  reasonable payment ability if the
  equity purchaser has not obtained documents other than  a  statement  by
  the  equity  seller  of assets, liabilities and income. The standard for
  determining a reasonable ability to pay shall be the  same  standard  as
  set  forth  in  paragraph (k) of subdivision two of section six-l of the
  banking law;
    (ii) the equity purchaser and the equity seller complete a closing for
  any reconveyance arrangement in which the  equity  purchaser  obtains  a
  deed  or  mortgage  from an equity seller. For purposes of this section,
  "closing"  means  an  in-person  meeting  to  complete  final  documents
  incident  to  the sale of the real property or creation of a mortgage on
  the real property conducted by an attorney who is not employed by or  an
  affiliate of the equity purchaser;
    (iii) the equity purchaser obtains the written consent from the equity
  seller  before  the equity purchaser grants any interest in the property
  to anyone else during such  time  as  the  equity  seller  maintains  an
  interest in the property, including an option to repurchase; and
    (iv)  the equity purchaser notifies all existing mortgage lien holders
  of his or her intent to accept conveyance of an interest in the property
  from the equity seller, and fully complies with all terms and conditions
  contained in the mortgage lien documents, including but not  limited  to
  due-on-sale  provisions  or  meeting  all qualification requirements for
  assuming the repayment of the mortgage.
    (c) An equity purchaser shall not enter into repurchase or lease terms
  as part of the reconveyance arrangement that are unfair or  commercially
  unreasonable,  and  is  prohibited  from engaging in any other unfair or
  unconscionable conduct.
    (d) As part of a reconveyance arrangement, an equity  purchaser  shall
  either:
    (i)  ensure  that  title  to the residence is reconveyed to the equity
  seller; or
    (ii)  make  a payment to the equity seller such that the equity seller
  has received consideration in an amount of at least  eighty-two  percent
  of  the fair market value of the property within one hundred twenty days
  of either the eviction or voluntary relinquishment of possession of  the
  residence  by  the  equity  seller.  The  equity  purchaser shall make a
  detailed accounting of the basis for the payment amount, or  a  detailed
  accounting  of  the  reasons  for  failure  to make a payment, including
  providing written documentation of expenses,  within  such  one  hundred
  twenty-day  period.  The accounting shall be on a form prescribed by the
  department of financial services. For purposes of this subparagraph, the
  following applies:
    (A) there is a rebuttable presumption that an appraisal  by  a  person
  licensed  or  certified  by  an agency of the federal government or this
  state to appraise real estate establishes the fair market value  of  the
  property;
    (B)  the  time  for  determining the fair market value amount shall be
  determined in the reconveyance arrangement as either at the time of  the
  execution  of  the  reconveyance arrangement or at resale to a bona fide
  purchaser. If the covered contract states that  the  fair  market  value
  shall  be  determined at the time of resale, the fair market value shall
  be the resale price if it is sold within one hundred twenty days of  the
  eviction  or  voluntary  relinquishment  of  the  property by the equity
  seller. If the covered contract states that the fair market value  shall
  be  determined  at  the  time of resale, and the resale is not completed
  within  one  hundred  twenty  days  of   the   eviction   or   voluntary
  relinquishment  of  the  property  by the equity seller, the fair market
  value shall be determined by an  appraisal  conducted  within  ten  days
  after  the  end  of  such  one hundred twenty-day period and payment, if
  required, shall be made to the equity seller. If payment is not made  to
  the  equity  seller  at  such  time,  the  fair  market  value  shall be
  recalculated as the resale price on resale and payment shall be made  to
  the  equity  seller within fifteen days of resale. A detailed accounting
  of the basis for the payment amount shall be made within fifteen days of
  resale, including  providing  written  documentation  of  expenses.  The
  accounting  shall be on a form prescribed by the department of financial
  services;
    (C) "consideration" shall mean any payment or thing of value  provided
  to the equity seller, including unpaid lease payments owed by the equity
  seller  prior to the date of eviction or voluntary relinquishment of the
  property, reasonable costs paid to third parties necessary  to  complete
  the  reconveyance  transaction,  payment  of  money to satisfy a debt or
  legal obligation of the equity seller or the reasonable cost of  repairs
  for  damage  to the dwelling caused by the equity seller beyond ordinary
  wear and tear; but shall not include amounts imputed  as  any  fee  paid
  directly   or  indirectly  to  the  equity  purchaser,  or  his  or  her
  representative, incident  to  a  reconveyance  arrangement,  except  for
  reasonable  costs  paid  to  third  parties  necessary  to  complete the
  reconveyance.
    (D) "resale" means a bona fide market sale of the property subject  to
  the  reconveyance arrangement by the equity purchaser to an unaffiliated
  third party.
    (E) "resale price" means the purchase price of the property on resale.
    (e) This subdivision shall not be  deemed  to  abrogate  any  duty  of
  inquiry  which exists as to rights or interests of persons in possession
  of the residential real property in foreclosure or default.
    (f) All deeds or conveyances subject  to  a  reconveyance  arrangement
  shall  state  explicitly on the face of the document that the conveyance
  is subject to a reconveyance arrangement, and shall state the  terms  of
  the  reconveyance  arrangement.  Moreover, all reconveyance arrangements
  must be simultaneously recorded by the equity purchaser with the subject
  deed in the county clerk's office where the property is located.
    12.  Any provision of a covered contract which attempts or purports to
  limit the liability of the equity purchaser under this section shall  be
  null  and  void.  Inclusion of such provision shall at the option of the
  equity seller render the covered contract  void.  The  equity  purchaser
  shall  be liable to the equity seller for all damages proximately caused
  by such provision. Any provision in a covered contract which attempts or
  purports to require  arbitration  of  any  dispute  arising  under  this
  section shall be void at the option of the equity seller.
    13.  In  addition to the other remedies provided, whenever there shall
  be a violation of this section, application may be made by the  attorney
  general in the name of the people of the state of New York to a court or
  justice  having  jurisdiction  by  a  special  proceeding  to  issue  an
  injunction, and upon notice to the defendant of not less than five days,
  to enjoin and restrain the continuance of such  violations;  and  if  it
  shall  appear  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  court or justice that the
  defendant has, in fact, violated this  section,  an  injunction  may  be
  issued  by  such court or justice, enjoining and restraining any further
  violation, without requiring proof that any person has,  in  fact,  been
  injured  or  damaged thereby. In any such proceeding, the court may make
  allowances to the attorney general  as  provided  in  paragraph  six  of
  subdivision  (a)  of  section  eighty-three  hundred  three of the civil
  practice law and rules, and direct restitution. Whenever the court shall
  determine that a violation of this section has occurred, the  court  may
  impose a civil penalty of not more than twenty-five thousand dollars for
  each  violation.  In  connection with any such proposed application, the
  attorney general is authorized to take proof and make a determination of
  the relevant facts and to issue subpoenas in accordance with  the  civil
  practice law and rules.
    14. This section shall not apply to a prior lien holder where the lien
  was  properly recorded prior to the execution of any covered contract by
  both the equity seller and the equity purchaser nor shall any  provision
  of this section be deemed to impair any equity or other available rights
  of any such prior lien holder.
    15.  The  provisions  of  this section shall be liberally construed to
  effectuate  the  intent  and  to  achieve  the  purposes  set  forth  in
  subdivision one of this section.
    16.  The  provisions  of  this  section  are  not exclusive and are in
  addition to any other  requirements,  rights,  remedies,  and  penalties
  provided by law.
    17.  Any  waiver  of  the provisions of this section shall be void and
  unenforceable as contrary to the public policy.
    18. If any provision of this section, or if any application thereof to
  any person or circumstances is held unconstitutional, the  remainder  of
  this  section and the application of its provisions to other persons and
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.


§ 265-b. Distressed property consulting contracts. 1. Definitions. The
  following definitions shall apply to this section:
    (a)  "Homeowner"  means  a  natural  person  who is the mortgagor with
  respect to a distressed home loan or who is in danger of losing  a  home
  for nonpayment of taxes.
    (b)  "Consulting  contract" or "contract" means an agreement between a
  homeowner  and  a  distressed  property  consultant  under   which   the
  consultant agrees to provide consulting services.
    (c)  "Consulting  services"  means  services  provided by a distressed
  property consultant to a homeowner that the consultant  represents  will
  help to achieve any of the following:
    (i)  stop,  enjoin,  delay, void, set aside, annul, stay or postpone a
  foreclosure filing, a foreclosure  sale  or  the  loss  of  a  home  for
  nonpayment of taxes;
    (ii) obtain forbearance from any servicer, beneficiary or mortgagee or
  relief  with respect to the potential loss of the home for nonpayment of
  taxes;
    (iii) assist the homeowner to exercise a  right  of  reinstatement  or
  similar  right  provided  in  the  mortgage  documents  or any law or to
  refinance a distressed home loan;
    (iv) obtain any extension of the period within which the homeowner may
  reinstate or otherwise restore his or her rights  with  respect  to  the
  property;
    (v)  obtain  a  waiver  of  an  acceleration  clause  contained in any
  promissory note or contract secured by  a  mortgage  on  a  property  in
  foreclosure;
    (vi) assist the homeowner to obtain a loan or advance of funds;
    (vii) assist the homeowner in answering or responding to a summons and
  complaint,  or otherwise providing information regarding the foreclosure
  complaint and process;
    (viii) avoid or ameliorate the impairment of  the  homeowner's  credit
  resulting from the commencement of a foreclosure proceeding or tax sale;
  or
    (ix)  save  the  homeowner's  property  from  foreclosure  or loss for
  non-payment of taxes.
    * (d) "Distressed home loan" means a home loan that is  in  danger  of
  being  foreclosed  because  the homeowner has one or more defaults under
  the mortgage that entitle the lender to accelerate full payment  of  the
  mortgage and repossess the property, or a home loan where the lender has
  commenced  a foreclosure action. For purposes of this paragraph, a "home
  loan" is a loan in which the debt is incurred by the homeowner primarily
  for personal, family or household purposes, and the loan is secured by a
  mortgage or deed of trust on property upon which  there  is  located  or
  there  is  to  be located a structure or structures intended principally
  for occupancy of from one to four families which is or will be  occupied
  by the homeowner as the homeowner's principal dwelling.
    * NB Effective until December 14, 2023
    * (d)   "Distressed  home  loan"  means  a  home  loan  for  which  an
  installment payment is more than sixty days past due,  or  a  home  loan
  where  the  lender  has  commenced a foreclosure action. For purposes of
  this paragraph, a "home loan" is a loan in which the debt is incurred by
  the homeowner primarily for personal, family or household purposes,  and
  the  loan  is  secured  by  a mortgage or deed of trust on property upon
  which there is located  or  there  is  to  be  located  a  structure  or
  structures  intended  principally  for  occupancy  of  from  one to four
  families  which  is  or  will  be  occupied  by  the  homeowner  as  the
  homeowner's principal dwelling.
    * NB Effective December 14, 2023
    (e)   "Distressed   property  consultant"  or  "consultant"  means  an
  individual or a corporation, partnership, limited liability  company  or
  other   business  entity  that,  directly  or  indirectly,  solicits  or
  undertakes employment to provide consulting services to a homeowner  for
  compensation  or  promise  of  compensation with respect to a distressed
  home loan or a potential loss of the home for  nonpayment  of  taxes.  A
  distressed property consultant does not include the following:
    (i) an attorney admitted to practice in the state of New York when the
  attorney  is  directly  providing  legal  representation  to a homeowner
  pursuant to a retainer agreement,  and  has  entered  an  appearance  on
  behalf  of  a  homeowner,  in  the  course  of  his or her regular legal
  practice. This exception shall not  apply  to  non-attorney  individuals
  engaged in activities covered by subdivision two of this section who are
  employed by, associated with, or consultants for law firms when such law
  firms  are  not  providing  legal  representation  to  a  homeowner in a
  foreclosure action pursuant to a retainer agreement;
    (ii) a person or entity who holds or is owed an obligation secured  by
  a  lien  on  any  property  in  foreclosure  while  the person or entity
  performs services in connection with the obligation or lien;
    (iii) a bank, trust company, private  banker,  bank  holding  company,
  savings  bank,  savings  and  loan  association, thrift holding company,
  credit union or insurance company  organized  under  the  laws  of  this
  state,  another state or the United States, or a subsidiary or affiliate
  of such  entity  or  a  foreign  banking  corporation  licensed  by  the
  superintendent of financial services or the comptroller of the currency;
    (iv)  a  federal  Department of Housing and Urban Development approved
  mortgagee and any subsidiary or affiliate of  such  mortgagee,  and  any
  agent or employee of these persons while engaged in the business of such
  mortgagee;
    (v)  a  judgment creditor of the homeowner, if the judgment creditor's
  claim accrued before the written notice of foreclosure sale is sent;
    (vi) a title insurer authorized to do business in  this  state,  while
  performing title insurance and settlement services;
    (vii)  a  person  licensed  as  a  mortgage  banker or registered as a
  mortgage broker or registered as a mortgage loan servicer as defined  in
  article  twelve-D of the banking law, provided that no such person shall
  take any upfront fee in conjunction  with  activities  constituting  the
  business of a distressed property consultant;
    (viii)  a bona fide not-for-profit organization that offers counseling
  or advice to homeowners in foreclosure or loan default; or
    (ix) a person licensed or registered in the state  to  engage  in  the
  practice  of  other  professions  that  the  superintendent of financial
  services has determined should not be subject to this section.
    (f) "Property" shall mean real property located in this state improved
  by a one-to-four family dwelling used or occupied,  or  intended  to  be
  used  or  occupied, wholly or partly, as the home or residence of one or
  more persons, but shall not refer to unimproved real property upon which
  such dwellings are to be constructed.
    (g) "Business day" shall mean any calendar day except  Sunday  or  the
  public  holidays  as  set  forth  in  section twenty-four of the general
  construction law.
    2. Prohibitions. A distressed property consultant is  prohibited  from
  doing the following:
    (a)  performing  consulting services without a written, fully executed
  consulting contract with a homeowner;
    (b) charging for or accepting  any  payment  for  consulting  services
  before  the full completion of all such services, including a payment to
  be placed in escrow pending the completion of such services;
    (c) taking a power of attorney from a homeowner;
    (d)  retaining  any  original loan document or other original document
  related to the distressed home loan, the property or the potential  loss
  of the home for nonpayment of taxes;
    (e) inducing or attempting to induce a homeowner to enter a consulting
  contract that does not fully comply with the provisions of this article;
    (f) inducing the transfer of a deed to any person or entity, including
  to the distressed property consultant;
    (g)  accepting  or taking ownership of a deed from a homeowner for any
  period of time whatsoever;
    (h)  simulating  in  any  manner  a  law  enforcement  officer,  or  a
  representative of any governmental agency;
    (i)  disclosing  or  threatening to disclose information affecting the
  homeowner's reputation for credit worthiness with knowledge or reason to
  know that the information is false;
    (j) communicating with the homeowner or any member of  his  family  or
  household  with  such  frequency  or  at such unusual hours or in such a
  manner as can reasonably be expected to abuse or harass the homeowner;
    (k) claiming, attempting, or  threatening  to  enforce  a  right  with
  knowledge or reason to know that the right does not exist;
    (l)  using  a  communication  which  simulates  in any manner legal or
  judicial process or which gives  the  appearance  of  being  authorized,
  issued  or approved by a government, governmental agency, or attorney at
  law when it is not; or
    (m) encumbering the property with a lien without  any  contractual  or
  legal basis.
    If any provision of this subdivision or the application thereof to any
  person  or  circumstances  is held invalid, the invalidity thereof shall
  not affect other provisions or applications of  this  subdivision  which
  can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to
  this end the provisions of this subdivision are severable.
    3.  Distressed  property  consulting  contracts.    (a)  A  distressed
  property consulting contract shall:
    (i) contain the entire agreement of the parties;
    (ii) be provided  in  writing  to  the  homeowner  for  review  before
  signing;
    (iii) be printed in at least twelve point type and written in the same
  language  that  is  used  by  the  homeowner and was used in discussions
  between the consultant and the homeowner to  describe  the  consultant's
  services or to negotiate the contract;
    (iv)  fully  disclose  the  exact  nature  of  the distressed property
  consulting services to be provided by the distressed property consultant
  or  anyone  working  in  association  with   the   distressed   property
  consultant;
    (v) fully disclose the total amount and terms of compensation for such
  consulting services;
    (vi)  contain  the  name, business address and telephone number of the
  consultant and the street address (if different) and facsimile number or
  email address of the distressed property consultant where communications
  from the homeowner may be delivered;
    (vii) be  dated  and  personally  signed  by  the  homeowner  and  the
  distressed  property  consultant  and be witnessed and acknowledged by a
  New York notary public; and
    (viii) contain the following notice, which  shall  be  printed  in  at
  least  fourteen  point  boldface  type,  completed  with the name of the
  distressed property consultant, and located in  immediate  proximity  to
  the space reserved for the homeowner's signature:
  "NOTICE REQUIRED BY NEW YORK LAW
    You  may  cancel  this contract, without any penalty or obligation, at
  any  time  before  midnight  of          (fifth   business   day   after
  execution).
            (Name of Distressed Property Consultant) (the "Consultant") or
  anyone working for the Consultant may not take any money from you or ask
  you  for  money  until  the  Consultant  has  completely  finished doing
  everything this Contract says the Consultant will do.
  You should consider consulting  an  attorney  or  a  government-approved
  housing  counselor  before  signing  any  legal document concerning your
  home. It is advisable that you find your own attorney, and  not  consult
  with  an  attorney  recommended  or provided to you by the Consultant. A
  list of housing counselors may be found on the website of the  New  York
  State  Department  of  Financial  Services,  (enter  web  address) or by
  calling  the  Department  of  Financial  Services  toll-free  at  (enter
  number).  The  law  requires  that  this  contract  contain  the  entire
  agreement between you and the Consultant. You should not rely  upon  any
  other written or oral agreement or promise."
  The  distressed  property  consultant shall accurately enter the date on
  which the right to cancel ends.
    (b)(i) The homeowner has the right to cancel, without any  penalty  or
  obligation,  any  contract  with  a distressed property consultant until
  midnight of the fifth business  day  following  the  day  on  which  the
  distressed  property  consultant  and  the  homeowner  sign a consulting
  contract. Cancellation occurs when the homeowner, or a representative of
  the homeowner, either delivers written notice of cancellation in  person
  to  the  address specified in the consulting contract or sends a written
  communication by facsimile, by United States mail or by  an  established
  commercial  letter delivery service. A dated proof of facsimile delivery
  or  proof  of  mailing  creates  a  presumption  that  the   notice   of
  cancellation has been delivered on the date the facsimile is sent or the
  notice   is  deposited  in  the  mail  or  with  the  delivery  service.
  Cancellation  of  the  contract  shall  release  the  homeowner  of  all
  obligations  to  pay  fees  or  any other compensation to the distressed
  property consultant.
    (ii) The consulting contract shall be accompanied by two copies  of  a
  form,  captioned  "notice of cancellation" in at least twelve-point bold
  type. This form shall be attached  to  the  contract,  shall  be  easily
  detachable,  and  shall  contain  the following statement written in the
  same language as used in the contract, and the contractor  shall  insert
  accurate  information  as  to the date on which the right to cancel ends
  and the contractor's contact information:
  "NOTICE OF CANCELLATION
  Note: You may cancel this contract, without any penalty  or  obligation,
  at any time before midnight of ______. (Enter date)
 
  To  cancel this contract, sign and date both copies of this cancellation
  notice and personally deliver one copy or send it by  facsimile,  United
  States  mail,  or  an  established  commercial  letter delivery service,
  indicating cancellation to the Distressed Property Consultant at one  of
  the following:
 
  Name of Contractor_________________________
  Street Address_____________________________
  City, State, Zip___________________________
  Facsimile:_________________________________
 
  I hereby cancel this transaction.
  Name of Homeowner:_________________________
 
  Signature of Homeowner:____________________
 
  Date:______________________________________"
    (iii)  Within  ten  days following receipt of a notice of cancellation
  given in accordance  with  this  subdivision,  the  distressed  property
  consultant  shall  return  any original contract and any other documents
  signed by or provided by the homeowner. Cancellation shall  release  the
  homeowner  of  all  obligations  to  pay any fees or compensation to the
  distressed property consultant.
    3-a.  Distressed  property  consultant  advertisements.      (a)   All
  advertisements  disseminated  by  a  distressed property consultant must
  prominently include the following statement: "In New York State, Housing
  Counselors, who are approved by the U.S. Department of Housing  &  Urban
  Development  or the New York State Department of Financial Services, may
  provide the same or similar services as a distressed property consultant
  for free. A list of approved Housing Counselors can be found on the  New
  York  State  Department  of  Financial  Services  website  at (enter web
  address) or by contacting the New York  State  Department  of  Financial
  Services  toll-free at (enter number). You should consider consulting an
  attorney or a government-approved housing counselor before  signing  any
  legal  document  concerning  a  distressed  property consultant."   Such
  statement, if disseminated by print media  or  the  internet,  shall  be
  clearly  and  legibly printed or displayed in not less than twelve-point
  bold type, or, if the advertisement is printed to be displayed in  print
  that is smaller than twelve point, in bold type print that is no smaller
  than  the  print  in  which  the text of the advertisement is printed or
  displayed.
    (b) For the purposes of this  subdivision,  the  term  "advertisement"
  shall   include,  but  is  not  limited  to,  all  forms  of  marketing,
  solicitation, or  dissemination  of  information  related,  directly  or
  indirectly,  to securing or obtaining a consulting contract or services.
  Further, it shall include any and all commonly recognized forms of media
  marketing via television, radio, print media, all  forms  of  electronic
  communication  via  the  internet,  and all prepared sales presentations
  given in person or over the internet to the general public.
    (c) The advertising provisions of this subdivision shall apply to  all
  distressed  property  consultants  who disseminate advertisements in the
  state of New York or who intend to  directly  or  indirectly  contact  a
  homeowner  who  has  property  located  in  New  York  state. Distressed
  property consultants shall establish and at all times  maintain  control
  over the content, form and method of dissemination of all advertisements
  of  its  services.  Further,  all  advertisements  shall be sufficiently
  complete and clear to avoid the possibility of deception or the  ability
  to mislead or deceive.
    4.  Penalties  and  other  provisions.  (a)  If  a  court finds that a
  distressed property  consultant  has  violated  any  provision  of  this
  section,  the  court  may  make  null and void any agreement between the
  distressed homeowner and the distressed property consultant.
    (b) If the distressed property consultant violates  any  provision  of
  this  section and the homeowner suffers damage because of the violation,
  the homeowner may recover actual and  consequential  damages  and  costs
  from  the  distressed  property  consultant  in  an action based on this
  section.    If  the  distressed  property  consultant  intentionally  or
  recklessly  violates  any provision of this section, the court may award
  the homeowner treble damages, attorneys' fees and costs.
    (c) Any provision of a consulting contract that attempts  or  purports
  to  limit the liability of the distressed property consultant under this
  section shall be null and void. Inclusion of such provision shall at the
  option of  the  homeowner  render  the  consulting  contract  void.  Any
  provision   in   a  contract  which  attempts  or  purports  to  require
  arbitration of any dispute arising under this section shall be  void  at
  the  option  of  the  homeowner.  Any  waiver  of the provisions of this
  section shall be void and unenforceable as contrary to public policy.
    (d) In addition to the other remedies provided, whenever  there  shall
  be  a violation of this section, application may be made by the attorney
  general in the name of the people of the state of New York to a court or
  justice  having  jurisdiction  by  a  special  proceeding  to  issue  an
  injunction, and upon notice to the defendant of not less than five days,
  to  enjoin  and  restrain  the continuance of such violations; and if it
  shall appear to the satisfaction  of  the  court  or  justice  that  the
  defendant  has,  in  fact,  violated  this section, an injunction may be
  issued by such court or justice, enjoining and restraining  any  further
  violation,  without  requiring  proof that any person has, in fact, been
  injured or damaged thereby. In any such proceeding, the court  may  make
  allowances  to  the  attorney  general  as  provided in paragraph six of
  subdivision (a) of section  eighty-three  hundred  three  of  the  civil
  practice law and rules, and direct restitution. Whenever the court shall
  determine  that  a violation of this section has occurred, the court may
  impose a civil penalty of not more than ten thousand  dollars  for  each
  violation.  In  connection  with  any  such  proposed  application,  the
  attorney general is authorized to take proof and make a determination of
  the relevant facts and to issue subpoenas in accordance with  the  civil
  practice law and rules.
    (e)  The  provisions  of  this  section  are  not exclusive and are in
  addition to any other  requirements,  rights,  remedies,  and  penalties
  provided by law.
    5.  The department of financial services shall prescribe the telephone
  number and web address to be included in the notice.


§ 265-b. Distressed property consulting contracts. 1. Definitions. The
  following definitions shall apply to this section:
    (a)  "Homeowner"  means  a  natural  person  who is the mortgagor with
  respect to a distressed home loan or who is in danger of losing  a  home
  for nonpayment of taxes.
    (b)  "Consulting  contract" or "contract" means an agreement between a
  homeowner  and  a  distressed  property  consultant  under   which   the
  consultant agrees to provide consulting services.
    (c)  "Consulting  services"  means  services  provided by a distressed
  property consultant to a homeowner that the consultant  represents  will
  help to achieve any of the following:
    (i)  stop,  enjoin,  delay, void, set aside, annul, stay or postpone a
  foreclosure filing, a foreclosure  sale  or  the  loss  of  a  home  for
  nonpayment of taxes;
    (ii) obtain forbearance from any servicer, beneficiary or mortgagee or
  relief  with respect to the potential loss of the home for nonpayment of
  taxes;
    (iii) assist the homeowner to exercise a  right  of  reinstatement  or
  similar  right  provided  in  the  mortgage  documents  or any law or to
  refinance a distressed home loan;
    (iv) obtain any extension of the period within which the homeowner may
  reinstate or otherwise restore his or her rights  with  respect  to  the
  property;
    (v)  obtain  a  waiver  of  an  acceleration  clause  contained in any
  promissory note or contract secured by  a  mortgage  on  a  property  in
  foreclosure;
    (vi) assist the homeowner to obtain a loan or advance of funds;
    (vii) assist the homeowner in answering or responding to a summons and
  complaint,  or otherwise providing information regarding the foreclosure
  complaint and process;
    (viii) avoid or ameliorate the impairment of  the  homeowner's  credit
  resulting from the commencement of a foreclosure proceeding or tax sale;
  or
    (ix)  save  the  homeowner's  property  from  foreclosure  or loss for
  non-payment of taxes.
    * (d) "Distressed home loan" means a home loan that is  in  danger  of
  being  foreclosed  because  the homeowner has one or more defaults under
  the mortgage that entitle the lender to accelerate full payment  of  the
  mortgage and repossess the property, or a home loan where the lender has
  commenced  a foreclosure action. For purposes of this paragraph, a "home
  loan" is a loan in which the debt is incurred by the homeowner primarily
  for personal, family or household purposes, and the loan is secured by a
  mortgage or deed of trust on property upon which  there  is  located  or
  there  is  to  be located a structure or structures intended principally
  for occupancy of from one to four families which is or will be  occupied
  by the homeowner as the homeowner's principal dwelling.
    * NB Effective until December 14, 2023
    * (d)   "Distressed  home  loan"  means  a  home  loan  for  which  an
  installment payment is more than sixty days past due,  or  a  home  loan
  where  the  lender  has  commenced a foreclosure action. For purposes of
  this paragraph, a "home loan" is a loan in which the debt is incurred by
  the homeowner primarily for personal, family or household purposes,  and
  the  loan  is  secured  by  a mortgage or deed of trust on property upon
  which there is located  or  there  is  to  be  located  a  structure  or
  structures  intended  principally  for  occupancy  of  from  one to four
  families  which  is  or  will  be  occupied  by  the  homeowner  as  the
  homeowner's principal dwelling.
    * NB Effective December 14, 2023
    (e)   "Distressed   property  consultant"  or  "consultant"  means  an
  individual or a corporation, partnership, limited liability  company  or
  other   business  entity  that,  directly  or  indirectly,  solicits  or
  undertakes employment to provide consulting services to a homeowner  for
  compensation  or  promise  of  compensation with respect to a distressed
  home loan or a potential loss of the home for  nonpayment  of  taxes.  A
  distressed property consultant does not include the following:
    (i) an attorney admitted to practice in the state of New York when the
  attorney  is  directly  providing  legal  representation  to a homeowner
  pursuant to a retainer agreement,  and  has  entered  an  appearance  on
  behalf  of  a  homeowner,  in  the  course  of  his or her regular legal
  practice. This exception shall not  apply  to  non-attorney  individuals
  engaged in activities covered by subdivision two of this section who are
  employed by, associated with, or consultants for law firms when such law
  firms  are  not  providing  legal  representation  to  a  homeowner in a
  foreclosure action pursuant to a retainer agreement;
    (ii) a person or entity who holds or is owed an obligation secured  by
  a  lien  on  any  property  in  foreclosure  while  the person or entity
  performs services in connection with the obligation or lien;
    (iii) a bank, trust company, private  banker,  bank  holding  company,
  savings  bank,  savings  and  loan  association, thrift holding company,
  credit union or insurance company  organized  under  the  laws  of  this
  state,  another state or the United States, or a subsidiary or affiliate
  of such  entity  or  a  foreign  banking  corporation  licensed  by  the
  superintendent of financial services or the comptroller of the currency;
    (iv)  a  federal  Department of Housing and Urban Development approved
  mortgagee and any subsidiary or affiliate of  such  mortgagee,  and  any
  agent or employee of these persons while engaged in the business of such
  mortgagee;
    (v)  a  judgment creditor of the homeowner, if the judgment creditor's
  claim accrued before the written notice of foreclosure sale is sent;
    (vi) a title insurer authorized to do business in  this  state,  while
  performing title insurance and settlement services;
    (vii)  a  person  licensed  as  a  mortgage  banker or registered as a
  mortgage broker or registered as a mortgage loan servicer as defined  in
  article  twelve-D of the banking law, provided that no such person shall
  take any upfront fee in conjunction  with  activities  constituting  the
  business of a distressed property consultant;
    (viii)  a bona fide not-for-profit organization that offers counseling
  or advice to homeowners in foreclosure or loan default; or
    (ix) a person licensed or registered in the state  to  engage  in  the
  practice  of  other  professions  that  the  superintendent of financial
  services has determined should not be subject to this section.
    (f) "Property" shall mean real property located in this state improved
  by a one-to-four family dwelling used or occupied,  or  intended  to  be
  used  or  occupied, wholly or partly, as the home or residence of one or
  more persons, but shall not refer to unimproved real property upon which
  such dwellings are to be constructed.
    (g) "Business day" shall mean any calendar day except  Sunday  or  the
  public  holidays  as  set  forth  in  section twenty-four of the general
  construction law.
    2. Prohibitions. A distressed property consultant is  prohibited  from
  doing the following:
    (a)  performing  consulting services without a written, fully executed
  consulting contract with a homeowner;
    (b) charging for or accepting  any  payment  for  consulting  services
  before  the full completion of all such services, including a payment to
  be placed in escrow pending the completion of such services;
    (c) taking a power of attorney from a homeowner;
    (d)  retaining  any  original loan document or other original document
  related to the distressed home loan, the property or the potential  loss
  of the home for nonpayment of taxes;
    (e) inducing or attempting to induce a homeowner to enter a consulting
  contract that does not fully comply with the provisions of this article;
    (f) inducing the transfer of a deed to any person or entity, including
  to the distressed property consultant;
    (g)  accepting  or taking ownership of a deed from a homeowner for any
  period of time whatsoever;
    (h)  simulating  in  any  manner  a  law  enforcement  officer,  or  a
  representative of any governmental agency;
    (i)  disclosing  or  threatening to disclose information affecting the
  homeowner's reputation for credit worthiness with knowledge or reason to
  know that the information is false;
    (j) communicating with the homeowner or any member of  his  family  or
  household  with  such  frequency  or  at such unusual hours or in such a
  manner as can reasonably be expected to abuse or harass the homeowner;
    (k) claiming, attempting, or  threatening  to  enforce  a  right  with
  knowledge or reason to know that the right does not exist;
    (l)  using  a  communication  which  simulates  in any manner legal or
  judicial process or which gives  the  appearance  of  being  authorized,
  issued  or approved by a government, governmental agency, or attorney at
  law when it is not; or
    (m) encumbering the property with a lien without  any  contractual  or
  legal basis.
    If any provision of this subdivision or the application thereof to any
  person  or  circumstances  is held invalid, the invalidity thereof shall
  not affect other provisions or applications of  this  subdivision  which
  can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to
  this end the provisions of this subdivision are severable.
    3.  Distressed  property  consulting  contracts.    (a)  A  distressed
  property consulting contract shall:
    (i) contain the entire agreement of the parties;
    (ii) be provided  in  writing  to  the  homeowner  for  review  before
  signing;
    (iii) be printed in at least twelve point type and written in the same
  language  that  is  used  by  the  homeowner and was used in discussions
  between the consultant and the homeowner to  describe  the  consultant's
  services or to negotiate the contract;
    (iv)  fully  disclose  the  exact  nature  of  the distressed property
  consulting services to be provided by the distressed property consultant
  or  anyone  working  in  association  with   the   distressed   property
  consultant;
    (v) fully disclose the total amount and terms of compensation for such
  consulting services;
    (vi)  contain  the  name, business address and telephone number of the
  consultant and the street address (if different) and facsimile number or
  email address of the distressed property consultant where communications
  from the homeowner may be delivered;
    (vii) be  dated  and  personally  signed  by  the  homeowner  and  the
  distressed  property  consultant  and be witnessed and acknowledged by a
  New York notary public; and
    (viii) contain the following notice, which  shall  be  printed  in  at
  least  fourteen  point  boldface  type,  completed  with the name of the
  distressed property consultant, and located in  immediate  proximity  to
  the space reserved for the homeowner's signature:
  "NOTICE REQUIRED BY NEW YORK LAW
    You  may  cancel  this contract, without any penalty or obligation, at
  any  time  before  midnight  of          (fifth   business   day   after
  execution).
            (Name of Distressed Property Consultant) (the "Consultant") or
  anyone working for the Consultant may not take any money from you or ask
  you  for  money  until  the  Consultant  has  completely  finished doing
  everything this Contract says the Consultant will do.
  You should consider consulting  an  attorney  or  a  government-approved
  housing  counselor  before  signing  any  legal document concerning your
  home. It is advisable that you find your own attorney, and  not  consult
  with  an  attorney  recommended  or provided to you by the Consultant. A
  list of housing counselors may be found on the website of the  New  York
  State  Department  of  Financial  Services,  (enter  web  address) or by
  calling  the  Department  of  Financial  Services  toll-free  at  (enter
  number).  The  law  requires  that  this  contract  contain  the  entire
  agreement between you and the Consultant. You should not rely  upon  any
  other written or oral agreement or promise."
  The  distressed  property  consultant shall accurately enter the date on
  which the right to cancel ends.
    (b)(i) The homeowner has the right to cancel, without any  penalty  or
  obligation,  any  contract  with  a distressed property consultant until
  midnight of the fifth business  day  following  the  day  on  which  the
  distressed  property  consultant  and  the  homeowner  sign a consulting
  contract. Cancellation occurs when the homeowner, or a representative of
  the homeowner, either delivers written notice of cancellation in  person
  to  the  address specified in the consulting contract or sends a written
  communication by facsimile, by United States mail or by  an  established
  commercial  letter delivery service. A dated proof of facsimile delivery
  or  proof  of  mailing  creates  a  presumption  that  the   notice   of
  cancellation has been delivered on the date the facsimile is sent or the
  notice   is  deposited  in  the  mail  or  with  the  delivery  service.
  Cancellation  of  the  contract  shall  release  the  homeowner  of  all
  obligations  to  pay  fees  or  any other compensation to the distressed
  property consultant.
    (ii) The consulting contract shall be accompanied by two copies  of  a
  form,  captioned  "notice of cancellation" in at least twelve-point bold
  type. This form shall be attached  to  the  contract,  shall  be  easily
  detachable,  and  shall  contain  the following statement written in the
  same language as used in the contract, and the contractor  shall  insert
  accurate  information  as  to the date on which the right to cancel ends
  and the contractor's contact information:
  "NOTICE OF CANCELLATION
  Note: You may cancel this contract, without any penalty  or  obligation,
  at any time before midnight of ______. (Enter date)
 
  To  cancel this contract, sign and date both copies of this cancellation
  notice and personally deliver one copy or send it by  facsimile,  United
  States  mail,  or  an  established  commercial  letter delivery service,
  indicating cancellation to the Distressed Property Consultant at one  of
  the following:
 
  Name of Contractor_________________________
  Street Address_____________________________
  City, State, Zip___________________________
  Facsimile:_________________________________
 
  I hereby cancel this transaction.
  Name of Homeowner:_________________________
 
  Signature of Homeowner:____________________
 
  Date:______________________________________"
    (iii)  Within  ten  days following receipt of a notice of cancellation
  given in accordance  with  this  subdivision,  the  distressed  property
  consultant  shall  return  any original contract and any other documents
  signed by or provided by the homeowner. Cancellation shall  release  the
  homeowner  of  all  obligations  to  pay any fees or compensation to the
  distressed property consultant.
    3-a.  Distressed  property  consultant  advertisements.      (a)   All
  advertisements  disseminated  by  a  distressed property consultant must
  prominently include the following statement: "In New York State, Housing
  Counselors, who are approved by the U.S. Department of Housing  &  Urban
  Development  or the New York State Department of Financial Services, may
  provide the same or similar services as a distressed property consultant
  for free. A list of approved Housing Counselors can be found on the  New
  York  State  Department  of  Financial  Services  website  at (enter web
  address) or by contacting the New York  State  Department  of  Financial
  Services  toll-free at (enter number). You should consider consulting an
  attorney or a government-approved housing counselor before  signing  any
  legal  document  concerning  a  distressed  property consultant."   Such
  statement, if disseminated by print media  or  the  internet,  shall  be
  clearly  and  legibly printed or displayed in not less than twelve-point
  bold type, or, if the advertisement is printed to be displayed in  print
  that is smaller than twelve point, in bold type print that is no smaller
  than  the  print  in  which  the text of the advertisement is printed or
  displayed.
    (b) For the purposes of this  subdivision,  the  term  "advertisement"
  shall   include,  but  is  not  limited  to,  all  forms  of  marketing,
  solicitation, or  dissemination  of  information  related,  directly  or
  indirectly,  to securing or obtaining a consulting contract or services.
  Further, it shall include any and all commonly recognized forms of media
  marketing via television, radio, print media, all  forms  of  electronic
  communication  via  the  internet,  and all prepared sales presentations
  given in person or over the internet to the general public.
    (c) The advertising provisions of this subdivision shall apply to  all
  distressed  property  consultants  who disseminate advertisements in the
  state of New York or who intend to  directly  or  indirectly  contact  a
  homeowner  who  has  property  located  in  New  York  state. Distressed
  property consultants shall establish and at all times  maintain  control
  over the content, form and method of dissemination of all advertisements
  of  its  services.  Further,  all  advertisements  shall be sufficiently
  complete and clear to avoid the possibility of deception or the  ability
  to mislead or deceive.
    4.  Penalties  and  other  provisions.  (a)  If  a  court finds that a
  distressed property  consultant  has  violated  any  provision  of  this
  section,  the  court  may  make  null and void any agreement between the
  distressed homeowner and the distressed property consultant.
    (b) If the distressed property consultant violates  any  provision  of
  this  section and the homeowner suffers damage because of the violation,
  the homeowner may recover actual and  consequential  damages  and  costs
  from  the  distressed  property  consultant  in  an action based on this
  section.    If  the  distressed  property  consultant  intentionally  or
  recklessly  violates  any provision of this section, the court may award
  the homeowner treble damages, attorneys' fees and costs.
    (c) Any provision of a consulting contract that attempts  or  purports
  to  limit the liability of the distressed property consultant under this
  section shall be null and void. Inclusion of such provision shall at the
  option of  the  homeowner  render  the  consulting  contract  void.  Any
  provision   in   a  contract  which  attempts  or  purports  to  require
  arbitration of any dispute arising under this section shall be  void  at
  the  option  of  the  homeowner.  Any  waiver  of the provisions of this
  section shall be void and unenforceable as contrary to public policy.
    (d) In addition to the other remedies provided, whenever  there  shall
  be  a violation of this section, application may be made by the attorney
  general in the name of the people of the state of New York to a court or
  justice  having  jurisdiction  by  a  special  proceeding  to  issue  an
  injunction, and upon notice to the defendant of not less than five days,
  to  enjoin  and  restrain  the continuance of such violations; and if it
  shall appear to the satisfaction  of  the  court  or  justice  that  the
  defendant  has,  in  fact,  violated  this section, an injunction may be
  issued by such court or justice, enjoining and restraining  any  further
  violation,  without  requiring  proof that any person has, in fact, been
  injured or damaged thereby. In any such proceeding, the court  may  make
  allowances  to  the  attorney  general  as  provided in paragraph six of
  subdivision (a) of section  eighty-three  hundred  three  of  the  civil
  practice law and rules, and direct restitution. Whenever the court shall
  determine  that  a violation of this section has occurred, the court may
  impose a civil penalty of not more than ten thousand  dollars  for  each
  violation.  In  connection  with  any  such  proposed  application,  the
  attorney general is authorized to take proof and make a determination of
  the relevant facts and to issue subpoenas in accordance with  the  civil
  practice law and rules.
    (e)  The  provisions  of  this  section  are  not exclusive and are in
  addition to any other  requirements,  rights,  remedies,  and  penalties
  provided by law.
    5.  The department of financial services shall prescribe the telephone
  number and web address to be included in the notice.




§   266.   Rights   of   purchaser   or  incumbrancer  for  valuable
  consideration protected. This article does not in any manner  affect  or
  impair  the  title  of  a  purchaser  or  incumbrancer  for  a  valuable
  consideration, unless it appears that he  had  previous  notice  of  the
  fraudulent  intent  of  his immediate grantor, or of the fraud rendering
  void the title of such grantor.
    * NB Effective until December 14, 2023
    * §  266.  Rights  of   purchaser   or   incumbrancer   for   valuable
  consideration  protected.  This article does not in any manner affect or
  impair  the  title  of  a  purchaser  or  incumbrancer  for  a  valuable
  consideration, unless it appears that such purchaser or incumbrancer had
  previous  notice,  whether  actual  or  constructive,  of the fraudulent
  intent of his immediate grantor, or of  the  fraud  rendering  void  the
  title  of  such  grantor. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a
  purchaser or incumbrancer had notice of fraud or  fraudulent  intent  in
  the  case  of a transfer of mortgaged real property, between a purchaser
  and seller who are not associated parties, that is  not  accompanied  by
  the  recording  with the clerk of the county or with the commissioner of
  deeds in which the property is located, of a statement, executed by  the
  mortgagee,  and  duly  acknowledged,  stating, substantially, that (a) a
  party is assuming the seller's indebtedness secured by the mortgage;  or
  (b) that the indebtedness secured by the mortgage has been satisfied.
    For  the purposes of this section, "associated parties" means spouses,
  ex-spouses,  parents  and  children,  siblings,  a  homeowner  and  that
  homeowner's   family   trust,   or  a  homeowner  and  that  homeowner's
  wholly-owned limited liability company.
    * NB Effective December 14, 2023


§  267.  Conveyances  with  power  to  revoke,  determine  or alter. A
  conveyance of, or charge on, an estate or  interest  in  real  property,
  containing  a  provision for the revocation, determination or alteration
  of the estate or interest, or any part  thereof,  at  the  will  of  the
  grantor,  is  void,  as against subsequent purchasers and incumbrancers,
  from the grantor,  for  a  valuable  consideration,  of  any  estate  or
  interest so liable to be revoked or determined, although the same be not
  expressly  revoked,  determined  or altered by the grantor, by virtue of
  the power reserved or expressed in the prior conveyance or charge. Where
  a power to revoke a conveyance of real property or the rents and profits
  thereof, and to reconvey the same, is given to any  person,  other  than
  the  grantor  in such conveyance, and such person thereafter conveys the
  same real property, rents or profits to a purchaser or incumbrancer  for
  a  valuable  consideration,  such subsequent conveyance is valid, in the
  same manner and to the same extent as if the power  of  revocation  were
  recited  therein,  and  the  intent  to  revoke  the  former  conveyance
  expressly declared. If a conveyance  to  a  purchaser  or  incumbrancer,
  under  this  section, be made before the person making it is entitled to
  execute his power of revocation, it is nevertheless valid, from the time
  the power of revocation actually vests  in  such  person,  in  the  same
  manner, and to the same extent, as if then made.


§  268.  Disaffirmance  of  fraudulent  act by executor and others. An
  executor, administrator, receiver, assignee or other trustee,  may,  for
  the  benefit of creditors, or of others interested in real property held
  in trust, disaffirm, treat as void and resist any act done  or  transfer
  or  agreement  made  in  fraud  of the rights of any creditor, including
  himself, interested in  such  estate  or  property;  and  a  person  who
  fraudulently  receives, takes, or in any manner interferes with the real
  property of a deceased person, or an insolvent corporation, association,
  partnership, or individual, is liable to such  executor,  administrator,
  receiver  or  other  trustee for the same, or the value thereof, and for
  all damages caused by such act to the trust estate.   A  creditor  of  a
  deceased  insolvent  debtor,  having  a  claim  or  demand exceeding one
  hundred dollars against such deceased, may, for the benefit of creditors
  or others interested in the real property of such  deceased,  disaffirm,
  treat  as  void,  and  resist  any  act  done or conveyance, transfer or
  agreement made by such deceased in fraud of the rights of any  creditor,
  including  himself,  and  may  maintain an action to set aside such act,
  conveyance, transfer or  agreement,  without  having  first  obtained  a
  judgment  on  such  claim  or  demand; but the same, if disputed, may be
  established on the trial. The judgment in such action  may  provide  for
  the  sale  of  the  premises  or property involved, when a conveyance or
  transfer thereof is set aside, and that the proceeds thereof be  brought
  into  court or paid into the proper surrogate's court to be administered
  according to law.


§  269.  When  remainderman  may  pay  interest  owed  by life tenant.
  Whenever real property held by any person  for  life  is  incumbered  by
  mortgage or other lien, the interest on which should be paid by the life
  tenant,  and  such life tenant neglects or refuses to pay such interest,
  the remainderman may pay such interest, and recover the amount  thereof,
  together  with  interest  thereon  from the time of such payment, of the
  life tenant.


§  270.  Powers of courts of equity not abridged. Nothing contained in
  this article abridges the powers of  courts  of  equity  to  compel  the
  specific performance of agreements in cases of part performance.


§  271.  Construction  of  covenants  in  mortgages  on leases of real
  property and bonds or notes. In mortgages on leases of real property and
  in bonds or notes secured thereby, the following or similar covenants or
  agreements must be construed as follows:
    1. In default of payment,  mortgagee  to  have  power  to  sell.---  A
  covenant  that  the mortgagor "will pay the indebtedness, as provided in
  the mortgage, and if default be made in the payment of any part thereof,
  the mortgagee or obligee shall have power to sell the  premises  therein
  described,  according  to  law,"  must  be construed as meaning that the
  mortgagor or obligor shall well and truly  pay  unto  the  mortgagee  or
  obligee  the  said  sum  of money mentioned in the condition of the said
  bond, note or obligation, and the interest  thereon,  according  to  the
  condition  of the said bond, note or obligation. And if default shall be
  made in the payment of the said sum of money therein  mentioned,  or  in
  the  interest which shall accrue thereon, or of any part of either, that
  then and from thenceforth it shall be lawful for the said  mortgagee  or
  obligee,  his legal representative or assigns, to sell, transfer and set
  over, all the rest, residue and remainder of the said term of years then
  yet to come, and all other, the right, title and interest  of  the  said
  mortgagor  or  obligor  of,  in  and  to  the  same,  at public auction,
  according to the act in such case made and provided. And as the attorney
  of the said mortgagor or obligor for that purpose by these presents duly
  authorized, constituted  and  appointed,  to  make,  seal,  execute  and
  deliver  to  the  purchaser or purchasers thereof, a good and sufficient
  assignment, transfer or other  conveyance  in  the  law,  for  the  said
  premises, with the appurtenances; and out of the money arising from such
  sale,  to  retain  the principal and interest which shall then be due on
  the said bond, note or obligation, together with the costs  and  charges
  of  advertisement  and sale of the said premises, rendering the overplus
  of the purchase-money (if any there shall be) unto the said mortgagor or
  obligor, his legal representatives or assigns;  which  sale,  so  to  be
  made,  shall forever be a perpetual bar, both in law and equity, against
  the said mortgagor or obligor, and against all persons  claiming  or  to
  claim  the  premises or any part thereof, by, from or under him or them,
  or any of them.
    2. Mortgagor to  keep  buildings  insured.---  A  covenant  "that  the
  mortgagor  will  keep the buildings on the said premises insured against
  loss by fire, for the benefit of the mortgagee," must  be  construed  as
  meaning  that  the  said  mortgagor  or  obligor shall and will keep the
  buildings erected and to be  erected  upon  the  lands  above  conveyed,
  insured  against loss and damage by fire, by insurance, and in an amount
  approved by the said mortgagee or obligee and his  assigns,  and  either
  assign  the  policy and certificates thereof or have such insurance made
  payable to the said mortgagee or obligee or his assigns, and in  default
  thereof  it  shall  be  lawful for the said mortgagee or obligee and his
  assigns to effect such insurance, and the premium and premiums paid  for
  effecting the same shall be a lien on the said mortgaged premises, added
  to the amount of the said bond, note or obligation, and secured by these
  presents, and payable on demand, with legal interest.
    3.  Mortgagor  to pay rent and charges on premises.--- A covenant that
  the mortgagor "will pay the rent and other charges mentioned in and made
  payable by said indenture of lease within ....... days after  said  rent
  or  charges  are  payable,"  must  be construed as meaning that the said
  mortgagor or obligor and his legal representatives and assigns, will pay
  or cause to be paid, and discharge all rent and rents mentioned  in  and
  made  payable  by  the indenture of lease aforesaid, and also all taxes,
  assessments or other charges that now are a lien, or hereafter shall  or
  may  be  levied, assessed or imposed and become a lien upon the premises
  above described or any part thereof; and in  default  thereof,  for  the
  space  of  .......  after such taxes or assessments or ....... after the
  said rent or rents, or any of them shall have become due and payable  by
  the  terms of said lease or by law, then and in each and every such case
  the said mortgagee or obligee, his legal representatives or assigns may,
  at  option,  and  without  notice,  pay  such  rent  or  rents,   taxes,
  assessments  or  other charges and expenses, and the amount so paid, and
  interest thereon, from the time of such payment, shall forthwith be  due
  and   payable   from   the   said   mortgagor   or  obligor,  his  legal
  representatives or assigns, to the said mortgagee or obligee, his  legal
  representatives  or  assigns, and shall be deemed to be secured by these
  presents, and shall be collectable in the same manner, and at  the  same
  time,  and  upon  the same conditions as the interest then next maturing
  upon the principal sum hereinbefore mentioned.
    4. Agreement that whole sum shall become due.--- The words "And it  is
  hereby  expressly  agreed that the whole of the said principal sum shall
  become due at the option of said mortgagee or obligee after  default  in
  the  payment  of  any  instalment  of  principal or after default in the
  payment of interest for ....... days, or after default in the payment of
  any rent or other charge made payable by said  indenture  of  lease  for
  ........  days, or after default in the payment of any tax or assessment
  for ....... days after notice and demand," must be construed as  meaning
  that  should  any  default  be  made in the payment of any instalment of
  principal or any part thereof, or of said interest or any part  thereof,
  or  of any rent or other charge made payable by said indenture or lease,
  on any day whereon the same is  made  payable,  or  should  any  tax  or
  assessment,  which  now is or may be hereafter imposed upon the premises
  hereinafter described, become due  and  payable,  and  should  the  said
  interest,  rent  or  other charge aforesaid, remain unpaid and in arrear
  for the space of ....... days, or such tax or assessment  remain  unpaid
  and  in arrear for ....... days after written notice by the mortgagee or
  obligee, his executors, administrators or  assigns,  that  such  tax  or
  assessment  is unpaid, and demand for the payment thereof, then and from
  thenceforth, that is to say, after the  lapse  of  either  one  of  said
  periods,  as  the  case  may  be,  the aforesaid principal sum, with all
  arrearage of interest thereon,  rent  and  other  charges  paid  by  the
  mortgagee  or  obligee,  shall,  at  the option of the said mortgagee or
  obligee, his executors, administrators or assigns, become and be due and
  payable immediately thereafter, although the period  above  limited  for
  the  payment  thereof  may not then have expired, anything thereinbefore
  contained to the contrary thereof in anywise notwithstanding.


§  272.  Construction of grant of appurtenances, and all of the rights
  and estate of the mortgagor. In any mortgage on a lease of real property
  the words "together with the appurtenances and all the estate and rights
  of the part ...... of the first part of, in and to said  premises  under
  and by virtue of the aforesaid indenture of lease," must be construed as
  meaning, together with all and singular the edifices, buildings, rights,
  members,  privileges and appurtenances thereunto belonging or in anywise
  appertaining; and also all the estate, right, title, interest,  term  of
  years  yet to come and unexpired, property, possession, claim and demand
  whatsoever, as well in law as  in  equity,  of  the  said  mortgagor  or
  obligor,  of,  in  and  to the said demised premises, and every part and
  parcel thereof, with the appurtenances; and also the said  indenture  of
  lease,  and  the renewal therein provided for, and every clause, article
  and condition therein expressed and contained.


§ 273. What form of mortgage on lease of real property. The use of the
  following form of instrument for mortgages on leases of real property is
  lawful, but this section does not prevent or invalidate the use of other
  forms.
                                 SCHEDULE D.
 
                     MORTGAGE ON LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY.
  This  indenture,  made  the  .......  day  of  ........, in the year one
  thousand  .......  hundred  and  ..........,  between  .............  of
  (insert  residence)  of  the  first  part  and  ...........  of  (insert
  residence) of the second part; whereas ...........  did,  by  a  certain
  indenture  of  lease,  bearing  date the ....... day of ........, in the
  year one thousand nine hundred and .........., demise, lease and to farm
  let unto ............ and to ............ executors, administrators  and
  assigns,  all  and  singular  the  premises  hereinafter  mentioned  and
  described, together with their appurtenances; to have and  to  hold  the
  same   unto   the   said   ...........  and  to  ...........  executors,
  administrators and assigns, for and during and until the  full  end  and
  term  of  .......  years, from the ....... day of ........, one thousand
  nine hundred and ........, fully to be complete and ended, yielding  and
  paying  therefor  unto  the  said ....... and to ....... or assigns, the
  yearly rent or sum of ............... .
    And whereas, the said part ....... of the first part  justly  indebted
  to  the  said  part  .......  of  the second part, in the sum of .......
  lawful money of the United States of America,  secured  to  be  paid  by
  .......    certain  bond  or  obligation,  bearing  even  date herewith,
  conditioned for the payment of the said sum of .......  on  the  .......
  day  of  ........, nineteen hundred and ....... and the interest thereon
  to be computed from ....... at the rate of ....... per centum per  annum
  and to be paid ...... .
    It being thereby expressly agreed that the whole of the said principal
  sum  shall  become  due  at the option of the mortgagee or obligee after
  default in the payment of interest, taxes or  assessments  or  rents  as
  hereinafter provided.
    Now  this indenture witnesseth that the said part ....... of the first
  part, for the better securing the payment  of  the  said  sum  of  money
  mentioned in the condition of the said bond or obligation, with interest
  thereon,  and  also  for  and in consideration of the sum of one dollar,
  paid by the said part ....... of the second part, the receipt whereof is
  hereby acknowledged, doth grant and release, assign,  transfer  and  set
  over  unto  said  part  ....... of the second part, and to his heirs (or
  successors) and assigns forever.
                               (Description.)
    Together with the appurtenances and all the estate and rights  of  the
  part ........ of the first part of, in and to said premises under and by
  virtue of the aforesaid indenture of lease.
    To  have  and  hold  the  said indenture of lease and renewal, and the
  above granted premises, unto the said part ....... of the  second  part,
  his  heirs  and  assigns,  for  and  during  all  the  rest, residue and
  remainder of the said term of years yet to come and unexpired,  in  said
  indenture  of  lease  and in the renewals therein provided for; subject,
  nevertheless, to the rents, covenants, conditions and provisions in  the
  said indenture of lease mentioned.
    Provided  always that if the said part ....... of the first part shall
  pay unto the said part ....... of the second part, the said sum of money
  mentioned in the condition of the  said  bond  or  obligation,  and  the
  interest  thereon,  at  the time and in the manner mentioned in the said
  condition, that then these presents and the estate hereby granted, shall
  cease, determine and be void.
    And  the said part ....... of the first part covenant ....... with the
  said part ....... of the second part as follows:
    First.  That  the  part  .......  of  the  first  part  will  pay  the
  indebtedness as hereinbefore provided.
    And  if  default  shall be made in the payment of any part thereof the
  said part ....... of the second  part  shall  have  power  to  sell  the
  premises therein described according to law.
    Second.  That  the  said  premises  now  are  free  and  clear  of all
  incumbrances whatsoever, and that .......  ha  .......  good  right  and
  lawful authority to convey the same in manner and form hereby conveyed.
    Third. That the part ....... of the first part will keep the buildings
  on  the  said  premises insured against loss by fire, for the benefit of
  the mortgagee.
    Fourth. That the part ....... of the first part will pay the rents and
  other charges mentioned in and made payable by said indenture  of  lease
  within ....... days after said rent or charges are payable.
    Fifth.  And  it  is hereby expressly agreed that the whole of the said
  principal sum shall become due at the option of the  said  mortgagee  or
  obligee  after default in the payment of any instalment of principal, or
  after default in the payment of interest  for  .......  days,  or  after
  default  in the payment of any rent or other charge made payable by said
  indenture of lease for ....... days, or after default in the payment  of
  any tax or assessment for ....... days after notice and demand.
    In  witness  whereof, the said part ....... of the first part to these
  presents ha ....... hereunto set ....... hand ....... and  seal  .......
  the day and year first above written.
 
  Sealed and delivered }
   in the presence of  }


§  274.  Transfers  and  mortgages  of interest in decedents' estates.
  Every conveyance, assignment, or other transfer of, and  every  mortgage
  or other charge upon the interest, or any part thereof, of any person in
  the  estate  of a decedent which is situated within this state, shall be
  in writing, and shall be acknowledged or proved in the  manner  required
  to  entitle  conveyances  of  real  property  to  be  recorded. Any such
  instrument may also be recorded as hereinafter provided; and if  not  so
  recorded,  it  is  void against any subsequent purchaser or mortgagee of
  the same interest or any part thereof, in good faith and for a  valuable
  consideration,  whose conveyance or mortgage is first duly recorded.  If
  such interest is entirely in  the  real  property  of  a  decedent,  the
  conveyance  or mortgage shall be recorded in the office of the recording
  officer where such real property is situated. If  such  interest  is  in
  both  the personal and the real property of a decedent the conveyance or
  mortgage shall be recorded  in  the  office  of  the  surrogate  issuing
  letters   testamentary  or  letters  of  administration  upon  the  said
  decedent's estate, or if no such letters have been issued, then  in  the
  office  of the surrogate having jurisdiction to issue the same, and also
  in the office of the  said  recording  officer.  Such  a  conveyance  or
  mortgage  when  so  recorded,  shall  be  indexed  under the name of the
  decedent, in a book to  be  kept  for  the  purpose  by  each  recording
  officer.  The person presenting any such instrument for record shall pay
  to the clerk of the surrogate's court a fee of ten cents for each folio.
  Such filing or recording shall not be deemed notice of such  conveyance,
  assignment  or  other  transfer  of, or mortgage or other lien or charge
  upon the interest, or any part thereof of any person in the estate of  a
  decedent  which  is situated within the state, so as to charge the legal
  representative of the estate with liability for payment to a legatee  or
  other  beneficiary  of an estate unless and until he shall have received
  actual notice of such conveyance, assignment or other transfer.


§  274-a.  Certificate of principal amount unpaid on mortgages of real
  property. 1. The holder of a mortgage upon real property  shall  execute
  and  deliver  to the owner of the real property upon which such mortgage
  is a lien a written instrument setting forth the amount of the principal
  of said mortgage remaining unpaid, the date to which interest  has  been
  paid,  and  the amounts, if any, claimed to be unpaid upon said mortgage
  for principal and interest, itemizing the same, provided, however,  that
  prior  written demand by registered or certified mail has been made upon
  the holder of such mortgage by such owner of the real property and  that
  such  owner  of  the  real property shall have executed and delivered to
  another a written contract to convey, or shall have received  a  written
  commitment  to  make  a  mortgage  loan  upon,  the  real property or an
  interest therein. The written instrument hereinbefore  required  of  the
  holder  of  the  mortgage  shall  be  a  certificate  duly  executed and
  acknowledged in the  same  manner  as  required  by  law  to  entitle  a
  conveyance  of real property to be recorded, except that a bank, savings
  bank, private banker, trust company, savings and loan association or any
  other banking organization, as defined in the banking  law,  a  national
  bank   or   trust   company   or   any   other   federally-chartered  or
  federally-regulated  savings  and  loan  association  or  other  banking
  institution  and  an  insurance company duly organized or licensed to do
  business in this state under the insurance law of  this  state  and  the
  state  of  New York, or an agency thereof and a political subdivision of
  the state of New York or an agency thereof may,  in  lieu  of  the  said
  certificate,  furnish  a  letter signed by a duly authorized officer, or
  employee or agent, containing the information required to be  set  forth
  in  such  certificate. An owner of real property who shall have complied
  with the foregoing requirements and who  shall  not  have  received  the
  written instrument from the holder of the mortgage thereon within twenty
  days  after  such  compliance  shall  be entitled to petition a court of
  competent jurisdiction  for  an  order  requiring  such  holder  of  the
  mortgage to comply with this section.
    2.   (a)   The  mortgagee  of  an  owner-occupied,  one-to-six  family
  residential structure or residential  condominium  unit,  shall  deliver
  within  thirty  days,  any  mortgage  related documents to an authorized
  individual making a bona fide written demand  for  such  documents.  The
  mortgagee shall not charge for providing the mortgage-related documents,
  provided,  however,  the  mortgagee  may  charge  not  more  than twenty
  dollars, or such amount  as  may  be  fixed  by  the  superintendent  of
  financial  services, for each subsequent payoff statement provided under
  this subdivision. If the mortgagee fails to deliver the mortgage-related
  documents, the mortgagee shall be liable for the actual damages  to  the
  mortgagor  by  reason  of  such failure. In computing actual damages the
  court may consider the actual rate of interest on the mortgage debt  and
  current  prevailing  rate  or  rates  of  interest  on comparable debts.
  However, actual damages do not include pain  and  suffering,  mental  or
  emotional  distress  or  the  like.    The  replacement  costs of a lost
  abstract of title required to be delivered hereunder,  may  be  deducted
  from the amount required to satisfy the mortgage.
    (b) When used in this section:
    (i)  "Authorized  individual"  means  the  mortgagor,  the mortgagor's
  attorney, or the attorney representing a banking organization which  has
  agreed  to  make  a  loan secured by the same real property securing the
  mortgage for which the mortgage related documents have been requested.
    (ii) "Mortgagee" means (1) the  current  holder  of  the  mortgage  of
  record  or  the  current  holder of the mortgage, (2) any person to whom
  payments are required to be made and (3) their personal representatives,
  successors and assigns.
    (iii) "Bona fide written demand" means a written  demand  made  by  an
  authorized  individual  in  connection with a sale or refinancing of the
  mortgaged property or some other event where the mortgage is  reasonably
  expected  to  be  paid  off  or  assigned.  Such  demand shall either be
  delivered  personally,  or  by  registered  or  certified  mail, postage
  prepaid, return receipt requested. The demand shall include the names of
  the mortgagor and mortgagee, the address of the mortgaged property, loan
  number, the date of the mortgage  or  the  date  it  was  recorded,  the
  mortgage related documents demanded and the proposed payoff date or date
  of  assignment  of the mortgage, if applicable. If the demand includes a
  request for  the  abstract  of  title,  the  demand  shall  include  the
  agreement  by  the mortgagor to pay for a replacement abstract of title,
  the cost of which may not exceed the actual  replacement  cost  of  such
  abstract of title, in the event that the mortgage is not paid off or the
  abstract  of  title  is  not returned within thirty days of the proposed
  payoff date. Such demand shall include the following in capital letters:
      "THIS DEMAND IS MADE UNDER SECTION 274-a OF THE REAL PROPERTY LAW.
     FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH THIS DEMAND MAY RESULT IN SEVERE PENALTIES."
    (iv) "Mortgage-related documents" means:
    (1) the abstract of title for the real property securing the  mortgage
  if  such  document is in the possession and control of the mortgagee. In
  the event that the mortgage is not paid off, the  authorized  individual
  receiving the abstract of title shall within thirty days of the proposed
  payoff  date  return  the  abstract  of  title to the mortgagee or other
  person so designated by the mortgagee; upon a failure to so  return  the
  abstract  of  title,  the mortgagee may obtain a replacement abstract of
  title, the cost of which may not exceed the actual replacement  cost  of
  such abstract of title and which shall be paid by the mortgagor;
    (2)  a  payoff  statement  setting  forth the balance of the mortgage,
  including principal, interest and other charges assessed pursuant to the
  loan documents, together with a per  diem  rate  for  interest  accruing
  after  the  date  to  which  the balance has been calculated. The payoff
  statement may, in the event that the statement reflects  payments  which
  may  have  not  yet cleared, require the authorized individual to obtain
  from the mortgagee a day of payoff verification of the payoff statement.
  A payoff statement requiring day of payoff verification  shall  include,
  in addition to the address of the mortgagee, the telephone number of the
  mortgagee  and,  if  a  banking organization or corporation, the name or
  department, and its telephone number and facsimile phone number.  Unless
  the  payoff statement requires a day of payoff verification, a mortgagee
  furnishing a payoff statement shall be obligated to make its best effort
  to furnish a satisfaction of mortgage upon receipt  of  the  amount  set
  forth  in  such  statement  unless such person subsequently notifies the
  authorized individual of an error in the payoff  statement.  The  payoff
  statement furnished by a mortgagee shall include a name or department in
  addition  to  the address of the banking organization or corporation for
  use in connection with preparation of  an  affidavit  under  subdivision
  five of section nineteen hundred twenty-one of the real property actions
  and proceedings law;
    (3)  if  requested  and  if  the  title  insurance  policy  is  in the
  possession and control of the mortgagee, a copy  of  such  policy  or  a
  statement  setting  forth the name of the insurer and the number of such
  policy.
    (v) "Banking organization" shall have the same meaning as provided  in
  subdivision  eleven  of section two of the banking law and shall include
  any institution chartered or licensed by the United States or any state.


§  275.  Certificate  of discharge of mortgage required. 1. Whenever a
  mortgage upon real property is due and payable, and the full  amount  of
  principal  and  interest  due  on the mortgage is paid, a certificate of
  discharge of  mortgage  shall  be  given  to  the  mortgagor  or  person
  designated  by  him or her, signed by the person or persons specified in
  section three hundred twenty-one of this chapter. The person signing the
  certificate shall, within thirty days thereafter, arrange  to  have  the
  certificate  presented  for  recording  to  the recording officer of the
  county where the mortgage is recorded. Failure by a mortgagee to present
  a certificate of discharge for recording shall result in  the  mortgagee
  being  liable  to the mortgagor in the amount of five hundred dollars if
  he or she fails to present such certificate within  thirty  days,  shall
  result  in  the mortgagee being liable to the mortgagor in the amount of
  one thousand dollars if he or she fails  to  present  a  certificate  of
  discharge  for  recording  within  sixty  days  and  shall result in the
  mortgagee being liable to the mortgagor in the amount  of  one  thousand
  five  hundred  dollars  if  he  or she fails to present a certificate of
  discharge for recording within ninety days. For  the  purposes  of  such
  liability under this subdivision, the term "mortgagee" shall not include
  a  person,  partnership,  association, corporation or other entity which
  makes less than five mortgage loans in any calendar year. The provisions
  of this section shall not apply to any mortgage granted to  or  made  by
  the  state  of New York, or any agency or instrumentality thereof or any
  political subdivision of the state  or  any  agency  or  instrumentality
  thereof.
    2.  For  purposes  of  this  section, the full amount of principal and
  interest due on a mortgage shall not be considered to be  paid  whenever
  such  mortgage  continues  to secure a bona fide debt and an enforceable
  lien continues to exist, such as may occur in the following situations:
    (a) the commercial practice of lenders trading or selling mortgages on
  the secondary market;
    (b) the replacement of a construction loan with permanent financing;
    (c) the refinancing of an existing loan with a  new  lender,  such  as
  where  the  original lender assigns a note and the mortgage securing its
  payment to another lender in return for consideration and such  mortgage
  is  consolidated  with another mortgage which secures any funds advanced
  by the new lender to the mortgagor;
    (d) the modification of the  terms  of  a  loan  by  a  mortgagor  and
  mortgagee in order to avoid foreclosure; and
    (e) a refinancing that occurs in conjunction with the sale of property
  such  that  the  seller conveys property to the purchaser subject to the
  lien of the mortgage and  the  original  lender  assigns  its  note  and
  mortgage on the property to the purchaser's lender.
    3.  Except  with respect to the assignment of a mortgage in connection
  with a transaction described in paragraph (a) of subdivision two of this
  section, in order to record an assignment of a mortgage  there  must  be
  set forth in the assignment document or attached thereto and recorded as
  part thereof a statement under oath signed by the mortgagor or any other
  party  to  the  transaction having knowledge of the facts (provided such
  other party asserts such knowledge), that the assignee is not acting  as
  a  nominee  of the mortgagor and that the mortgage continues to secure a
  bona fide obligation. With respect to the assignment of  a  mortgage  in
  connection  with a transaction described in paragraph (a) of subdivision
  two of  this  section,  such  assignment  shall  contain  the  following
  statement:  "This  assignment  is  not  subject  to  the requirements of
  section two hundred seventy-five of the Real Property Law because it  is
  an assignment within the secondary mortgage market."


§  276.  Effect  of  certain  easements  on  the  right  to  invest in
  mortgages. The existence of an easement in  real  property  acquired  or
  reserved  by  a  municipal  corporation, a railroad corporation or other
  transportation corporation, shall not be deemed an encumbrance upon such
  real property under any law relating to investments  in  mortgages  upon
  real  property  by  corporations,  trustees,  executors, administrators,
  guardians or other persons holding trust funds, but the effect  of  such
  an easement upon the real property which it affects, shall be taken into
  consideration in determining the value thereof.


§   277.   Modification  and  extension  of  mortgage  investment.  1.
  Corporations,   trustees,    executors,    administrators,    guardians,
  committees,  conservators and other persons holding trust funds, savings
  banks and other corporations that shall have made or shall own  or  hold
  an  investment, with the specified ratio of real property security, in a
  bond and mortgage or share or part thereof or series or group  of  bonds
  and  mortgages  or  in any instrument evidencing any collateral or other
  interest in such a bond and mortgage or share or part  thereof  or  such
  series or group of bonds and mortgages, or in any participation or other
  certificate  secured by the deposit of, or evidencing any share, part or
  interest in the principal sum of any such bond and mortgage or share  or
  part  thereof  or series or group of bonds and mortgages, whether any of
  such investments, instruments or certificates be guaranteed or not, may,
  prior to April first, nineteen hundred sixty-nine waive  or  modify,  or
  agree to waive or modify, either with or without consideration and prior
  or  subsequent  to maturity, any terms and conditions thereof, including
  the rate of interest, due or to become due and extend  or  re-extend  or
  agree  to  extend  or  re-extend such bond and mortgage or share or part
  thereof, or such series  or  group  or  such  evidencing  instrument  or
  participation  or  other  certificate for a period of not more than five
  years from the time of such extension, by agreement with  the  owner  of
  the real property subject to the lien of such bond and mortgage or bonds
  and  mortgages  or by agreement with the issuer or guarantor of any such
  evidencing   instrument   or   participation   or   other   certificate,
  notwithstanding   that,  at  the  time  of  such  waiver,  modification,
  extension or agreement, the value of such real property may be less than
  that required by law for  an  original  investment  of  such  an  amount
  therein  by  such holder and, in case any such investment is guaranteed,
  any such holder thereof may also extend or re-extend or agree to  extend
  or  re-extend  the  time of payment under the guaranty for a like period
  from its due date, and may release or agree to release such guaranty  or
  from  time to time waive or modify or agree to waive or modify any terms
  or conditions thereof, including the rate of interest due or  to  become
  due.
    2.  In  addition  to  the  provisions  of  subdivision one hereof, any
  corporation,  trustee,  executor,  administrator,  guardian,  committee,
  conservator  or other person, including any official of the state or any
  political subdivision thereof, holding trust funds, or any savings  bank
  or  other  corporation  that  shall  have made or shall own or hold such
  investment, may prior to April first, nineteen hundred  sixty-nine  join
  in  promulgating, participate in, consent to or pay any assessment under
  or incur any necessary expense in connection with participation  in  any
  plan  providing  for the readjustment, modification or reorganization of
  such investment, which plan is required by  the  terms  thereof  or  the
  provisions  of  law applicable thereto to be approved by a court of this
  or  any  other  state  or  of  the  United  States,   having   competent
  jurisdiction  over  proceedings  for  such readjustment, modification or
  reorganization, and if such plan shall have been or shall  hereafter  be
  duly  approved  by  any  such court, may execute such instruments and do
  such acts as may be  required  thereby,  and  as  may  be  necessary  or
  desirable  for  the  consummation  thereof,  and may accept and hold, as
  legal investments, any securities or obligations, secured or  unsecured,
  issued  pursuant  to  such  plan  so  approved, notwithstanding, without
  limiting the generality of the foregoing, that such plan may provide for
  the extension of the maturity or reduction of the principal, or  of  the
  rate of interest, or for any other modification of such investment or of
  any bond and mortgage or bonds and mortgages held as security for or for
  the benefit of the holders of such investment.
    3.  This section shall be construed so as to effectuate its purpose as
  a grant of powers. The limitations  and  restrictions  contained  herein
  shall  not  apply  to  powers  granted  by any other law but only to the
  powers granted herein.


§ 277-a. Powers of fiduciaries and others holding guaranteed mortgages
  or mortgage investments. Trustees, executors, administrators, guardians,
  committees  for incompetents, conservators of conservatees and all other
  persons acting in any fiduciary capacity, including all officials of the
  state or any political subdivision thereof, and  corporations  organized
  under,  or subject to the provisions of the banking law or the insurance
  law, who hold any mortgage  investment  or  any  wholly  owned  mortgage
  guaranteed  by  a  guaranty corporation, or who hold any claim against a
  guaranty  corporation,  may  assent  to  a  plan  of  reorganization  or
  readjustment  of the guaranty corporation or of the business thereof, or
  to any proposal, however designated, to buy any assets of such  guaranty
  corporation,  which  has been or shall be approved by the supreme court;
  and in  connection  therewith  may  assign  such  claims,  execute  such
  instruments  and  do  such  acts  as  may  be  required  by such plan or
  proposal, or as may be  necessary  or  desirable  for  the  consummation
  thereof;  and  may  accept in exchange for such claims, and hold same as
  legal investments, any stock,  securities  or  obligations,  secured  or
  unsecured, issued pursuant to such plan or proposal; and may join in any
  voting  trust agreement provided for by such plan or proposal. The terms
  "mortgage investment" and "guaranty corporation" as used herein shall be
  construed as said terms are defined by  section  two  of  chapter  seven
  hundred  forty-five  of  the  laws  of nineteen hundred thirty-three, as
  amended, and by section  three  of  chapter  nineteen  of  the  laws  of
  nineteen hundred thirty-five, as amended.


§   278.   Exchange   of  mortgage  investment.  Trustees,  executors,
  administrators, guardians, committees, conservators, receivers, the town
  treasurer of any town and other persons and corporations  holding  trust
  funds,  corporations  and  private bankers organized under or subject to
  the provisions of the  banking  law,  the  superintendent  of  financial
  services  as  conservator,  liquidator  or  rehabilitator  of  any  such
  corporation or  private  banker  organized  under  and  subject  to  the
  provisions  of  the banking law, persons, partnerships, and corporations
  organized under or subject to the provisions of the insurance  law,  the
  superintendent  of  financial  services  as  conservator,  liquidator or
  rehabilitator of any such person, partnership or  corporation  organized
  under  or  subject  to  the  provisions  of the insurance law, and other
  domestic corporations, that shall have made or shall hold an investment,
  whether with or without a specified ratio of real property security,  in
  a  bond  secured  by mortgage on real property or share or part thereof,
  whether guaranteed or not, may, at any time  without  an  order  of  the
  court  or  other  authority,  exchange, prior or subsequent to maturity,
  such bond and mortgage or share  or  part  thereof  and  any  rights  in
  respect   thereto,  for  bonds  of  Home  Owners'  Loan  Corporation,  a
  corporation created under home owners' loan act of nineteen hundred  and
  thirty-three,  and  may hold such bonds of Home Owners' Loan Corporation
  as  authorized  and  lawful  investments  for  any  and  all   purposes,
  notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  any general or special law of this
  state inconsistent with the provisions of this section.


§  278-a.  Sale  or  exchange  of  certain  real  property or mortgage
  investments therein  authorized.  Trustees,  executors,  administrators,
  guardians,   committees,   conservators   and   all   other  persons  or
  corporations holding trust funds or  acting  in  a  fiduciary  capacity,
  corporations  and  private  bankers  organized  under  or subject to the
  provisions of the banking law, the superintendent of financial  services
  as  conservator,  liquidator or rehabilitator of any such corporation or
  private banker organized under and subject  to  the  provisions  of  the
  banking  law,  persons, partnerships and corporations organized under or
  subject to the provisions of the insurance law,  the  superintendent  of
  financial  services  as  conservator, liquidator or rehabilitator of any
  such person, partnership or corporation organized under  or  subject  to
  the provisions of the insurance law who or which (1) own any property on
  which there is a building defined in the multiple dwelling law as an old
  law  tenement  or  who  or  which  hold a mortgage or other lien on such
  property, or
    (2) own any property, improved or unimproved, or any mortgage or other
  lien thereon, within any section of a municipality  included  in  a  map
  showing sections containing areas for clearance, replanning and low rent
  housing,  adopted  by  the  planning commission of the municipality as a
  whole or part of the master plan, or
    (3) own any property, improved or unimproved, or any mortgage or other
  lien thereon,  within  any  section  of  a  municipality  which  may  be
  designated  by  the  planning commission or the housing authority of the
  municipality as substandard  or  insanitary,  may  sell  such  property,
  mortgage  or  lien, and may, notwithstanding any other provision of law,
  receive and hold in exchange therefor securities issued by a corporation
  owning or acquiring title to such property, if  such  corporation  shall
  agree  in  writing  at  the  time of such sale, to reconstruct, improve,
  alter, repair or demolish such property or to construct a  new  building
  on  such  property,  or  on such property and on any contiguous property
  owned or to be acquired by such corporation.


§  279.  Graduated payment mortgage. 1. A "graduated payment mortgage"
  means a mortgage which provides: (i) monthly payments of  principal  and
  interest  which  are lower during the initial years of the mortgage; and
  (ii) that the graduation rate for the  monthly  payments,  the  term  of
  graduation  and  the  interest rate are fixed throughout the term of the
  loan; and (iii) monthly payments of  principal  and  interest  shall  be
  sufficient to pay all interest and to effect full repayment of principal
  within the term of the mortgage as fixed at its origination.
    2. Every graduated payment mortgage shall be subject to the following:
    (a)  the  average  annual  rate of increase for principal and interest
  payments shall not exceed:
    (i) 7.5 percent per annum for a mortgage with a graduation  period  of
  five years or less;
    (ii)  6.5 percent per annum for a mortgage with a graduation period of
  six years;
    (iii) 5.5 percent per annum for a mortgage with a graduation period of
  seven years;
    (iv) 4.5 percent per annum for a mortgage with a graduation period  of
  eight years;
    (v)  3.5  percent per annum for a mortgage with a graduation period of
  nine years; and
    (vi) 3 percent per annum for a mortgage with a  graduation  period  of
  ten years.
    (b)  periodic payments of principal and interest shall not change more
  than once per annum and increases shall be  limited  to  the  first  ten
  years of the term of the mortgage.
    (c)  payments  of  principal  and  interest  are  required  in amounts
  sufficient to pay all interest and full repayment of principal within  a
  period not to exceed forty years.
    3. Graduated payment mortgages may be offered only if the lender:
    (a)  offers  the prospective borrower a non-graduated payment mortgage
  loan at the prevailing rate being offered by that lender;
    (b) provides the mortgagor with the option to  convert  the  graduated
  payment  mortgage  loan  to  a  non-graduated payment mortgage loan at a
  pre-determined time agreed upon between the borrower and lender  and  at
  the  same  rate  of interest provided for the graduated payment mortgage
  loan; and
    (c) discloses in advance on a uniform disclosure statement, prescribed
  by the superintendent of financial services, the relevant provisions  of
  the graduated payment mortgage loan including:
    (i)  a  side by side comparison of interest rates and other terms that
  differ between a non-graduated payment mortgage  loan  and  a  graduated
  payment mortgage loan;
    (ii)  payment  schedules for both types of loans and the total payment
  in dollars over the full term of each loan;
    (iii) a statement prominently displayed that borrowers have the option
  to elect a non-graduated payment mortgage loan; and
    (iv) a description of the conversion option.
    4. Failure  of  any  lender  to  comply  with  any  of  the  foregoing
  provisions  shall  not  render the mortgage void or unenforceable unless
  otherwise provided by law.
    5. The provisions of this  section  shall  be  applicable  only  to  a
  mortgage  on  real  property  improved  by a one to six family residence
  given by a natural person to secure a loan or to any agreement  or  note
  made  by  a  natural  person in pursuance of any loan for the purpose of
  financing the purchase of or refinancing an existing ownership  interest
  in  certificates of stock or other evidence of an ownership interest in,
  and a proprietary lease from, a corporation or  partnership  formed  for
  the  purpose  of  the  cooperative  ownership  of real estate, unsecured
  except to  the  extent  of  an  assignment  or  transfer  of  the  stock
  certificates or other evidence of ownership interest of the borrower and
  the  proprietary  lease  within  ninety days from the making of the loan
  which would otherwise conform to the provisions of this section  but  is
  not otherwise entitled to be recorded as a mortgage.


§ 280. Reverse mortgage loans for persons sixty years of age or older.
  1.  For  purposes  of  this  section  the following terms shall have the
  following meanings:
    (a) Reverse mortgage loans.  A  loan  which  is  secured  by  a  first
  mortgage on real property improved by a one- to four-family residence or
  condominium  that  is  the residence of the mortgagor(s) the proceeds of
  which are advanced to the mortgagor(s) during the term of  the  loan  in
  equal  installments,  in advances through a line of credit or otherwise,
  in lump sums, or through a combination thereof.
    (b) Term reverse mortgage loan. Any reverse mortgage loan that  has  a
  fixed term to maturity.
    (c)  Tenure reverse mortgage loan. Any reverse mortgage loan that does
  not have a fixed term  to  maturity,  but  rather  matures  solely  upon
  contingent  events, such as events including but not limited to death or
  the real property securing the loan  no  longer  being  the  mortgagors'
  principal residence.
    (d)  Authorized  lender.  Any  bank,  trust  company, national banking
  association, savings bank, savings and loan association, federal savings
  bank, federal savings and loan association,  credit  union,  or  federal
  credit  union or any licensed mortgage banker approved for the making of
  reverse mortgage loans by the superintendent of  financial  services  or
  any  entity  exempted  from  licensing  pursuant to section five hundred
  ninety of the banking  law  and  approved  for  the  making  of  reverse
  mortgage loans by the superintendent of financial services.
    (e)  Mortgagor.  A  tenant  in  severalty who is sixty years of age or
  older, or if the real property is held by tenants by the entirety or  by
  joint tenancy, the youngest of which is sixty years of age or older.
    (f)   Superintendent   of   financial   services.  The  superintendent
  established pursuant  to  section  two  hundred  two  of  the  financial
  services law.
    2.  A  reverse mortgage loan pursuant to this section shall be subject
  to the following:
    (a) the loan to value ratio shall be determined by the  superintendent
  of financial services; and
    (b)  subject  to  such  rules  or regulations as the superintendent of
  financial services shall adopt, any authorized lender or  any  successor
  or assign of such authorized lender which suspends, ceases or makes late
  payments  to  a mortgagor under a reverse mortgage loan shall be subject
  to forfeiture (as liquidated damages to such  mortgagor  and  not  as  a
  penalty)  of  twice  the interest which would otherwise have been earned
  during the period in which payments were suspended, ceased or made late,
  provided that said authorized lender or any successor or assign of  such
  authorized lender shall have the right to make payments pursuant to said
  loan  agreement  within  fifteen  days  of  each  payment  date, without
  penalty; and
    (c) the outstanding balance may be prepaid in full  by  the  mortgagor
  without  penalty  at any time during the term and/or tenure of the loan;
  and
    (d) an authorized lender is prohibited from  using  or  attaching  any
  property or asset of the mortgagor except the real property securing the
  reverse  mortgage  loan  in settlement of a reverse mortgage obligation;
  and
    (e)  the  authorized  lender  must  deliver  to  an   applicant   such
  disclosures  as  may  be  required  by  the  superintendent of financial
  services which shall describe  the  relevant  portions  of  the  reverse
  mortgage  being  offered,  and  shall  include but not be limited to the
  following items:
    (i) except for a tenure reverse mortgage loan, a schedule of  payments
  to  and  from  the  mortgagor and the total payments in dollars over the
  term of the reverse mortgage loan for both the mortgagor  and  mortgagee
  depending on the type of reverse mortgage loan being offered;
    (ii)  a statement prominently displayed advising applicants to consult
  with  appropriate  authorities  regarding  tax   and   estate   planning
  consequences of a reverse mortgage;
    (iii)  where  applicable  a  description of prepayment and refinancing
  features;
    (iv) the interest rate and, except for a tenure reverse mortgage loan,
  the total interest payable on the loan;
    (v) a statement concerning the  compliance  of  the  lender  with  the
  criteria established by the superintendent of financial services that an
  authorized  lender  must  meet before it may make reverse mortgage loans
  pursuant to this section; and
    (vi) a statement setting forth those events which would terminate  the
  reverse mortgage loan; and
    (f)  in  the  event that an authorized lender or holder of the reverse
  mortgage loan intends to initiate foreclosure proceedings the  mortgagor
  shall  have  the right to designate a third party who shall be notified.
  In the event that the mortgagor has not  designated  a  third  party  to
  receive  such  notice  of foreclosure, then the authorized lender or the
  holder of said reverse mortgage loan shall notify the  local  or  county
  office  for the aging of its intent to commence foreclosure proceedings.
  Such entity shall take appropriate action to protect  the  interests  of
  the mortgagor; and
    (g)   an  authorized  lender  must  deliver  to  the  applicant,  upon
  application, if available, a statement prepared by the local  or  county
  office for the aging on the advisability and availability of independent
  counseling  and  information  services.  Further,  no  reverse  mortgage
  commitment shall be issued by an authorized lender until  the  applicant
  presents, in writing, a statement that the terms of the reverse mortgage
  loan have been explained by an attorney, a housing and urban development
  certified  counselor or any other counseling service as indicated on the
  statement supplied by the county or local office  for  the  aging  or  a
  signed  affidavit  indicating that the applicant, although made aware of
  the importance of counseling and  its  local  availability  through  the
  provision  of  such information by the authorized lender, chooses not to
  utilize any of the aforementioned available services. The form  of  such
  statement  and affidavit shall be developed by the New York state office
  for the aging; and
    (h) any such reverse mortgage shall expressly and conspicuously bear a
  legend identifying it as such; and
    (i) subject to such rules or  regulations  as  the  superintendent  of
  financial  services  may adopt, a reverse mortgage loan shall be made at
  either a fixed or variable rate of interest.
    3. A reverse mortgage loan pursuant to this section may:
    (a) provide that the mortgagor's  closing  costs,  including  but  not
  limited  to  loan  or commitment fees, if any, insurance premiums, house
  repairs, legal fees, the cost of annuities,  the  costs  of  third-party
  counseling,  the  costs  of  existing  mortgages  or  liens,  and  other
  appropriate costs be included in the principal of the  reverse  mortgage
  loan and disbursed out of the loan proceeds at closing;
    (b) provide for the maintenance of an escrow account by the authorized
  lender  for purposes of payment of real property taxes, insurance on the
  property securing the loan, or any other fees and  expenses  as  may  be
  permitted by superintendent of financial services regulation;
    (c)  provide  that  an  authorized lender may, consistent with federal
  laws and regulations,  include  a  due-on-sale  clause  in  its  reverse
  mortgage  loan  agreement  and  at  its option exercise and enforce such
  clause in accordance with its terms.
    4. The superintendent of financial services shall adopt those rules or
  regulations as it considers appropriate to govern reverse mortgage loans
  made  pursuant  to  this section. No reverse mortgage loan shall be made
  unless it conforms to the requirements of this section  and  such  rules
  and  regulations  as  the superintendent of financial services may adopt
  except those reverse mortgage loans made pursuant to section two hundred
  eighty-a of this article. A reverse mortgage loan made by any authorized
  lender,  national  banking  association,  federal   savings   and   loan
  association  or  federal  credit  union  in  conformity  with applicable
  federal laws and regulations specifically  regulating  reverse  mortgage
  loans  shall  be  deemed  to conform to the requirements of this section
  unless such reverse mortgage loan fails to conform  to  such  rules  and
  regulations  as  the  superintendent of financial services has expressly
  declared to be neither preempted by,  nor  otherwise  inconsistent  with
  such  federal  laws  or  regulations.  Those  rules or regulations shall
  include, but are not limited to, the form and contents of any disclosure
  statement, with the exception of the counseling  statement  prepared  by
  the  New  York  state  office for the aging pursuant to paragraph (g) of
  subdivision two of this section, that authorized lenders must provide to
  mortgagors.
    5. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, the priority  of
  the  lien  of  a reverse mortgage, including the lien for all principal,
  interest, fees, costs, shared appreciation and other charges assessed in
  connection with the reverse mortgage, shall date from the  recording  of
  the  reverse mortgage irrespective of the date of any advance of reverse
  mortgage loan proceeds or the date by which an authorized  lender  shall
  be entitled to shared appreciation or accrued but unpaid interest, fees,
  costs or other charges.
    6.  Nothing  in  this  section  shall be construed to limit, impair or
  otherwise  affect  the  priority  under  applicable  law  of  any  other
  mortgage, deed of trust, encumbrance or lien which was recorded or filed
  prior to the effective date of this section.
    7.  The  sale  or  transfer  of the real property securing the reverse
  mortgage loan to a person other than an original mortgagor or mortgagors
  shall result in the termination of the loan.
    8. In a term reverse mortgage loan, the  real  property  securing  the
  reverse  mortgage loan may be reappraised by an independent appraiser at
  the end of the loan  term.  If  the  value  of  the  real  property  has
  appreciated,  the  term  of  the  reverse  mortgage  may  be extended or
  refinanced, however, the total reverse  mortgage  loan  amount  may  not
  exceed  such  amount or ratio as may be determined by the superintendent
  of financial services. The refinancing  of  the  reverse  mortgage  loan
  shall  be  provided  by  the  original authorized lender or by any other
  authorized lender designated by the mortgagee.
    9. The principal, including any accrued  but  unpaid  interest,  of  a
  reverse  mortgage  loan  agreement entered into pursuant to this section
  may be insured by the mortgagor. If such insurance is purchased from  or
  otherwise  provided by any agency of the state of New York the mortgagor
  shall be granted the  right,  for  a  term  reverse  mortgage  loan,  to
  refinance  or  extend  the reverse mortgage loan at the end of the term,
  subject to such rules or regulations as the superintendent of  financial
  services  may  adopt.  The  authorized  lender  shall have the option to
  choose between refinancing  or  extending  the  reverse  mortgage  loan.
  Subject  to  obtaining an adequate increase in the insurance and subject
  to such  rules  and  regulations  as  the  superintendent  of  financial
  services  may  adopt,  the  total reverse mortgage loan amount shall not
  exceed such amount or loan to value ratio as may be  determined  by  the
  superintendent  of  financial  services.  The refinancing of the reverse
  mortgage loan shall be provided by the original authorized lender or  by
  any other authorized lender designated by the mortgagee.
    10.  Any authorized lender offering reverse mortgage loans pursuant to
  this section shall also offer reverse mortgage loans pursuant to section
  two hundred eighty-a of this article. Subject to  this  section  in  the
  event  that an authorized lender makes reverse mortgage loans under this
  section then that lender must make an equal number of  reverse  mortgage
  loans  pursuant  to  section  two hundred eighty-a of this article. Such
  loans shall be made to individuals who meet the requirements promulgated
  in section two hundred eighty-a  of  this  article  provided  that  such
  individual  seeking the loan would otherwise qualify and be approved for
  that loan. In the event that no or insufficient applications for reverse
  mortgage loans pursuant to section two hundred eighty-a of this  article
  are  made  to  a  lender  who has previously made reverse mortgage loans
  pursuant to this section then there shall be  no  requirement  for  that
  lender  to  make a reverse mortgage loan pursuant to section two hundred
  eighty-a of this article. It shall also not be  a  requirement  that  an
  authorized  lender  make any reverse mortgage loan to any individual who
  would not qualify for such loan and/or would not otherwise  be  approved
  for such loan.
    11.  Nothing  contained  in this section, section six-h of the banking
  law or any other provision of law  shall  be  construed  to  prohibit  a
  banking  organization or licensed mortgage banker from providing reverse
  mortgages  to  homeowners  in  this  state  under  the  federal  housing
  administration's home equity conversion mortgage insurance demonstration
  Program.


§  280-a.  Reverse  mortgage loans for persons seventy years of age or
  older. 1. For purposes of this section, the following terms  shall  have
  the following meanings:
    (a) Reverse mortgage loan. A loan which is secured by a first mortgage
  on  real  property  improved  by  a  one  to  four-family  residence  or
  condominium that is the residence of the mortgagor(s)  the  proceeds  of
  which  are  advanced  to the mortgagor(s) during the term of the loan in
  equal  installments,  or  in  advances  through  a  line  of  credit  or
  otherwise, in lump sums, or through a combination thereof.
    (b)  Term  reverse mortgage loan. As used in this section, any reverse
  mortgage loan that has a fixed term for payments to the mortgagor(s).
    (c) Tenure reverse mortgage loan. As used in this section, any reverse
  mortgage loan that does not have  a  fixed  term  for  payments  to  the
  mortgagor(s).
    (d)  Authorized  lender.  Any  bank,  trust  company, national banking
  association, savings bank, savings and loan association, federal savings
  bank, federal savings and loan association,  credit  union,  or  federal
  credit  union or any licensed mortgage banker approved for the making of
  reverse mortgage loans by the superintendent of  financial  services  or
  any  entity  exempted  from  licensing  pursuant to section five hundred
  ninety of the banking  law  and  approved  for  the  making  of  reverse
  mortgage loans by the superintendent of financial services.
    (e)  Mortgagor.  A  tenant in severalty who is seventy years of age or
  older, or if the real property is held by tenants by the entirety or  by
  joint  tenancy,  the  youngest of which is seventy years of age or older
  and whose income does not exceed eighty percent of the median income  of
  the county in which he or she resides.
    (f)   Superintendent   of   financial   services.  The  superintendent
  established pursuant  to  section  two  hundred  two  of  the  financial
  services law.
    2.  A  reverse mortgage loan pursuant to this section shall be subject
  to the following:
    (a) the mortgagor shall be granted lifetime possession of the  subject
  premises  of  the  real  property  which is the security for the reverse
  mortgage loan, as long as such real  property  remains  the  mortgagors'
  principal  residence  and  subject  to  a limited waiver of the right of
  foreclosure as determined by the superintendent of  financial  services;
  and
    (b)  the  term  of  the  reverse mortgage, except for a tenure reverse
  mortgage loan, shall be for a period of ten years or less; and
    (c) the loan to value ratio shall be determined by the  superintendent
  of financial services; and
    (d)  subject  to  such  rules  or regulations as the superintendent of
  financial services shall adopt, for that period of  time  commencing  at
  the  end  of  the loan term or ten years after the reverse mortgage loan
  commences, whichever occurs first,  and  ending  at  such  time  as  the
  reverse  mortgage  loan  is  paid in full, the authorized lender, at its
  option,  may  receive  no  more  than  twenty  percent  of  the   future
  appreciation  of the property securing the reverse mortgage loan as full
  or partial consideration for the making  of  a  reverse  mortgage  loan;
  provided,  however,  that  such  future appreciation shall be limited by
  such rules and regulations as the superintendent of  financial  services
  may  adopt  or the authorized lender may charge a fixed rate of interest
  on the outstanding balance of monies advanced under the reverse mortgage
  agreement or any combination thereof. Said reverse mortgage  loan  shall
  not come due and shall be extended until the voluntary relinquishment by
  the  mortgagors  of  possessory interest in such real property, the real
  property no longer being the mortgagors' principal residence, the  death
  of  the  mortgagors,  or  such  other events as may be determined by the
  superintendent of financial services. Any such appreciation shall not be
  considered interest for the purposes of any law regulating  the  maximum
  rate  of  interest  which  may  be  charged, taken or received including
  sections 190.40 and 190.42 of the penal law; and
    (e) the authorized lender shall maintain an  escrow  account  for  the
  purposes  of  paying  real  property  taxes,  insurance  premiums of the
  property securing the reverse mortgage loan, or for the payment  of  any
  other  fees  and  expenses  as may be permitted by the superintendent of
  financial services regulation; and
    (f) subject to such rules or  regulations  as  the  superintendent  of
  financial  services  may adopt, an authorized lender or any successor or
  assign of such authorized lender which may  suspends,  ceases  or  makes
  late  payments  to  a  mortgagor  under a reverse mortgage loan shall be
  subject to forfeiture (as liquidated damages to such mortgagor  and  not
  as  a  penalty)  of  twice  the interest which would otherwise have been
  earned during the period in which payments were  suspended,  ceased,  or
  made  late,  provided  that  said  authorized lender or any successor or
  assign of such authorized lender shall have the right to  make  payments
  pursuant to said loan agreement within fifteen days of each payment date
  without penalty; and
    (g) an authorized lender must deliver to an applicant such disclosures
  as  may  be  required  by the superintendent of financial services which
  shall describe the relevant  portions  of  the  reverse  mortgage  being
  offered, and shall include but not be limited to the following items:
    (i)  except for a tenure reverse mortgage loan, a schedule of payments
  to and from the mortgagor and the total payments  in  dollars  over  the
  term  of the reverse mortgage loan for both the mortgagor and mortgagee,
  depending on the type of reverse mortgage loan being offered;
    (ii) a statement prominently displayed advising applicants to  consult
  with   appropriate   authorities   regarding  tax  and  estate  planning
  consequences of a reverse mortgage;
    (iii) where applicable a description  of  prepayment  and  refinancing
  features;
    (iv)  to  the  extent determinable at or prior to the inception of the
  reverse mortgage loan, the  interest  rate  and,  except  for  a  tenure
  reverse  mortgage  loan,  the  total  interest  payable  on  the reverse
  mortgage loan;
    (v) a statement concerning the  compliance  of  the  lender  with  the
  criteria established by the superintendent of financial services that an
  authorized  lender  must  meet before it may make reverse mortgage loans
  pursuant to this section; and
    (vi) a statement setting forth those events which would terminate  the
  reverse mortgage loan; and
    (h)  the  outstanding  balance may be prepaid in full by the mortgagor
  without penalty at any time during the reverse mortgage loan term; and
    (i) an authorized lender is prohibited from  using  or  attaching  any
  property or asset of the mortgagor except the real property securing the
  reverse  mortgage  loan  in settlement of a reverse mortgage obligation;
  and
    (j)  an  authorized  lender  must  deliver  to  the   applicant   upon
  application,  if  available, a statement prepared by the local or county
  office for the aging on the advisability and availability of independent
  counseling  and  information  services.  Further,  no  reverse  mortgage
  commitment  shall be issued by the authorized lender until the applicant
  presents, in writing, a statement that the terms of the reverse mortgage
  loan have been explained to them by an attorney,  a  housing  and  urban
  development  certified  counselor  or  any  other  counseling service as
  indicated on the statement supplied by the county or  local  office  for
  the  aging or a signed affidavit indicating that the applicant, although
  made aware of the importance of counseling and  its  local  availability
  through  the  provision  of  such  information by the authorized lender,
  chooses not to utilize any of the aforementioned available services. The
  form of such statement and affidavit shall be developed by the New  York
  state office for the aging; and
    (k)  a  reverse  mortgage pursuant to this section shall expressly and
  conspicuously bear a legend identifying it as such; and
    (l) subject to such rules or  regulations  as  the  superintendent  of
  financial  services  may adopt, a reverse mortgage loan shall be made at
  either a fixed or variable rate of interest; and
    (m) in the event that an authorized lender or holder  of  the  reverse
  mortgage  loan intends to initiate foreclosure proceedings the mortgagor
  shall have the right to designate a third party who shall  be  notified.
  In  the  event  that  the  mortgagor has not designated a third party to
  receive such notice of foreclosure, then the authorized  lender  or  the
  holder  of  said  reverse mortgage loan shall notify the local or county
  office for the aging of its intent to commence foreclosure  proceedings.
  Such  entity  shall  take appropriate action to protect the interests of
  the mortgagor.
    3. A reverse mortgage loan pursuant to this section may:
    (a) provide that an authorized lender  may,  consistent  with  federal
  laws  and  regulations,  include  a  due-on-sale  clause  in its reverse
  mortgage loan agreement and at its  option  exercise  and  enforce  such
  clause in accordance with its terms;
    (b)  provide  that  the  mortgagor's  closing costs, including but not
  limited to loan or commitment fees if  any,  insurance  premiums,  house
  repairs,  legal  fees,  the costs of annuities, the costs of third party
  counseling,  the  costs  of  existing  mortgages  or  liens,  and  other
  appropriate  costs  be included in the principal of the reverse mortgage
  loan and disbursed out of the loan proceeds at closing.
    4. The superintendent of financial services shall adopt those rules or
  regulations as it considers appropriate to govern reverse mortgage loans
  made pursuant to this section. No reverse mortgage loan  shall  be  made
  unless  it  conforms  to the requirements of this section and such rules
  and regulations as the superintendent of financial  services  may  adopt
  except those reverse mortgage loans made pursuant to section two hundred
  eighty  of  this article. A reverse mortgage loan made by any authorized
  lender,  national  banking  association,  federal   savings   and   loan
  association  or  federal  credit  union  in  conformity  with applicable
  federal laws and regulations specifically  regulating  reverse  mortgage
  loans  shall  be  deemed  to conform to the requirements of this section
  unless such reverse mortgage loan fails to conform  to  such  rules  and
  regulations  as  the  superintendent of financial services has expressly
  declared to be neither preempted by,  nor  otherwise  inconsistent  with
  such  federal  laws  or  regulations.  Those  rules or regulations shall
  include, but are not limited to:
    (a) any limitations on the  taking  of  a  percentage  of  the  future
  appreciation  of the real property securing the reverse mortgage loan as
  consideration for making the reverse mortgage loan;
    (b) the execution by an authorized lender of a limited waiver  of  the
  right of foreclosure;
    (c) with the exception of the counseling statement prepared by the New
  York state office for the aging pursuant to paragraph (j) of subdivision
  two  of  this section, the form and contents of any disclosure statement
  that authorized lenders must provide to mortgagors.
    5. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, the priority  of
  the  lien  of  a reverse mortgage, including the lien for all principal,
  interest, fees, costs, shared appreciation and other charges assessed in
  connection with the reverse mortgage, shall date from the  recording  of
  the mortgage irrespective of the date of any advance of reverse mortgage
  loan  proceeds  or  the  date  by  which  an  authorized lender shall be
  entitled to shared appreciation or accrued but  unpaid  interest,  fees,
  costs or other charges.
    6.  Nothing  in  this  section  shall be construed to limit, impair or
  otherwise affect the  priority,  under  applicable  law,  of  any  other
  mortgage, deed of trust, encumbrance or lien which was recorded or filed
  prior to the effective date of this section.
    7.  The  sale  or  transfer  of  the  real estate securing the reverse
  mortgage loan to a person other than an original mortgagor or mortgagors
  shall result in the termination of the reverse mortgage loan.
    8. In a term reverse mortgage loan, the  real  property  securing  the
  reverse  mortgage  may be reappraised by an independent appraiser at the
  end of the loan term. If the value of the property has appreciated,  the
  term  of the reverse mortgage may be extended or refinanced; however the
  total reverse mortgage loan amount may not exceed such amount or loan to
  value ratio as may be determined  by  the  superintendent  of  financial
  services. The refinancing of the reverse mortgage loan shall be provided
  by  the  original  authorized  lender  or by any other authorized lender
  designated by the mortgagee.
    9. The principal, including any accrued  but  unpaid  interest,  of  a
  reverse  mortgage  loan  agreement entered into pursuant to this section
  must be insured by the mortgagor. If such insurance is purchased from or
  otherwise provided by any agency of the state of New York, the mortgagor
  shall be granted the  right,  for  a  term  reverse  mortgage  loan,  to
  refinance  or  extend  the reverse mortgage loan at the end of the term,
  subject to such rules and regulations as the superintendent of financial
  services may adopt. The authorized  lender  shall  have  the  option  to
  choose  between  refinancing  or  extending  the  reverse mortgage loan.
  Subject to obtaining an adequate increase in the insurance  and  subject
  to  such  rules  and  regulations  as  the  superintendent  of financial
  services may adopt, the total reverse mortgage  loan  amount  shall  not
  exceed  such  amount or ratio as may be determined by the superintendent
  of financial services. The refinancing  of  the  reverse  mortgage  loan
  shall  be  provided  by  the  original authorized lender or by any other
  authorized lender designated by the mortgagee.


§  280-b.  Federal  home equity conversion mortgage regulation. 1. For
  the purposes of  this  section,  the  following  terms  shall  have  the
  following meanings:
    (a)  Reverse  mortgage  loan.  A  reverse  mortgage loan as defined in
  section two hundred eighty of this article,  which  is  issued  in  this
  state  pursuant  to  the  home  equity  conversion  mortgage for seniors
  program  operated  by  the  federal  Department  of  Housing  and  Urban
  Development.
    (b)  Authorized lender. An authorized lender as defined in section two
  hundred eighty of this  article  authorized  to  make  reverse  mortgage
  loans, as defined in this section.
    (c)   Superintendent.   The   superintendent   of  financial  services
  established pursuant  to  section  two  hundred  two  of  the  financial
  services law.
    2.  No  authorized  lender  or  any other party or entity shall in any
  manner, in the marketing or offering of reverse mortgage  loans,  engage
  in any unfair or deceptive practices in connection with the marketing or
  offering of reverse mortgage loans, and, additionally, shall not:
    (a)  use  the  words  "public service announcement" in any commercial,
  mailing, advertisement or writing relating thereto; or
    (b) use the words "government insured" or other similar language in  a
  manner  that falsely represents that reverse mortgage loans are insured,
  supported and sponsored by any governmental entity  in  any  commercial,
  mailing, advertisement or writing relating thereto; or
    (c) represent that any such loan is other than a commercial product.
    3.  (a)  Every  authorized lender or its agent shall provide, with any
  solicitation for reverse mortgage products mailed to a physical  address
  within the state, supplemental consumer protection materials the content
  and form of which shall be specified by the superintendent or his or her
  designee.
    (b)  Every authorized lender shall provide each applicant or potential
  applicant for a reverse mortgage loan  with  the  telephone  number  and
  internet  website  address provided by the federal Department of Housing
  and  Urban  Development  for  the  purposes  of  acquiring  home  equity
  conversion mortgage counseling.
    (c)  The  superintendent  is  authorized  to promulgate such rules and
  regulations  as  he  or  she  shall  deem  necessary  to  implement  the
  provisions of this subdivision.
    4.  (a)  Reverse mortgages secured by residential real property within
  the state shall be subject to the rules and regulations of  the  federal
  Department  of Housing and Urban Development relating to the home equity
  conversion mortgage program.
    (b) For all borrowers whose tax payments, mortgage insurance payments,
  homeowners insurance payments,  or  payments  stemming  from  any  other
  property  obligation  or  obligations are administered by the authorized
  lender, and where these payments are derived from the  proceeds  of  the
  mortgage, the authorized lender shall provide on the borrower's periodic
  account  statement  the current balance remaining in the borrower's line
  of credit  or  lifetime  expectancy  set  aside,  the  projected  annual
  property  charges  for  that  year, and a notice which reads in at least
  twelve point type: "YOUR TAXES AND INSURANCE ARE CURRENTLY BEING PAID BY
  THE PROCEEDS OF THIS MORTGAGE. THE FUNDS THAT HAVE BEEN  SET  ASIDE  ARE
  EXPECTED  TO  BE  EXHAUSTED  AFTER  THE  TAX  AND  INSURANCE PAYMENTS OF
  (SPECIFY EXPECTED MONTH AND YEAR). IF  THE  PROCEEDS  OF  THIS  MORTGAGE
  CANNOT  PAY  THE  TAXES AND INSURANCE, YOU MUST PAY THESE OBLIGATIONS OR
  YOUR HOME MAY BE LOST TO  FORECLOSURE.  PLEASE  NOTE  THAT  AS  TAX  AND
  INSURANCE AMOUNTS CAN VARY YOU SHOULD CONTINUE TO REVIEW THIS NOTICE FOR
  CHANGES."
    (c)  An  authorized  lender  shall, by telephone and first class mail,
  inform and provide notice to a mortgagor when his  or  her  home  equity
  line  of  credit or life expectancy set aside is depleted to ten percent
  or less of its value. Such notice shall inform the mortgagor of  his  or
  her  obligations  relating  to  such  real  property  including, but not
  limited to, mortgage insurance, homeowners insurance and  real  property
  taxes  previously  paid  by  such  line of credit or life expectancy set
  aside, and that such obligations must continue to be paid when the  home
  equity  line  of  credit  or life expectancy set aside is depleted. Such
  notice shall use plain language, written in a clear and coherent  manner
  using  words  with  common and every day meanings, appropriately divided
  and captioned by its various sections.
    (d) Each authorized lender shall, by telephone and first  class  mail,
  inform  and  provide  notice  to a mortgagor when his or her home equity
  line of credit or life expectancy set aside  is  depleted.  Such  notice
  shall  inform  the  mortgagor  of his or her obligations relating to the
  mortgaged  real  property  including,  but  not  limited  to,   mortgage
  insurance,  homeowners  insurance  and real property taxes, and that the
  home equity line of credit or life expectancy set aside will  no  longer
  pay  these obligations. Such notice shall use plain language, written in
  a clear and coherent manner  using  words  with  common  and  every  day
  meanings, appropriately divided and captioned by its various sections.
    5.  No  authorized  lender  shall  make  an  advance  payment  for any
  obligation arising from mortgaged real  property.  Furthermore,  in  the
  event  a  mortgagor  defaults  upon  the  payment  of mortgage insurance
  premium, homeowners' insurance premium or real property tax  related  to
  the  mortgaged  property,  the  authorized  lender  may  only  pay those
  premiums and/or taxes which are in arrears.
    6. In the event that an authorized lender  seeks  to  foreclose  on  a
  reverse  mortgage  loan on the basis that the mortgaged real property is
  no longer the primary residence of or  occupied  by  the  mortgagor,  if
  during  the  verification  of  the  mortgagor's primary residence and/or
  occupancy no responses are received in  response  to  mailings  relating
  thereto,  such  lender  shall  cause  a telephone call to be made to the
  mortgagor, or if the mortgagor is unreachable by telephone, a designated
  third-party specified by the mortgagor, and an in  person  visit  to  be
  made to the mortgagor at the mortgaged real property to be made prior to
  the  commencement  of any foreclosure proceeding. During such visit, the
  authorized lender or its agent shall provide clear information as to who
  they are, that the visit pertains to the reverse  mortgage,  the  reason
  for  the  home  visit,  and  the  telephone  number  to call for further
  information. The authorized  lender  must  wait  at  least  thirty  days
  following  such  visit,  in  addition  to  any additional time or notice
  requirements specified by any other provision of law, before  initiating
  a foreclosure action on the basis that the mortgaged real property is no
  longer the primary residence of the mortgagor. If the mortgagor contacts
  the authorized lender and provides proof of residence or occupancy after
  such  visit  but  before  the  commencement of a foreclosure action, the
  authorized lender shall  be  barred  from  initiating  such  foreclosure
  action.  Furthermore,  no authorized lender shall charge a mortgagor any
  fee  for  any  such  visit  and  inspection.  This  prohibition  on  the
  imposition  of  fees  shall include any and all inspections conducted by
  the authorized lender to verify the status of the reverse  mortgage,  or
  any suspected or actual default condition.
    7.  Both  the authorized lender and the mortgagor shall be represented
  by an attorney or attorneys at the time of the closing  on  the  reverse
  mortgage,  and  each such party shall have at least one attorney present
  to conduct the closing.
    8. Any person who has been injured by reason of any violation of  this
  section  or  any  violation  of the rules and regulations of the federal
  Department of Housing and Urban Development relating to the home  equity
  conversion  mortgage  program may bring an action in his or her own name
  to  recover  treble  his  or  her  actual  damages,  plus the prevailing
  plaintiff's reasonable attorney's fees.
    9. Compliance with the provisions of this section shall be  conditions
  precedent  to  commencing  an  action  to  foreclose  upon a home equity
  conversion mortgage which is subject to the provisions of this  section,
  and  the  failure  to  comply therewith shall be a complete defense to a
  foreclosure action.


§   280-d.   Federal  home  equity  conversion  mortgage  default  and
  foreclosure regulation.  1.  For  the  purposes  of  this  section,  the
  following terms shall have the following meanings:
    (a)  Reverse  mortgage  loan.  A  reverse  mortgage loan as defined in
  section two hundred eighty of this article,  which  is  issued  in  this
  state  pursuant  to  the  home  equity  conversion  mortgage for seniors
  program  operated  by  the  federal  Department  of  Housing  and  Urban
  Development.
    (b)  Authorized lender. An authorized lender as defined in section two
  hundred eighty of this  article  authorized  to  make  reverse  mortgage
  loans, as defined in this section.
    (c)  Department.  The  department  of  financial  services established
  pursuant to section one hundred two of the financial services law.
    2. In addition to the  requirements  of  section  one  thousand  three
  hundred  four  of  the  real  property  actions  and proceedings law, an
  authorized lender shall include in the notice required by  such  section
  any additional information required by the department. The department is
  hereby  authorized  to promulgate rules and regulations requiring that a
  notice issued pursuant to subdivision  one-a  of  section  one  thousand
  three  hundred  four  of  the  real property actions and proceedings law
  include additional information  necessary  to  explain  the  mortgagor's
  rights in a foreclosure process.
    3.  In  addition  to  the  requirements  of section one thousand three
  hundred six of the real  property  actions  and  proceedings  law,  each
  filing with the department that relates to a reverse mortgage loan shall
  include  an  affirmative statement that the lender, assignee or mortgage
  loan servicer either received final approval from the federal Department
  of Housing and Urban Development to accelerate the reverse mortgage loan
  that is the subject of the filing or that  no  such  approval  from  the
  federal Department of Housing and Urban Development is required.
    4.   Authorized   lenders  shall  comply  with  all  applicable  laws,
  regulations and any guidelines  issued  by  the  federal  Department  of
  Housing  and  Urban Development on loss mitigation for reverse mortgages
  and shall maintain policies on loss mitigation  that  shall  be  updated
  when  necessary  to  ensure  compliance  with all applicable rules. Each
  authorized lender shall maintain loan level  data  and  loss  mitigation
  data  for  all loans associated with a repayment plan including, but not
  limited to:
    (a) monthly surplus income;
    (b) term of repayment plan;
    (c) amount of monthly repayment plan;
    (d) due date of each monthly payment;
    (e) when a mortgagor experiences a hardship; and
    (f) the nature of the hardship.
    5. Any person who has been injured by reason of any violation of  this
  section may bring an action in his or her own name to recover treble his
  or  her  actual  damages,  plus  the  prevailing  plaintiff's reasonable
  attorney's fees.
    6. The requirements of this section shall be conditions  precedent  to
  commencing an action to foreclose upon a home equity conversion mortgage
  which  is  subject  to  the  provisions  of this section, and failure to
  comply therewith shall be a complete defense to a foreclosure action.


§  281. Credit line mortgage. 1. (a) For the purposes of this section,
  a "credit line mortgage" shall mean any mortgage or deed of trust, other
  than a mortgage or deed of  trust  made  pursuant  to  a  building  loan
  contract  as  defined in subdivision thirteen of section two of the lien
  law, which states that it secures  indebtedness  under  a  note,  credit
  agreement  or  other financing agreement that reflects the fact that the
  parties reasonably contemplate  entering  into  a  series  of  advances,
  payments  and  readvances,  and  that limits the aggregate amount at any
  time outstanding to a maximum amount specified in such mortgage or  deed
  of  trust.  For  purposes  of this section, "credit line mortgage" shall
  include a reverse mortgage loan  as  defined  in  sections  two  hundred
  eighty  and  two  hundred  eighty-a  of  this article except that such a
  credit line mortgage of the reverse mortgage  loan  type  shall  not  be
  subject  to  the  twenty year limitation set forth in subdivision two of
  this section.
    (b) Payments made by an authorized lender pursuant to any credit  line
  reverse mortgage made in accordance with section two hundred eighty-a of
  this  article  during  any  one  year shall be limited to such amount or
  ratio as may be determined by the superintendent of financial  services.
  In  the  event  that  a borrower does not take payment under such credit
  line during the course of any year then that  borrower  shall  have  the
  ability to increase the yearly payments by that amount available but not
  borrowed during previous years.
    2.  Any credit line mortgage may, and when so expressed therein, shall
  secure not only the original  indebtedness  but  also  the  indebtedness
  created  by future advances thereunder made within thirty years from the
  date of the  recording  of  such  credit  line  mortgage,  whether  such
  advances are obligatory or are to be made at the option of the lender or
  otherwise,  to  the same extent and with the same priority of lien as if
  such future advances had been made at the time such credit line mortgage
  was recorded pursuant to section two hundred ninety-one of this chapter,
  although there may have been  no  advances  made  at  the  time  of  the
  execution  and acknowledgment of such credit line mortgage, and although
  there may be no indebtedness outstanding at  the  time  any  advance  is
  made.  The  total  amount  of  indebtedness  that may be so secured by a
  credit line mortgage may increase or decrease from time to time, but the
  amount so secured at any one time shall not exceed  the  maximum  amount
  specified  in  such  credit  line mortgage, plus interest thereon at the
  rate provided therein, and plus any disbursements made  to  protect  the
  security   of   such   credit  line  mortgage,  with  interest  on  such
  disbursements at the rate provided therein.
    3. Nothing in this section shall affect the priority of a  lien  under
  article two of the lien law with respect to future advances made under a
  credit  line  mortgage after the filing of the notice of such lien under
  the lien law.
    4. This section shall apply to advances made after the effective  date
  of  this  section under a credit line mortgage, whether such credit line
  mortgage is recorded  on  or  after,  or  was  recorded  prior  to,  the
  effective date of this section.
    5.  Nothing  in  this  section  shall be construed to limit, impair or
  otherwise affect the priority under applicable law without reference  to
  this section of a mortgage, deed of trust, encumbrance or lien which was
  recorded or filed prior to the effective date of this section.


§  282.  Mortgagor's  right  to  recover attorneys' fees in actions or
  proceedings arising out of  foreclosures  of  residential  property.  1.
  Whenever a covenant contained in a mortgage on residential real property
  shall provide that in any action or proceeding to foreclose the mortgage
  that  the mortgagee may recover attorneys' fees and/or expenses incurred
  as the result of the failure of the mortgagor to perform any covenant or
  agreement contained in such  mortgage,  or  that  amounts  paid  by  the
  mortgagee therefor shall be paid by the mortgagor as additional payment,
  there  shall  be implied in such mortgage a covenant by the mortgagee to
  pay to the mortgagor the  reasonable  attorneys'  fees  and/or  expenses
  incurred  by the mortgagor as the result of the failure of the mortgagee
  to perform any covenant or agreement on its part to be  performed  under
  the  mortgage  or  in the successful defense of any action or proceeding
  commenced by the mortgagee against the  mortgagor  arising  out  of  the
  contract,  and an agreement that such fees and expenses may be recovered
  as provided by law in an action commenced against the  mortgagee  or  by
  way  of  counterclaim  in  any  action  or  proceeding  commenced by the
  mortgagee against the mortgagor. Any waiver of  this  section  shall  be
  void as against public policy.
    2. For the purposes of this section, "residential real property" means
  real property improved by a one- to four-family residence, a condominium
  that is occupied by the mortgagor or a cooperative unit that is occupied
  by the mortgagor.


ARTICLE 9
                RECORDING INSTRUMENTS AFFECTING REAL PROPERTY
  Section 290.    Definitions; effect of article.
          291.    Recording of conveyances.
          291-a.  Recording  conveyances  of  land  in towns in Chautauqua
                    county; duties of county and town clerks.
          291-b.  Recording conveyances of land in  towns  in  Cattaraugus
                    county; duties of county and town clerks.
          291-c.  Recording memoranda of leases.
          291-cc. 1. Recording modifications of leases.
          291-d.  Recording  of  master  forms  of  mortgage covenants and
                    clauses; incorporation thereof by reference.
          291-e.  Exceptions,  reservations  and  recitals  referring   to
                    unrecorded  conveyances and contracts for sale of real
                    property.
          291-f.  Rights  where  recorded  mortgage  restricts  landlord's
                    action in respect to leases.
          291-g.  Recording insurance information.
          291-h.  Recording of liens by the state.
          291-i.  Validity of electronic recording.
          291-j.  Recording  of  declarations by the New York state energy
                    research and development authority.
          292.    By whom conveyance must be acknowledged or proved.
          292-a.  Conveyances  by  certain   corporations   executed   and
                    acknowledged   by   attorneys   in  fact  entitled  to
                    recordation.
          293.    Recording  of  conveyances  heretofore  acknowledged  or
                    proved.
          294.    Recording executory contracts and powers of attorney.
          294-a.  Recording assignments of rent.
          294-b.  Recording brokers affidavit of entitlement to commission
                    for completed brokerage services.
          295.    Recording of letters patent.
          296.    Recording  copies  of instruments which are in secretary
                    of state's office.
          297.    Certified copies may be recorded.
          297-a.  Recording of  certified  copies  of  bankruptcy  papers;
                    constructive notice.
          297-b.  Recording  of  certified  copies  of judgments affecting
                    real property.
          298.    Acknowledgments and proofs within the state.
          299.    Acknowledgments and proofs without the state, but within
                    the United States or  any  territory,  possession,  or
                    dependency thereof.
          299-a.  Acknowledgment to conform to law of New York or of place
                    where taken; certificate of conformity.
          300.    Acknowledgments  and  proofs  by  persons in or with the
                    armed forces of the United States.
          301.    Acknowledgments and proofs in foreign countries.
          301-a.  Acknowledgment to conform to  law  of  New  York  or  of
                    foreign country; certificate of conformity.
          302.    Acknowledgments and proofs by married women.
          303.    Requisites of acknowledgments.
          304.    Proof by subscribing witness.
          305.    Compelling witnesses to testify.
          306.    Certificate of acknowledgment or proof.
          307.    When certificate to state time and place.
          308.    When certificate must be under seal.
          309.    Acknowledgment by corporation and form of certificate.
          309-a.  Uniform forms of certificates of acknowledgment or proof
                    within this state.
          309-b.  Uniform  forms  of  certificates  of  acknowledgement or
                    proof without this state.
          310.    Authentication of acknowledgments and proofs made within
                    the state.
          311.    Authentication  of  acknowledgments  and   proofs   made
                    without the state.
          312.    Contents of certificate of authentication.
          313.    Notary public.
          313-a.  Deputies.
          314.    Recording  of conveyances acknowledged or proved without
                    the state, when parties  and  certifying  officer  are
                    dead.
          314-a.  Proof when witnesses are dead.
          315.    Recording books.
          316.    Indexes.
          316-a.  Indexing and reindexing conveyances, mortgages and other
                    instruments.
          316-b.  Inactive hazardous waste disposal site registry index.
          317.    Order of recording.
          318.    Certificate to be recorded.
          319.    Time of recording.
          320.    Certain deeds deemed mortgages.
          321.    Recording discharge of mortgage.
          321-a.  Recording discharge of rent assignment.
          324.    Effect of recording assignment of mortgage.
          325.    Recording   of   conveyances   made   by   treasurer  of
                    Connecticut.
          326.    Revocation to be recorded.
          327.    Penalty for using long forms of covenants.
          328.    Certain acts not affected.
          329.    Actions to have certain instruments canceled of record.
          329-a.  Lapse of oil and  gas  interest  within  Allegany  state
                    park.
          330.    Officers guilty of malfeasance liable for damages.
          331.    Laws  and decrees of foreign countries appointing agents
                    and attorneys and recording of the same.
          332.    The record of certain conveyances validated.
          332-a.  Validation  of  the  record,  execution  and  proof   or
                    acknowledgment of certain other instruments.
          332-b.  The record of certain other conveyances validated.
          333.    When conveyances of real property not to be recorded.
          333-a.  Same; maps to be filed.
          333-b.  Recording of maps or plot plans.
          333-c.  Lands in agricultural districts; disclosure.
          334.    Maps to be filed; penalty for nonfiling.
          334-a.  Filing of subdivision maps in Nassau county; penalty for
                    non-filing.
          335.    Filing  of  maps  and  abandonment  of  subdivisions  in
                    Suffolk county; penalty for nonfiling.
          335-a.  Easements of necessity.
          335-b.  Recording of solar energy easements.
          336.    Effect  of  recording   demands   or   requirements   of
                    noncitizen property custodian.


§ 290. Definitions; effect of article. 1. The term "real property," as
  used  in  this  article, includes lands, tenements and hereditaments and
  chattels real, except a lease for a term not exceeding three years.
    2. The term "purchaser" includes every person to whom  any  estate  or
  interest  in real property is conveyed for a valuable consideration, and
  every assignee of a mortgage, lease or other conditional estate.
    3. The term "conveyance" includes every written instrument,  by  which
  any  estate  or  interest  in  real  property  is  created, transferred,
  mortgaged or assigned, or by which the title to any real property may be
  affected, including an instrument in execution of a power, although  the
  power  be  one  of  revocation  only,  and  an  instrument postponing or
  subordinating a mortgage lien; except a will, a lease  for  a  term  not
  exceeding three years, an executory contract for the sale or purchase of
  lands,  and  an instrument containing a power to convey real property as
  the agent or attorney for the owner of such property.
    4. The term "recording officer" means the county clerk of the  county,
  except in a county having a register, where it means the register of the
  county.
    5.  "Recording"  or  "recorded"  means  the entry, at length, upon the
  pages of the proper record books in a plain and legible hand writing, or
  in print or in symbols of drawing or by photographic process  or  partly
  in  writing,  partly in printing, partly in symbols of drawing or partly
  by photographic process or by  any  combination  of  writing,  printing,
  drawing or photography or either or any two of them, or by an electronic
  process  by  which a record or instrument affecting real property, after
  delivery  is  incorporated  into  the  public  record.  "Recording"   or
  "recorded"    also    means   the   reproduction   of   instruments   by
  microphotography or other photographic process on film which is kept  in
  appropriate files.
    6.  "Electronic" means of or relating to technology having electrical,
  digital,  magnetic,  wireless,  optical,  electromagnetic   or   similar
  capabilities.
    7.   "Electronic   record"   means  information  evidencing  any  act,
  transaction, occurrence, event or other activity, produced or stored  by
  electronic  means  and  capable  of being accurately reproduced in forms
  perceptible by human sensory capabilities.
    8. "Electronic  signature"  means  an  electronic  sound,  symbol,  or
  process,  attached  to or logically associated with an electronic record
  and executed or adopted by a person with the intent to sign the record.
    9. "Paper document" means a document in a form that is not electronic.
    10. "Digitized paper document" means a  digitized  image  of  a  paper
  document  that  accurately depicts the information on the paper document
  in a format that cannot be altered without detection.
    11. "Wet signature" means a signature affixed  in  ink  or  pencil  or
  other material to a paper document.
    12.  This  article  does not apply to leases for life or lives, or for
  years, heretofore made, of lands in either of the  counties  of  Albany,
  Ulster, Sullivan, Herkimer, Dutchess, Columbia, Delaware or Schenectady.


§ 291. Recording of conveyances. A conveyance of real property, within
  the  state, on being duly acknowledged by the person executing the same,
  or proved as required by this chapter, and such acknowledgment or  proof
  duly  certified  when  required  by this chapter, may be recorded in the
  office of the clerk of the county where such real property is  situated,
  and such county clerk or city registrar where applicable shall, upon the
  request  of any party, on tender of the lawful fees therefor, record the
  same in said office. Every such conveyance not so recorded  is  void  as
  against any person who subsequently purchases or acquires by exchange or
  contracts  to purchase or acquire by exchange, the same real property or
  any portion thereof, or  acquires  by  assignment  the  rent  to  accrue
  therefrom  as  provided  in  section  two  hundred ninety-four-a of this
  article, in good faith and for a valuable consideration, from  the  same
  vendor  or assignor, his distributees or devisees, and whose conveyance,
  contract or assignment is first duly recorded, and is  void  as  against
  the lien upon the same real property or any portion thereof arising from
  payments  made  upon  the  execution  of  or  pursuant to the terms of a
  contract with the same vendor, his distributees  or  devisees,  if  such
  contract   is   made   in   good  faith  and  is  first  duly  recorded.
  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any increase in the principal balance  of
  a  mortgage lien by virtue of the addition thereto of unpaid interest in
  accordance with the terms of the mortgage shall retain the  priority  of
  the  original  mortgage  lien  as  so  increased  provided that any such
  mortgage instrument sets forth its terms of repayment. The clerk of  the
  county  or  city  registrar  where  such  conveyance of residential real
  property is recorded and maintained shall mail a written notice of  such
  conveyance  to  the  owner  of record. The notice shall have the heading
  printed in 20 point bold type and read as follows:
  "NOTICE OF SALE OR TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OF YOUR RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
  To:______________________________
        Name of owner of record
 
  Our records show that you are listed as the current owner of record  for
  residential property:
 
  Block #__________  Lot #________
 
  Located At: ___________________________
                    street address
 
  in the county of __________________ New York
  On ____________, documents were filed at this
        date
  office to change ownership and transfer title of your property.
 
  To: ______________________________
            name of new owner
 
  If  you  have any questions regarding the validity of the documents, and
  wish to dispute the recording of the transfer, you should  obtain  legal
  counsel.  If  you  believe  you  are a victim of a crime related to this
  recording, contact your local law enforcement agency or, if in the  City
  of New York, the office of the sheriff."
  The  party seeking to record such conveyance shall bear the cost of such
  written notice. The clerk of the county or city registrar is entitled to
  charge a reasonable fee to cover the cost of mailing the envelope to the
  owner of record. Failure to mail such notice or the failure of any party
  to receive the same, shall not affect the validity of the conveyance  of
  the property.


§  291-a. Recording conveyances of land in towns in Chautauqua county;
  duties of county and town clerks. 1. Every deed  and  will  relating  to
  real  property in Chautauqua county, outside the cities of Jamestown and
  Dunkirk, and every judicial decree establishing the right of inheritance
  to real property within Chautauqua county  shall,  before  the  same  be
  hereafter  recorded  in  the office of the clerk of Chautauqua county be
  presented to the clerk of said county together with  a  carbon  copy  or
  copies of the substance thereof, equal to the number of townships of the
  said  county  in  which land is conveyed by the instrument. Such copy or
  copies shall set  forth  the  date,  consideration,  the  names  of  the
  grantors and grantees, the mail address of the grantee and a description
  of the property conveyed as set out in the instrument of conveyance.
    Such  copy or copies of an instrument of conveyance of land within the
  county of Chautauqua, outside the cities of Jamestown and Dunkirk, shall
  be retained by the clerk of the said county until the first day  of  the
  month  succeeding  the  date on which it was received, and he thereafter
  shall transmit immediately all such copies received by  him  during  the
  preceding  month  to  the  clerks of the towns in which such conveyances
  have  occurred.  Hereafter  the  clerk  of  Chautauqua  county  or   any
  subordinate  in  the office of such clerk of Chautauqua county who shall
  record any instrument of conveyance of real property  without  receiving
  and transmitting to the town clerk of the town concerned, a copy thereof
  as  provided  herein  shall  be  guilty  of a misdemeanor. At the time a
  conveyance is offered for record a fee of  twenty-five  cents  shall  be
  paid  to the county clerk in addition to any other moneys required to be
  paid to entitle the deed to be recorded.
    The town clerks in each of the towns of Chautauqua county outside  the
  cities  of  Jamestown and Dunkirk, shall enter the copies of conveyances
  and all appurtenant data so received from the clerk of Chautauqua county
  in a record book to be provided and kept for such purpose. Such book and
  the records contained therein shall be open  to  public  inspection  and
  shall be used by the local assessors in making assessments.
    2.  Any  deed  or  instrument  of conveyance relating to real property
  within  the  towns  of  Chautauqua,  North  Harmony,  Ellicott,  Ellery,
  Westfield  and  Busti or the village of Celoron, Chautauqua county, that
  for the first time conveys an interest in a paper street located  within
  either  such  town or village to any grantee other than a not-for-profit
  corporation incorporated pursuant to the laws of this state  or  similar
  association or to a municipal corporation, notwithstanding the fact that
  such  deed  or  instrument  shall have been recorded by the clerk of the
  county of Chautauqua, shall be considered a nullity and given  no  force
  and  effect  unless accompanied by a resolution of the town board of the
  town or of the board of trustees of the village within which such  paper
  street  is located authorizing that such deed or instrument be recorded.
  For the purposes of this subdivision, a paper street shall mean a street
  that was designed in a subdivision map when originally filed  but  which
  was never subsequently developed or used as a public way.


§ 291-b. Recording conveyances of land in towns in Cattaraugus county;
  duties  of  county and town clerks. Every deed and will relating to real
  property  in  Cattaraugus  county,  outside  the  cities  of  Olean  and
  Salamanca,   and   every  judicial  decree  establishing  the  right  of
  inheritance to real property within Cattaraugus county shall, before the
  same be hereafter recorded in the office of  the  clerk  of  Cattaraugus
  county  be  presented to the clerk of said county together with a carbon
  copy or copies  of  the  substance  thereof,  equal  to  the  number  of
  townships  of  the  said  county  in  which  land  is  conveyed  by  the
  instrument. Such copy or copies shall set forth the date, consideration,
  the names of the grantors and grantees, the mail address of the  grantee
  and  a description of the property conveyed as set out in the instrument
  of conveyance. Such copy or copies of an  instrument  of  conveyance  of
  land  within  the county of Cattaraugus, outside the cities of Olean and
  Salamanca, shall be retained by the clerk of the said county  until  the
  first day of the month succeeding the date on which it was received, and
  he thereafter shall transmit immediately all such copies received by him
  during  the  preceding  month  to  the clerks of the towns in which such
  conveyances have occurred. Hereafter the clerk of Cattaraugus county  or
  any  subordinate  in  the office of such clerk of Cattaraugus county who
  shall record any instrument  of  conveyance  of  real  property  without
  receiving  and  transmitting  to the town clerk of the town concerned, a
  copy thereof as provided herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. At the
  time a conveyance is offered for a record a  fee  of  twenty-five  cents
  shall  be  paid  to  the  county  clerk  in addition to any other moneys
  required to be paid to entitle the deed to be recorded.
    The town clerks in each of the towns of Cattaraugus county outside the
  cities of Olean and Salamanca, shall enter the copies of conveyances and
  all appurtenant data so received from the Clerk of Cattaraugus county in
  a record book to be provided and kept for such purpose.  Such  book  and
  the  records  contained  therein  shall be open to public inspection and
  shall be used by the local assessors in making assessments.


§ 291-c. Recording memoranda of leases.  In lieu of the recording of a
  lease  for a term exceeding three years, pursuant to section two hundred
  ninety-one of this chapter, there may be recorded  with  like  effect  a
  memorandum of such lease, executed by all persons who are parties to the
  lease,  and  acknowledged  or  proved,  and  certified, in the manner to
  entitle a conveyance to be recorded. A memorandum of lease thus entitled
  to be recorded shall contain at least  the  following  information  with
  respect  to the lease: the name of the lessor and the name of the lessee
  and the addresses, if any, set forth in the lease as addresses  of  such
  parties;  a  reference  to  the  lease,  with  its  date of execution; a
  description of the leased premises in the form contained in  the  lease;
  the  term  of  the  lease, with the date of commencement and the date of
  termination of such term, and if  there  is  a  right  of  extension  or
  renewal,  the maximum period for which or date to which the lease may be
  extended or the number of times or date to which it may be renewed,  and
  the  date  or  dates  on  which  such rights of extension or renewal are
  exercisable.
    Whenever a memorandum of lease is presented for recording,  the  lease
  shall  also  be  submitted  to  the recording officer for the purpose of
  examination to determine whether or not  such  memorandum  of  lease  is
  subject  to  the  tax on mortgages provided by article eleven of the tax
  Law.


§  291-cc.  1.  Recording  modifications  of  leases. Where a lease or
  memorandum of such lease has  been  recorded,  an  unrecorded  agreement
  modifying  such  lease  or  memorandum  is  void as against a subsequent
  purchaser in good faith  and  for  a  valuable  consideration,  and  the
  possession of the tenant shall not be deemed notice of the modification,
  unless the agreement of modification or a memorandum thereof is recorded
  prior  to  the  recording  of  the  instrument  by  which the subsequent
  purchaser acquires his estate or interest.
    2. A memorandum of an agreement modifying a  lease  shall  contain  at
  least the following information with respect to the agreement: the names
  of  the parties and the addresses, if any, set forth in the agreement; a
  reference  to  the  agreement  with  its  date  of  execution;  a  brief
  description  of  the  leased premises in form sufficient to identify the
  same; any changes made by the agreement in the term of the lease and the
  date of the termination of the lease as modified, and any changes in the
  provisions of the lease as to the rights of extension or renewal.
    3. For the purpose of this section the  word  "purchaser"  includes  a
  person who purchases or acquires by exchange or contracts to purchase or
  acquire  by  exchange  the leased premises or the real property of which
  the leased premises are part or  any  estate  or  interest  therein,  or
  acquires by assignment the rent to accrue from tenancies or subtenancies
  thereof in existence at the time of the assignment.


§  291-d. Recording of master forms of mortgage covenants and clauses;
  incorporation thereof by reference. 1. An instrument containing  a  form
  or   forms  of  mortgage  covenants,  conditions,  obligations,  powers,
  releases, and other clauses  may  be  recorded  in  the  office  of  the
  recording  officer  of  any  county and such recording officer, upon the
  request of any person, on tender of  the  lawful  fees  therefor,  shall
  record  the  same  in  his  said  office. Every such instrument shall be
  entitled on the face thereof as a "Master form recorded by ....... (name
  of person causing the instrument to be recorded)." Such instrument  need
  not be acknowledged or proved or certified to be entitled to record.
    2.  When  any such instrument is recorded, the clerk or register shall
  index such instrument under the name of the  person  causing  it  to  be
  recorded  in  the manner provided for miscellaneous instruments relating
  to real property.
    3. Thereafter any of the provisions of such master form instrument may
  be incorporated by reference in any conveyance of real property situated
  within the state, if such reference in the conveyance  states  that  the
  master  form  instrument  was  recorded  in  the  county  in  which  the
  conveyance is offered for record, the date when and the office, book and
  page or pages where such master form instrument was recorded, and that a
  copy of  such  master  form  instrument  was  furnished  to  the  person
  executing  the  conveyance. The recording of any conveyance which has so
  incorporated by reference therein any of the provisions of a master form
  instrument recorded as provided in this section shall have  like  effect
  as  if  such  provisions of the master form so incorporated by reference
  had been set forth fully in the conveyance.
    4. Whenever an instrument of conveyance is presented for recording  on
  which  is  set  forth  matter purporting to be a copy or reproduction of
  such master form instrument or of part thereof, identified by its  title
  as provided in subdivision one of this section and stating the date when
  it  was  recorded  and  the  county,  office, book and page where it was
  recorded, preceded by the words "do not record" or "not to be  recorded,
  "  and  plainly  separated from the matter to be recorded as part of the
  conveyance, in such manner that it will not appear upon  a  photographic
  reproduction  of  any  page  containing any part of the conveyance, such
  matter shall not be recorded by the county clerk or register to whom the
  instrument is presented for recording; in such case the county clerk  or
  register  shall  record  only  the conveyance apart from such matter and
  shall not be liable for so doing, any other provisions  of  law  to  the
  contrary notwithstanding.
    5.  For  the  purposes  of  any  provision of law relating to fees for
  recording, entering or indexing of conveyances, or relating to searches,
  furnishing of certified copies, reproduction by photographic  method  or
  otherwise,  or  destruction,  or  to  any other matter pertaining to the
  powers and duties of recording officers  with  respect  to  conveyances,
  except  manner  of indexing thereof, the master form instrument provided
  for in subdivision one of this section shall be deemed a conveyance.


§ 291-e. Exceptions, reservations and recitals referring to unrecorded
  conveyances  and  contracts  for  sale of real property. 1. This section
  applies to any language, contained in a conveyance of real  property  in
  this  state, which (a) excepts or reserves a part or any or all parts of
  the described premises which have  been  or  may  have  been  previously
  conveyed,  or  previously  contracted  to  be  sold or exchanged, by the
  grantor or by a previous owner, or  (b)  otherwise  indicates  that  the
  premises  or  some  part  or  parts  thereof  have been or may have been
  previously conveyed or that  a  contract  has  been  or  may  have  been
  previously  made  for  the sale or exchange of all or some part or parts
  thereof, or (c) indicates that only such part of the premises  described
  is  intended to be conveyed as the grantor, or a previous owner, has not
  previously  conveyed  or  has  not  previously  contracted  to  sell  or
  exchange,  and, in any of the cases described in this subdivision, fails
  to identify the premises previously conveyed or contracted to be sold or
  exchanged in any other manner than by indicating that  a  conveyance  or
  contract  has previously been made or indicating the fact or possibility
  that one or more conveyances or contracts have been  or  may  have  been
  previously made.
    2.  An  exception, reservation or recital described in subdivision one
  of this section is (a) void as against a subsequent  purchaser  in  good
  faith  and  for a valuable consideration, who has no other notice of the
  identity of the premises to which it refers, and (b) ineffective to give
  notice to such  subsequent  purchaser  of  the  previous  conveyance  or
  contract  so  referred  to  or  create  any duty of inquiry with respect
  thereto, unless, in either case, such previous conveyance or contract is
  sufficient to identify the premises to which the exception,  reservation
  or recital refers and is recorded as provided in this article before the
  recording  of  the instrument by which the subsequent purchaser acquires
  his estate or interest.
    3. For the purposes of this section,
    (a) "Purchaser"  includes  a  person  who  purchases  or  acquires  by
  exchange  or  contracts  to  purchase  or  acquire  by exchange the same
  premises or any portion  thereof  or  estate  or  interest  therein,  or
  acquires by assignment the rent to accrue from tenancies or subtenancies
  thereof in existence at the time of the assignment.
    (b) Contract for sale includes an option to purchase or lease.
    (c)  A  lease,  or a contract or option, is recorded when a memorandum
  thereof is recorded as provided in section two hundred  ninety-one-c  or
  section two hundred ninety-four of this chapter.
    (d)  The  recording  of  a  contract or option, or memorandum thereof,
  pursuant  to  section  two  hundred  ninety-four  of  this  chapter,  is
  effective  up  to  and  including  the thirtieth day after the day fixed
  therein for the conveyance of title, or the thirtieth day after the last
  day fixed therein for the exercise of the option, provided,  that  if  a
  written  declaration  of the exercise of the option has been recorded as
  provided in subdivision seven of section two  hundred  ninety-four,  the
  recording  of the option is effective to and including the thirtieth day
  after the last day fixed  pursuant  to  the  option  agreement  for  the
  conveyance  of  title or the execution and delivery of the lease, as the
  case may be. An agreement extending  the  time  for  the  conveyance  of
  title, acknowledged or proved, and certified, in the manner to entitle a
  conveyance  to  be recorded, may be recorded, and the recording shall be
  effective up to and including the thirtieth day after the day  fixed  by
  such agreement for the conveyance of title.
    4.  This  section  shall  not  impair  the  effect  of  an  exception,
  reservation or recital to limit any  warranty  of  the  grantor  in  the
  conveyance in which it is contained.
    5.  This  section  shall  apply  where  the  instrument  by  which the
  subsequent purchaser acquires his estate or interest is executed  on  or
  after  September  first,  nineteen  hundred sixty, except that where the
  conveyance containing an exception, reservation or recital described  in
  subdivision  one  of  this  section was executed before September first,
  nineteen  hundred  sixty,  this  section  shall  apply  only  where  the
  instrument  by  which  the  subsequent  purchaser acquires his estate or
  interest is executed on  or  after  September  first,  nineteen  hundred
  Sixty-one.


§ 291-f. Rights where recorded mortgage restricts landlord's action in
  respect  to leases.   An agreement, referring to this section, contained
  in a recorded mortgage of real property, or  in  a  recorded  instrument
  relating  to  such  mortgage, restricting the right or power, as against
  the holder of the mortgage without his consent,  of  the  owner  of  the
  mortgaged   real   property  to  cancel,  abridge  or  otherwise  modify
  tenancies, subtenancies, leases  or  subleases  of  the  mortgaged  real
  property  in  existence  at  the  time  of  the  agreement, or to accept
  prepayments of instalments of  rent  to  become  due  thereunder,  shall
  become  binding  on  a  tenant or subtenant after written notice of such
  agreement, accompanied by a copy of  the  text  thereof;  and  any  such
  cancellation,  abridgement,  modification  or  prepayment  made  by such
  tenant or subtenant, after such written notice, without the  consent  of
  the holder of such mortgage, shall be voidable as against the holder, at
  his  option.  The  recording  on  or  after July first, nineteen hundred
  sixty, of any such mortgage or instrument relating thereto shall for the
  purposes of this section  be  in  itself  a  sufficient  notice  of  the
  restrictive  agreement  to  any  tenant  or  subtenant  who,  after such
  recording,  acquires  by  assignment,  whether  the  assignment  is   by
  instrument  or  by  operation of law, a leasehold estate in existence at
  the time of the restrictive agreement. This section shall not apply  (1)
  to  any  tenancy,  subtenancy,  lease  or  sublease  primarily  for  the
  residential purposes of the owner of the leasehold estate, or (2) to any
  tenancy, subtenancy, lease  or  sublease  having  at  the  time  of  the
  restrictive agreement an unexpired term of less than five years.


§  291-g.  Recording  insurance information. Every owner of a multiple
  dwelling,  as  defined  in  subdivision  two  of  section  two   hundred
  thirty-nine-a  of  this  chapter,  which  is  located  in  a city with a
  population in  excess  of  one  million  persons  shall  file  with  the
  department   of  housing  preservation  and  development  an  instrument
  containing the name or names of the insurer  issuing  a  fire,  casualty
  and/or liability insurance policy for the multiple dwelling, the address
  of the insurance company and the policy number.


§  291-h.  Recording  of liens by the state. The state may cause to be
  filed in the appropriate office of the city register of the city of  New
  York or in the county clerk's office of the county of Richmond or in the
  county  clerk's  office  of any other county of the state where the real
  property is situated a notice of lien created by the application for and
  receipt of state aid provided pursuant to section 41.27  of  the  mental
  hygiene  law or by the application for and receipt of state aid provided
  pursuant to section 25.03 of the mental hygiene law and any  regulations
  promulgated in connection therewith. Such notice shall briefly state the
  recipient of the state aid, conditions of the provision of the state aid
  and  shall  contain  a  general  description  by  metes and bounds or by
  section, block and lot number  of  the  real  property  to  be  acquired
  Thereby.


§  291-i. Validity of electronic recording. 1. Notwithstanding any law
  to the contrary, (a) where a law, rule  or  regulation  requires,  as  a
  condition  for  recording, that an instrument affecting real property be
  an original, be on paper or another tangible medium or  be  in  writing,
  the  requirement  is  satisfied  by  a  digitized  paper  document or an
  electronic record of such instrument;
    (b) where a law, rule or  regulation  requires,  as  a  condition  for
  recording,  that  an  instrument  affecting real property be signed, the
  requirement is satisfied, where the instrument  exists  as  a  digitized
  paper  document, if the digitized image of a wet signature of the person
  executing such instrument appears on such digitized paper  document  or,
  where  the  instrument exists as an electronic record, if the instrument
  is signed by use of an electronic signature;
    (c) where a law, rule  or  regulation  requires,  as  a  condition  of
  recording,  that  an  instrument  affecting real property or a signature
  associated with such an instrument be notarized, acknowledged, verified,
  witnessed or made under oath, the signature requirement is satisfied if:
  (i) the digitized image of a wet signature of the person  authorized  to
  perform that act and any stamp, impression or seal required by law to be
  included,  appears  on a digitized paper document of such instrument; or
  (ii) the electronic signature of the person authorized to  perform  that
  act,  and  all other information required to be included, is attached to
  or logically associated with an electronic record  of  such  instrument,
  provided,  however  that  no  physical  or  electronic image of a stamp,
  impression or seal  shall  be  required  to  accompany  such  electronic
  signature.
    (d)  where  a  law,  rule  or  regulation  requires, as a condition of
  recording an instrument affecting real property, that  any  accompanying
  document  be  filed  therewith,  the requirement is satisfied if, in the
  case of recording by electronic means, a  digitized  paper  document  or
  electronic  record of any such accompanying document is presented to the
  recording officer at the same time as such  instrument  is  recorded  by
  electronic  means;  provided  that each such document or record shall be
  presented to  the  recording  officer  as  a  separate  digitized  paper
  document or electronic record unto itself.
    2.  A  digitized  paper document or documents shall be created using a
  software application or other electronic process which stores  an  image
  of  the  original paper document or documents, and which does not permit
  additions, deletions or other changes to  the  digitized  image,  or  if
  additions,  deletions  or  changes  are  permitted, a media trail exists
  which creates an electronic record which makes it possible  to  identify
  these changes.
    3.  Nothing  in  this  section  or any other provision of law shall be
  construed to require the recording by electronic  means  of  instruments
  affecting   real   property.  The  decision  by  each  county  clerk  to
  participate in electronic recording  is  discretionary.  Once  a  county
  clerk  permits  electronic  recording,  the  county  shall  accept  such
  electronic recordings.
    4. Where any recording  officer  permits  instruments  affecting  real
  property and any accompanying documents to be presented for recording or
  filing  as  digitized  paper documents or electronic records pursuant to
  this section, such recording by electronic means shall be in  accordance
  with the rules and regulations established by the electronic facilitator
  pursuant to subdivision five of this section.
    5.  In  order to ensure consistency in the standards and practices of,
  and the  technology  used  by  recording  officers  in  the  state,  the
  electronic  facilitator,  as described in section three hundred three of
  the state technology law,  shall,  consistent  with  the  provisions  of
  article  three  of  the  state  technology  law,  promulgate  rules  and
  regulations, and amendments thereto, as appropriate  governing  the  use
  and  acceptance  of  digitized  paper  documents, electronic records and
  electronic  signatures  under this article. Such authority shall address
  and be limited to  standards  requiring  adequate  information  security
  protection  to  ensure  that electronic records of instruments affecting
  real property documents are accurate,  authentic,  adequately  preserved
  for  long-term  electronic  storage  and  resistant  to  tampering. When
  promulgating rules and regulations, the electronic facilitator may  take
  into  consideration:  (a)  the  most  recent  standards  promulgated  by
  national  standard-setting  bodies  such  as,  without  limitation,  the
  property  records  industry  association;  (b)  the  views of interested
  persons and governmental  officials  and  entities,  including  but  not
  limited  to  recording  officers and representatives of the state title,
  legal and banking industries; and (c) the needs of counties  of  varying
  size, population, and resources.
    6. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to authorize a
  recording  officer  to  furnish digitized paper documents of the reports
  required by section five hundred seventy-four of the real  property  tax
  law.  Such  reports  shall  be  furnished  as  paper  documents with the
  requisite notations thereon,  except  where  the  state  board  of  real
  property  services has agreed to accept data submissions in lieu thereof
  or has provided for the electronic transmission of such data pursuant to
  Law.


§  291-j.  Recording  of  declarations  by  the  New York state energy
  research and development authority.  Pursuant  to  subdivision  five  of
  section  eighteen  hundred ninety-six of the public authorities law, the
  New York state energy research and development authority shall record or
  cause to be  recorded,  in  the  office  of  the  appropriate  recording
  officer,  a  declaration evidencing the existence of a loan as described
  therein and, upon satisfaction of such loan, such authority shall file a
  declaration of repayment and full satisfaction  of  the  loan  repayment
  utility   meter   charge.   The  recording  officer  shall  record  such
  declarations in the same book,  provided  under  section  three  hundred
  fifteen  of  the  real  property  law,  in  which such recording officer
  records deeds.


§  292.  By whom conveyance must be acknowledged or proved.  Except as
  otherwise provided by this article, such acknowledgment can be made only
  by the person who executed the conveyance, and such proof  can  be  made
  only  by  some  other person, who was a witness of its execution, and at
  the same time subscribed his name to the conveyance as a witness.


§   292-a.      Conveyances   by  certain  corporations  executed  and
  acknowledged by attorneys in fact entitled to recordation.  A conveyance
  of real  property,  within  the  state,  or  of  any  interest  therein,
  including  an instrument discharging or satisfying a lien created by any
  such conveyance, executed and acknowledged by an attorney in fact of any
  corporation wholly owned, directly or indirectly, by the  United  States
  of  America,  or  any  other  corporation  which has so filed a power of
  attorney, whether heretofore or hereafter so executed and  acknowledged,
  shall  be  entitled  to  recordation under this article on tender of the
  lawful fees therefor, even though the corporate seal of such corporation
  be not annexed or affixed, if the power of attorney  pursuant  to  which
  such attorney in fact has executed such conveyance, duly acknowledged or
  proved  by  such  corporation, and certified, as required by section two
  hundred ninety-four, is filed or recorded in the office of the clerk  of
  the  county  where  the  real  property,  which  is  the subject of such
  conveyance, is located.


§  293. Recording of conveyances heretofore acknowledged or proved.  A
  conveyance of real property, within the state, heretofore executed,  and
  heretofore  acknowledged  or proved, and certified, so as to be entitled
  to be read in evidence, or recorded, under the laws in force at the time
  when so acknowledged or proved, but  which  has  not  been  recorded  is
  entitled  to  be  read in evidence, and recorded in the same manner, and
  with the like effect, as  if  this  chapter  had  not  been  passed.  If
  heretofore executed, but not proved or acknowledged, it may be proved or
  acknowledged  in  the  same manner as conveyances hereafter executed and
  with like effect.


§  294.  Recording  executory contracts and powers of attorney.  1. An
  executory contract for the sale, purchase or exchange of real  property,
  or  an instrument canceling such a contract, or an instrument containing
  a power to convey real property, as the agent or attorney for the  owner
  of the property, acknowledged or proved, and certified, in the manner to
  entitle  a  conveyance  to be recorded, may be recorded in the office of
  the recording officer of any county in which any of the real property to
  which it relates is situated, and such recording officer shall, upon the
  request of any party, on tender of the lawful fees therefor, record  the
  same in his said office.
    2.  In  lieu  of  the recording of an executory contract, there may be
  recorded a memorandum thereof, executed by the parties, and acknowledged
  or proved, and certified, in the manner to entitle a  conveyance  to  be
  recorded,  containing at least the following information with respect to
  the contract: the names of the parties to the contract, the  time  fixed
  by  the  contract  for the conveyance of title, and a description of the
  property. The executory contract shall be deemed duly recorded upon  the
  recording of a memorandum in conformity with this subdivision.
    If  the  purchaser is entitled to possession of the property under the
  terms of the contract, the memorandum must so state. The  provisions  of
  article  eleven  of  the tax law shall not be applicable to an executory
  contract for the  sale,  purchase  or  exchange  of  real  property,  or
  memorandum  thereof,  unless the contract provides that the purchaser is
  entitled to possession of the property.
    3. Every executory contract for the sale, purchase or exchange of real
  property not recorded as provided in  this  section  shall  be  void  as
  against any person who subsequently purchases or acquires by exchange or
  contracts  to purchase or acquire by exchange, the same real property or
  any portion thereof, or  acquires  by  assignment  the  rent  to  accrue
  therefrom  as  provided in section two hundred ninety-four-a of the real
  property law, in good faith and for a valuable consideration,  from  the
  same  vendor  or  assignor,  his  distributees  or  devisees,  and whose
  conveyance, contract or assignment is first duly recorded, and shall  be
  void  as  against  the  lien  upon the same real property or any portion
  thereof arising from payments made upon the execution of or pursuant  to
  the  terms  of  a  contract  with  the  same vendor, his distributees or
  devisees, if such contract is made in  good  faith  and  is  first  duly
  recorded.
    4.  (a)  Where  an  executory contract is duly recorded as provided in
  this section the right of the purchaser to performance of  the  contract
  is  enforceable  against  a  person who, subsequent to the recording and
  while the recording is effective as provided in this section,  purchases
  or acquires by exchange the same real property or any part thereof, from
  the same vendor, his distributees or devisees.
    (b)  If the recorded contract provides for payments made or to be made
  by the purchaser before conveyance of title, including payments made  at
  the execution of the contract, or if the recorded memorandum states that
  the  contract  so  provides,  the lien of the purchaser arising from any
  such payments actually made  is  enforceable  against  any  such  person
  described in paragraph (a) to the extent of such payments, not exceeding
  the  total  amount specified in the recorded contract or memorandum, and
  is so enforceable without regard to any notice of the estate or interest
  of such person.
    5. The recording of the executory  contract  or  memorandum  shall  be
  effective  for  the purposes of subdivision four up to and including the
  thirtieth day after the day fixed by the contract for the conveyance  of
  title.  An  agreement  extending  the  time for the conveyance of title,
  acknowledged or proved, and  certified,  in  the  manner  to  entitle  a
  conveyance  to  be recorded, may be recorded, and the recording shall be
  effective up to and including the thirtieth day after the day  fixed  by
  such agreement for the conveyance of title.
    6.  An  executory  contract  or memorandum thereof shall not be deemed
  recorded as provided in this section if it is  recorded  more  than  one
  year previous to the date on which the vendor acquired title to the real
  property to which the contract relates.
    An  executory  contract  recorded  before  the  date  when  the vendor
  acquired title shall not be deemed recorded as provided in this  section
  as  against a person to whom the real property is conveyed or contracted
  to be sold or exchanged, by a conveyance or contract which  is  part  of
  the transaction in which the vendor acquired title.
    7.  An  option  to  purchase or lease real property shall be deemed an
  executory contract within the meaning of this section, except  that  the
  recording  of  the  option  agreement  shall be effective only up to and
  including the thirtieth day after the last day fixed  by  the  agreement
  for the exercise of the option. If the option is exercised in accordance
  with  the  terms  of  the  option agreement, the optionee may extend the
  effectiveness of the recording of the option agreement to and  including
  the  thirtieth  day after the day fixed pursuant to the option agreement
  for the conveyance of title or the execution and delivery of the  lease,
  as  the case may be, by recording, within thirty days after the last day
  fixed by the option agreement for the exercise of the option, a  written
  declaration  executed  by  the  optionor  and  the  optionee,  or by the
  optionee alone, and acknowledged or proved and certified in  the  manner
  to entitle a conveyance to be recorded, stating that the said option has
  been  duly  exercised  and  setting  forth the day fixed pursuant to the
  option agreement for the  conveyance  of  title  or  the  execution  and
  delivery  of  the  lease,  as  the  case  may be. In the event that such
  declaration is executed by the optionee alone, it shall be  verified  by
  the  optionee and shall also set forth the time and manner in which such
  option was exercised and, if the last day for the conveyance of title or
  the execution and delivery of the lease is not specified in  the  option
  agreement,  the  extension  of the effectiveness of the recording of the
  option agreement shall in no event exceed ninety days from the  date  of
  the recording of such declaration.
    8.  (a) After the recording of an executory contract or memorandum has
  ceased to be effective as provided in subdivision five, or the recording
  of an option to purchase  or  lease  real  property  has  ceased  to  be
  effective  as  provided  in  subdivision seven, such executory contract,
  memorandum or option shall be (1) void as against a subsequent purchaser
  in good faith and for a valuable consideration, who has no other  notice
  of  an  estate  or  interest  of  the contract vendee or optionee in the
  premises to which such contract, memorandum or option refers, or of  any
  claim  thereof,  and  (2)  ineffective to give notice to such subsequent
  purchaser of any estate or interest of the contract vendee  or  optionee
  in  such  premises,  or  of  any claim thereof, or to create any duty of
  inquiry with respect thereto.
    (b) For the purposes  of  this  subdivision,  "purchaser"  includes  a
  person who purchases or acquires by exchange or contracts to purchase or
  acquire  by  exchange the same premises or any portion thereof or estate
  or interest therein, or acquires by assignment the rent to  accrue  from
  tenancies  or  subtenancies  thereof  in  existence  at  the time of the
  Assignment.


§  294-a.  Recording assignments of rent.  1. An assignment of rent to
  accrue  from  tenancies,  subtenancies,  leases  or  subleases  of  real
  property,  irrespective  of  the term of their duration, in existence at
  the time of the assignment, made, subscribed and acknowledged or proved,
  and certified in a manner to entitle a conveyance to be recorded may  be
  recorded  in  the office of the recording officer of any county in which
  any of the real property to which the tenancies, subtenancies, leases or
  subleases relate is situated, and such recording officer shall, upon the
  request of any party, on tender of the lawful fees therefor, record  the
  same in his said office.
    2.  Every such assignment not so recorded shall be void as against any
  person who subsequently purchases or acquires by exchange, or  contracts
  to  purchase  or  acquire  by  exchange,  the same real property, or any
  portion thereof, or acquires by assignment the rent to accrue  therefrom
  as  provided  in  this  section,  in  good  faith  and  for  a  valuable
  consideration, from the same vendor or  assignor,  his  distributees  or
  devisees,  and  whose  conveyance,  contract or assignment is first duly
  recorded.
    3. The recording of such assignment shall not be in itself a notice of
  the assignment to a lessee or tenant, his distributees or  devisees,  so
  as  to  invalidate  a  payment of rent made by the lessee or tenant, his
  distributees or devisees, to the assignor or a  prior  assignee  of  the
  Rent.


§  294-b. Recording brokers affidavit of entitlement to commission for
  completed brokerage services. 1. A duly licensed real estate broker  who
  asserts  that  he  or  she has produced a person who was ready, able and
  willing to purchase or lease all  or  any  part  of  a  parcel  of  real
  property  or  any  interest  in  a  cooperative  apartment pursuant to a
  written or oral contract of brokerage employment between  the  owner  of
  said  parcel of real property or interest in a cooperative apartment and
  such broker, and who asserts that such person or a party acting  on  his
  or  her  behalf  subsequently  contracted  to  purchase or lease, or did
  purchase or lease such  real  property  or  any  part  thereof,  or  any
  interest  in  a  cooperative apartment and who asserts that he or she is
  entitled to a commission pursuant to such written or oral contract,  may
  file  an  affidavit of entitlement to commission for completed brokerage
  services in the office of the recording officer of any county  in  which
  any of the real property is situated.
    2.  Such  affidavit  shall include: (i) the name and license number of
  the broker claiming the commission; (ii)  the  name  of  the  seller  or
  person  responsible  for  commission;  (iii)  the  name  of  the  person
  authorizing the sale on behalf of the seller, if any, and  the  date  of
  such  authorization; (iv) a copy of the written agreement, if any; (v) a
  description  of  the  real  property  or  interest  in  the  cooperative
  apartment  involved;  (vi)  the  amount  of  commission claimed; (vii) a
  description of the brokerage services performed; and  (viii)  the  dates
  thereof.  Recording  such affidavit shall not invalidate any transfer of
  real property or lease thereof. Such affidavit shall not  be  deemed  to
  create a lien and shall be discharged one year after filing.
    3.  Upon  receipt  by  the  county  clerk  of  a broker's affidavit of
  entitlement to commission  for  completed  brokerage  services  for  the
  purpose of recording, entering and indexing, the clerk shall record such
  affidavit  in  the  lien  docket and shall note thereon that such notice
  does not constitute a lien nor  shall  it  invalidate  any  transfer  or
  lease.  In  payment for said services the county clerk shall be entitled
  to receive a fee equivalent to that received for recording  a  deed  and
  pages thereof.
    4.  (a)  Within  five  business  days  after  filing  the affidavit of
  entitlement, the broker shall serve a copy of such affidavit, along with
  the fee required pursuant to paragraph (c) of subdivision five  of  this
  section, upon the seller by registered or certified mail, return receipt
  requested  or  by  personal  delivery,  to  the address set forth in the
  written contract of brokerage employment. If the delivery of the deed or
  delivery of the stock certificate and/or proprietary lease will occur in
  five business  days  or  less  from  the  filing  of  the  affidavit  of
  entitlement,  then  the  broker  shall  personally deliver a copy of the
  affidavit of entitlement to the seller. Where there  is  more  than  one
  seller,  service  upon one seller shall be deemed sufficient to meet the
  requirements of this  paragraph.  Failure  to  serve  the  affidavit  of
  entitlement  upon  the  seller  pursuant to this paragraph shall cause a
  forfeiture of  the  broker's  rights  under  subdivision  five  of  this
  section. In the event the seller fails to deposit any monies pursuant to
  paragraph  (a)  of  subdivision  five  of this section, the seller shall
  immediately return the fee provided by the broker.
    (b) If the seller is represented by an attorney and has  provided  the
  attorney's  contact information to the broker prior to the filing of the
  affidavit of entitlement,  the  broker  shall  provide  a  copy  of  the
  affidavit  of  entitlement to the seller's attorney via mail, facsimile,
  e-mail, personal delivery or any other agreed upon  method  within  five
  business  days of the filing of the affidavit of entitlement. Failure to
  deliver a copy of the affidavit of entitlement to the seller's  attorney
  pursuant  to  this paragraph shall not cause a forfeiture of the brokers
  rights under subdivision five of this section.
    5.  (a)  Whenever  an affidavit of entitlement by a duly licensed real
  estate broker, which includes a written contract of brokerage employment
  containing the notices set forth in paragraph (j) of  this  subdivision,
  has  been  recorded  pursuant to this section prior to the delivery of a
  deed in connection with a sale of all or any part of a  parcel  of  real
  property,  or delivery of the stock certificate and/or proprietary lease
  in connection with the sale of a cooperative apartment, and  the  broker
  does  not  receive  the  compensation called for under the terms of such
  written contract at or prior to the delivery of the deed or delivery  of
  the  stock  certificate  and/or proprietary lease, the lesser of the net
  proceeds of the sale  or  the  amount  of  the  unpaid  portion  of  the
  compensation  agreed  to  in such written contract shall be deposited by
  the seller, at the time of delivery of the deed or delivery of the stock
  certificate and/or proprietary lease,  with  the  recording  officer  in
  whose office such affidavit of entitlement had been recorded.
    (b)  In  the  event  multiple  affidavits  of entitlement are filed in
  connection with a sale of real property or any interest in a cooperative
  apartment pursuant to this section, the seller  shall  be  obligated  to
  deposit an amount equal to the lesser of the net proceeds of the sale or
  the  greatest amount of the unpaid portion of the compensation agreed to
  in the  written  contracts  of  brokerage  employment  attached  to  the
  multiple affidavits of entitlement.
    (c)  Upon  deposit  of  any  monies  pursuant to paragraph (a) of this
  subdivision, the recording officers shall be entitled to receive  a  fee
  of  twenty-five  dollars, which shall be paid by the real estate broker.
  The real estate broker shall make the twenty-five dollar fee payable  to
  the  recording  officer  in such form of payment that is accepted by the
  recording officer.
    (d) The monies deposited with the recording officer pursuant  to  this
  subdivision  shall  be  held  pursuant  to  subdivision  (b)  of section
  twenty-six hundred one of the civil practice law  and  rules  until  the
  rights  of  the seller and broker to such monies have been determined by
  order  of  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction  as  provided  in  this
  paragraph.  All  deposits of money pursuant to this subdivision shall be
  deemed paid into court and shall be subject to the provisions of article
  twenty-six of the civil practice law  and  rules,  except  as  otherwise
  provided in this subdivision. An order for the payment of such monies to
  the broker or seller may be made in any action or proceeding determining
  or  declaring  the  entitlement,  if  any, of the broker to compensation
  under the written contract of brokerage  employment  recorded  with  the
  affidavit  of  entitlement  or  as otherwise provided in rule twenty-six
  hundred six of the civil practice law and rules or, whether  or  not  an
  action or proceeding has been commenced, may be based upon a stipulation
  signed  by  the  seller  and  the  broker.  Any application for an order
  pursuant to this paragraph made by the broker or the seller shall be  on
  motion  with notice to the other party, except that an application based
  upon a stipulation signed by the seller and the broker may be  submitted
  without notice if the stipulation so provides.
    (e)  If  neither  the  broker  nor  the  seller commences an action or
  proceeding described in paragraph (d) of this subdivision  within  sixty
  days from the day of deposit of monies pursuant to paragraph (a) of this
  subdivision,  which  time  limit shall not be extended, the seller, upon
  petition, shall be entitled to an order directing  the  payment  to  the
  seller  of  such  monies  out  of  court, including any accrued interest
  thereon, less any fees to which  any  public  officer  may  be  entitled
  pursuant  to law, but such an order shall not be deemed to determine the
  broker's claim for a commission.
    (f)  Notwithstanding  any other provision of law to the contrary, upon
  the seller  making  the  deposit  required  by  paragraph  (a)  of  this
  subdivision,  any  action  or  proceeding  based  upon  the  contractual
  obligation to pay a  commission  under  the  contract  of  brokerage  of
  employment  shall  be  commenced  by the broker within six months of the
  deposit of the monies pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subdivision.
    (g) The obligation to deposit monies pursuant to this  subdivision  or
  the  seller's  failure  to  do  so  shall not constitute or be deemed to
  create a lien or encumbrance against any real property. Any violation of
  this subdivision shall not invalidate any transfer of real property.
    (h) In any action or proceeding commenced pursuant to this subdivision
  when the seller has not made the deposit required by  this  subdivision,
  and  it  is  determined  by  a  court  that  the  broker  is entitled to
  compensation pursuant to the written contract of  brokerage  employment,
  the  broker  shall  be awarded costs, including the fee paid pursuant to
  paragraph (c) of this subdivision, and reasonable attorneys' fees.
    (i) Nothing in this subdivision  shall  be  construed  to  prohibit  a
  broker  from  waiving  a seller's obligation to deposit money under this
  subdivision, provided such waiver is set forth in an  instrument  signed
  by or on behalf of the broker. Such instrument may be a written contract
  of brokerage employment or any other instrument.
    (j)  The  provisions  of  this  subdivision  shall only apply when the
  written  contract  of  brokerage  employment  contains   the   following
  statement to the seller in clear and conspicuous bold face type:
    "At  the  time of closing, you may be required to deposit the broker's
  commission with the county clerk in the event that you do  not  pay  the
  broker  his  or  her  commission as set forth herein. Your obligation to
  deposit the broker's commission with the county clerk may be  waived  by
  the broker."
    (k)  The  provisions  of  this  subdivision  shall  only apply to real
  property improved by a one to four family  dwelling  and  to  individual
  condominium units and individual cooperative apartments where the one to
  four  family dwelling, condominium unit or cooperative apartment is used
  or occupied, or intended to be used or occupied, wholly  or  partly,  as
  the home or residence of one or more persons.


§  295.  Recording of letters patent. Letters patent, issued under the
  great seal of the state, granting real property, may be recorded in  the
  county where such property is situated, in the same manner and with like
  effect,  as a conveyance duly acknowledged or proved and certified so as
  to entitle it to be recorded.


§  296.  Recording  copies  of  instruments  which are in secretary of
  state's office. A copy of an instrument affecting real property,  within
  the  state,  recorded  or filed in the office of the secretary of state,
  certified in the manner required to entitle  the  same  to  be  read  in
  evidence,  may  be  recorded  with such certificate in the office of any
  recording officer of the state.


§  297.  Certified  copies may be recorded.  A copy of a record, or of
  any recorded instrument, certified or authenticated so as to be entitled
  to be read in evidence, may be again recorded in any  office  where  the
  original  would  be  entitled  to  be recorded. Such record has the same
  effect as if the original were so recorded. A copy of  a  conveyance  or
  mortgage  affecting  separate  parcels  of  real  property  situated  in
  different counties, or of the record of such conveyance or  mortgage  in
  one of such counties, certified or authenticated so as to be entitled to
  be  read  in  evidence,  may be recorded in any county in which any such
  parcel is situated, with the same effect as if the  original  instrument
  authenticated  as  required  by  section  three  hundred and ten of this
  chapter were so recorded.


§   297-a.   Recording  of  certified  copies  of  bankruptcy  papers;
  constructive notice. 1. A copy of a  petition  in  bankruptcy  with  the
  schedules  omitted,  of a decree of adjudication of bankruptcy and of an
  order approving the bond of a trustee in bankruptcy, or any of them,  in
  each  case  certified  in  accordance with the laws of the United States
  applicable at the time of certification, may be recorded in  the  office
  of  the recording officer of any county, irrespective of the location of
  the United States district court having jurisdiction of  the  bankruptcy
  proceeding  or in which such petition was filed or order of adjudication
  or approval of the trustee's bond was made.
    2. (a) Each paper, together with the certification  thereof,  recorded
  pursuant   to  this  section  shall,  for  the  purposes  of  recording,
  transcription, reproduction and indexing, be regarded as a deed  by  the
  bankrupt  or alleged bankrupt to the trustee in bankruptcy named therein
  or, if no trustee be named, to the trustee appointed, or  thereafter  to
  be appointed.
    (b)  In  counties  where,  under certain circumstances and pursuant to
  law, deeds or  other  instruments  are  recordable  among  miscellaneous
  instruments,  or  indexed  in the index of such instruments, each of the
  papers shall be similarly recorded or  indexed.  In  other  counties  or
  cases, it shall be recorded or indexed as a deed.
    (c)  Where  the  paper  so  recorded  does  not reveal the name of the
  trustee in bankruptcy, the recording officer shall substitute,  for  the
  name of the grantee in the index or indices in his office where the name
  of  the  grantee in a deed is required to be entered, the words "Trustee
  in bankruptcy"; but any irregularity or failure of the recording officer
  in compliance with  this  paragraph  shall  not  invalidate  the  record
  thereof.
    (d)  The  recording  of  the paper and the certification thereof shall
  have the same effect as constructive notice as if it were  a  conveyance
  to a named grantee, duly acknowledged or proved and recorded.
    (e) The petition, decree or order referred to in subdivision 1 of this
  section may be one either heretofore or hereafter filed or made pursuant
  to any law of the United States relating to bankruptcy.


§  297-b.  Recording  of  certified copies of judgments affecting real
  property.  When a judgment, final order or decree is rendered by  a  New
  York  state  court of record or a United States district court affecting
  the title to or possession, use or enjoyment of real property, a copy of
  such judgment, order or decree, duly certified by the clerk of the court
  wherein said judgment was rendered, may be recorded in the office of the
  recording officer of the county in which such property is  situated,  in
  the  same  manner  as  a  conveyance  duly  acknowledged  or  proved and
  certified so as to entitle it to be recorded, and such recording officer
  shall upon request and on tender of the lawful fees therefor, record the
  same in his said office.
    For purposes of recording and indexing such judgment, order or decree,
  the prevailing party or parties named therein shall be  deemed  grantees
  and all other persons named therein shall be deemed grantors.


§ 298. Acknowledgments and proofs within the state. The acknowledgment
  or proof, within this state, of a conveyance of real property situate in
  this  state  may be made: 1. At any place within the state, before (a) a
  justice of the supreme court; (b) an official examiner of title; (c)  an
  official referee; or (d) a notary public.
    2.  Within  the district wherein such officer is authorized to perform
  official duties, before (a) a judge or clerk of any court of record; (b)
  a commissioner  of  deeds  outside  of  the  city  of  New  York,  or  a
  commissioner  of  deeds of the city of New York within the five counties
  comprising the city of New York; (c) the mayor or recorder  of  a  city;
  (d)  a surrogate, special surrogate, or special county judge; or (e) the
  county clerk or other recording officer of a county.
    3. Before a justice of the peace, town council member, village  police
  justice or a judge of any court of inferior local jurisdiction, anywhere
  within the county containing the town, village or city in which they are
  authorized to perform official duties.


§  299.  Acknowledgments  and proofs without the state, but within the
  United States or any territory, possession, or dependency thereof.   The
  acknowledgment or proof of a conveyance of real property situate in this
  state,  if  made (a) without the state but within the United States, (b)
  within any territory, possession, or dependency of the United States, or
  (c) within any place over which the United States, at the time when such
  acknowledgment  or  proof  is  taken,  has  or  exercises  jurisdiction,
  sovereignty,  control,  or a protectorate, may be made before any of the
  following officers acting within his territorial jurisdiction or  within
  that  of  the  court  of  which  he  is  an officer: 1. A judge or other
  presiding officer of any court having a seal,  or  the  clerk  or  other
  certifying officer thereof.
    2. A mayor or other chief civil officer of any city or other political
  subdivision.
    3. A notary public.
    4.  A  commissioner  of  deeds  appointed pursuant to the laws of this
  state to take acknowledgments or proofs without this state.
    5. Any person authorized, by  the  laws  of  the  state,  District  of
  Columbia,  territory,  possession,  dependency, or other place where the
  acknowledgment or proof is made, to take the acknowledgment or proof  of
  deeds to be recorded therein.


§  299-a.  Acknowledgment  to  conform  to law of New York or of place
  where taken; certificate of conformity. 1. An  acknowledgment  or  proof
  made  pursuant  to  the provisions of section two hundred ninety-nine of
  this chapter may be taken in the manner prescribed either by the laws of
  the state of New York or by the laws of the state, District of Columbia,
  territory,  possession,   dependency,   or   other   place   where   the
  acknowledgment  or proof is taken. The acknowledgment or proof, if taken
  in the manner prescribed by such state, District of Columbia, territory,
  possession, dependency,  or  other  place,  must  be  accompanied  by  a
  certificate  to  the  effect  that  it  conforms  with  such  laws. Such
  certificate may be made by
    (a) An attorney-at-law admitted to practice in the state of New  York,
  resident in the place where the acknowledgment or proof is taken, or by
    (b)  An attorney-at-law admitted to practice in the state, District of
  Columbia, territory, possession, dependency, or other  place  where  the
  acknowledgment or proof is taken, or by
    (c) Any other person deemed qualified by any court of the state of New
  York, if, in any action, proceeding, or other matter pending before such
  court,  it  be  necessary to determine that such acknowledgment or proof
  conforms with the laws of such state, District of  Columbia,  territory,
  possession,  dependency,  or other place; or by the supreme court of the
  state of New York, on application for such determination.  The  justice,
  judge,  surrogate,  or  other presiding judicial officer shall append to
  the instrument so acknowledged or proved his signed  statement  that  he
  deemed such person qualified to make such certificate.
    2.  (a)  The  signature  to  such a certificate of conformity shall be
  presumptively genuine, and the qualification of the person whose name is
  so signed as a person authorized  to  make  such  certificate  shall  be
  presumptively established by the recital thereof in the certificate.
    (b)  The  statement  of  a judicial officer appended to the instrument
  that he deemed  the  person  making  such  certificate  qualified  shall
  establish  the  qualification  of  the person designated therein to make
  such certificate; and the  recording,  filing,  registering  or  use  as
  evidence of the instrument shall not depend on the power of the court to
  make  the  statement  and  proof  shall  not  be required of any action,
  proceeding, matter or application in which or in connection  with  which
  the statement is made.
    (c) When an instrument so acknowledged or proved is accompanied by the
  certificate  of  conformity  and the statement of a judicial officer, if
  any be required, the acknowledgment or proof of the instrument, for  the
  purpose  of  recording, filing or registering in any recording or filing
  office in this state or for use as evidence, shall be equivalent to  one
  taken  or  made in the form prescribed by law for use in this state; and
  if  the  acknowledgment  or  proof  is  properly  authenticated,   where
  authentication  is  required  by law, and if the instrument be otherwise
  entitled to record, filing or  registering,  such  instrument,  together
  with  the acknowledgment or proof, the certificate of conformity and any
  certificate of authentication or statement of a judicial officer, may be
  recorded, filed or registered in any recording or filing office in  this
  state,  and  shall  be  so recorded, filed or registered upon payment or
  tender of lawful fees therefor. In  fixing  the  fees  of  a  recording,
  filing  or  registering  officer,  the certificate of conformity and the
  statement of a judicial officer appended, if any, shall  be  treated  as
  certificates  of  authentication  required  by  other provisions of this
  Chapter.


§  300.  Acknowledgments  and  proofs  by persons in or with the armed
  forces of the United States. The acknowledgment or proof of a conveyance
  of real property situate in this state, if made by a person enlisted  or
  commissioned  in  or  serving  in or with the armed forces of the United
  States or by a dependent of any such person, wherever located, or  by  a
  person  attached  to  or  accompanying  the  armed  forces of the United
  States, whether made within or without the United States,  may  be  made
  before  any  officer in active service of the armed forces of the United
  States authorized to act as a notary in any component part of the  armed
  forces of the United States.
    In  addition  to the requirements of sections three hundred and three,
  three hundred and four, and three hundred and six of this  chapter,  the
  certificate of an acknowledgment or proof taken under this section shall
  state (a) the rank and serial number of the officer taking the same, and
  the  command  to  which  he is attached, (b) that the person making such
  acknowledgment or proof was, at the time of making the same, enlisted or
  commissioned in or serving in or with the armed  forces  of  the  United
  States  or  the  dependent  of such a person, or a person attached to or
  accompanying the armed forces of the United States, and (c)  the  serial
  number   of   the  person  who  makes,  or  whose  dependent  makes  the
  acknowledgment or proof if such person is enlisted  or  commissioned  in
  the   armed   forces   of  the  United  States.  The  place  where  such
  acknowledgment or proof is taken need not be disclosed.
    No authentication of the officer's certificate  of  acknowledgment  or
  proof shall be required.
    Notwithstanding   any   of   the   provisions  of  this  section,  the
  acknowledgment or proof of a conveyance of real property situate in this
  state may also be made as provided in sections two hundred ninety-eight,
  two hundred ninety-nine, two hundred ninety-nine-a, three  hundred  one,
  and three hundred one-a, of this chapter.


§   301.   Acknowledgments   and  proofs  in  foreign  countries.  The
  acknowledgment or proof of a conveyance of real property situate in this
  state may be made in foreign  countries  before  any  of  the  following
  officers  acting  within  his territorial jurisdiction or within that of
  the court of which he is an officer: 1. An ambassador, envoy,  minister,
  charge   d'affaires,  secretary  of  legation,  consul-general,  consul,
  vice-consul,  consular  agent,  vice-consular  agent,   or   any   other
  diplomatic  or  consular  agent  or representative of the United States,
  appointed or accredited to, and residing within, the country  where  the
  acknowledgment or proof is taken.
    2.  A  judge or other presiding officer of any court having a seal, or
  the clerk or other certifying officer thereof.
    3. A mayor or other chief civil officer of any city or other political
  subdivision.
    4. A notary public.
    5. A commissioner of deeds appointed pursuant  to  the  laws  of  this
  state to take acknowledgments or proofs without this state.
    6.  A  person  residing  in,  or  going  to,  the  country  where  the
  acknowledgment or proof is to be taken,  and  specially  authorized  for
  that purpose by a commission issued to him under the seal of the supreme
  court of the state of New York.
    7.  Any  person  authorized,  by  the  laws  of  the country where the
  acknowledgment or proof is made, to take acknowledgments of  conveyances
  of real estate or to administer oaths in proof of the execution thereof.


§  301-a.  Acknowledgment  to conform to law of New York or of foreign
  country; certificate of conformity. 1. An acknowledgment or  proof  made
  pursuant  to the provisions of section three hundred one of this chapter
  may be taken in the manner prescribed either by the laws of the state of
  New York or by the laws of the country where the acknowledgment or proof
  is taken. The acknowledgment or proof, if taken in the manner prescribed
  by  the  laws  of  such  foreign  country,  must  be  accompanied  by  a
  certificate  to  the  effect  that  it  conforms  with  such  laws. Such
  certificate may be made by
    (a) An attorney-at-law admitted to practice in the state of New  York,
  resident in such foreign country, or by
    (b)  A consular officer of the United States, resident in such foreign
  country, under the seal of his office, or by
    (c) A consular officer of such foreign country, resident in the  state
  of New York, under the seal of his office, or by
    (d) Any other person deemed qualified by any court of the state of New
  York, if, in any action, proceeding, or other matter pending before such
  court,  it  be  necessary to determine that such acknowledgment or proof
  conforms with the laws of such foreign country; or by the supreme  court
  of the state of New York, on application for such determination.
    The  justice,  judge,  surrogate,  or other presiding judicial officer
  shall append to the instrument so  acknowledged  or  proved  his  signed
  statement that he deemed such person qualified to make such certificate.
    2.  (a)  The  signature  to  such a certificate of conformity shall be
  presumptively genuine, and the qualification of the person whose name is
  so signed as a person authorized  to  make  such  certificate  shall  be
  presumptively established by the recital thereof in the certificate.
    (b)  The  statement  of  a judicial officer appended to the instrument
  that he deemed  the  person  making  such  certificate  qualified  shall
  establish  the  qualification  of  the person designated therein to make
  such certificate; and the  recording,  filing,  registering  or  use  as
  evidence of the instrument shall not depend on the power of the court to
  make  the  statement  and  proof  shall  not  be required of any action,
  proceeding, matter or application in which or in connection  with  which
  the statement is made.
    (c) When an instrument so acknowledged or proved is accompanied by the
  certificate  of  conformity  and the statement of a judicial officer, if
  any be required, the acknowledgment or proof of the instrument, for  the
  purpose  of  recording, filing or registering in any recording or filing
  office in this state or for use as evidence, shall be equivalent to  one
  taken  or  made in the form prescribed by law for use in this state; and
  if  the  acknowledgment  or  proof  is  properly  authenticated,   where
  authentication  is  required  by law, and if the instrument be otherwise
  entitled to record, filing or  registering,  such  instrument,  together
  with  the acknowledgment or proof, the certificate of conformity and any
  certificate of authentication or statement of a judicial officer, may be
  recorded, filed or registered in any recording or filing office in  this
  state,  and  shall  be  so recorded, filed or registered upon payment or
  tender of lawful fees therefor. In  fixing  the  fees  of  a  recording,
  filing  or  registering  officer,  the certificate of conformity and the
  statement of a judicial officer appended, if any, shall  be  treated  as
  certificates  of  authentication  required  by  other provisions of this
  Chapter.


§ 302. Acknowledgments and proofs by married women. The acknowledgment
  or  proof  of a conveyance of real property, within the state, or of any
  other written instrument, may be made by a married woman the same as  if
  Unmarried.


§  303.  Requisites of acknowledgments.  An acknowledgment must not be
  taken by any officer unless he knows or has satisfactory evidence,  that
  the  person  making  it is the person described in and who executed such
  Instrument.


§  304.  Proof  by  subscribing  witness.  When  the  execution  of  a
  conveyance is proved by a subscribing witness, such witness  must  state
  his  own place of residence, and if his place of residence is in a city,
  the street and street number, if any  thereof,  and  that  he  knew  the
  person  described in and who executed the conveyance. The proof must not
  be taken unless the officer is personally acquainted with such  witness,
  or  has  satisfactory  evidence  that  he  is the same person, who was a
  subscribing witness to the conveyance.


§  305.  Compelling  witnesses  to  testify.  On  the application of a
  grantee in a conveyance, his  heir  or  personal  representative,  or  a
  person  claiming  under  either  of  them,  verified  by the oath of the
  applicant, stating that a witness to the  conveyance,  residing  in  the
  county  where  the  application  is  made, refuses to appear and testify
  concerning its execution, and that such conveyance  can  not  be  proved
  without his testimony, any officer authorized to take, within the state,
  acknowledgment  or  proof  of  conveyance  of  real property may issue a
  subpoena, requiring such  witness  to  attend  and  testify  before  him
  concerning the execution of the conveyance. A subpoena issued under this
  section shall be regulated by the civil practice law and rules.


§  306.  Certificate  of  acknowledgment or proof. A person taking the
  acknowledgement or proof of  a  conveyance  must  indorse  thereupon  or
  attach  thereto,  a  certificate,  signed  by  himself,  stating all the
  matters required to be done, known, or proved  on  the  taking  of  such
  acknowledgement  or  proof;  together with the name and substance of the
  testimony of each witness examined before  him,  and  if  a  subscribing
  witness, his place of residence.
    Any  conveyance  which  has  heretofore  been  recorded,  or which may
  hereafter be recorded, shall be deemed to have been duly acknowledged or
  proved and properly authenticated, when ten  years  have  elapsed  since
  such  recording;  saving, however, the rights of every purchaser in good
  faith and for a valuable consideration  deriving  title  from  the  same
  vendor  or  grantor,  his heirs or devisees, to the same property or any
  portion thereof, whose conveyance shall have been duly  recorded  before
  the said period of ten years shall have elapsed.


§   307.   When   certificate  to  state  time  and  place.  When  the
  acknowledgment or proof is taken by a commissioner  of  deeds  appointed
  pursuant  to  the  laws  of this state to take acknowledgments or proofs
  without this state, whether within or without  the  United  States,  the
  certificate  must  also  state  the  day on which, and the city or other
  political subdivision, and the state or country or other place in which,
  the same was taken.


§  308.  When certificate must be under seal. 1. When a certificate of
  acknowledgment or proof is made without this state,  whether  within  or
  without  the  United  States,  (a) if made by a judge or other presiding
  officer of a court having a seal, or by the clerk  or  other  certifying
  officer  thereof, such certificate must be under the seal of such court;
  (b) if made by a commissioner of deeds appointed pursuant to the laws of
  this state to take acknowledgments or proofs without  this  state,  such
  certificate must be under his seal of office; (c) if made by any officer
  specified  in  subdivision  one  of  section  three  hundred one of this
  chapter, such certificate must be under the  seal  of  the  legation  or
  consulate to which such officer is attached.
    2.  Any  certificate,  required  by  the  provisions  of section three
  hundred  eleven  of  this  chapter  to  be  authenticated,  must  be  so
  authenticated,  in  addition  to  being  under  seal as provided in this
  Section.


§  309.  Acknowledgment by corporation and form of certificate. 1. The
  acknowledgment of a conveyance or other  instrument  by  a  corporation,
  must  be  made  by  an officer or attorney in fact duly appointed, or in
  case of a dissolved corporation, by an officer, director or attorney  in
  fact  duly appointed thereof authorized to execute the same by the board
  of directors of said corporation.
    2. The certificate of acknowledgment must conform  substantially  with
  one  of  the  following  alternative  forms,  the  blanks being properly
  filled:
    State of New York }ss.:
    County of.........}
    On the....... day of....... in the year.......  before  me  personally
  came....... to me known, who, being by me duly sworn, did depose and say
  that  he/she/they reside(s) in....... (if the place of residence is in a
  city, include the street and  street  number,  if  any,  thereof);  that
  he/she/they  is  (are)  the  (president  or other officer or director or
  attorney in fact duly appointed)  of  the  (name  of  corporation),  the
  corporation  described  in and which executed the above instrument; that
  he/she/they know(s) the seal of said corporation; that the seal  affixed
  to  said  instrument  is  such corporate seal; that it was so affixed by
  authority of the board  of  directors  of  said  corporation,  and  that
  he/she/they signed his/her/their name(s) thereto by like authority.
    (Signature and office of person taking acknowledgment.)
    State of New York }ss.:
    County of.........}
    On  the.......  day  of....... in the year....... before me personally
  came....... to me known, who, being by me duly sworn, did depose and say
  that he/she/they reside(s) in....... (if the place of residence is in  a
  city,  include  the  street  and  street  number, if any, thereof); that
  he/she/they is (are) the (president or  other  officer  or  director  or
  attorney  in  fact  duly  appointed)  of  the (name of corporation), the
  corporation described in and which executed the  above  instrument;  and
  that  he/she/they  signed  his/her/their name(s) thereto by authority of
  the board of directors of said corporation.
    (Signature and office of person taking acknowledgment.)
    3. Subdivision two of  this  section  shall  be  inapplicable  to  the
  acknowledgment,  within  this state, of a conveyance or other instrument
  in respect to real property situate in this state executed on  or  after
  the  first day of September, nineteen hundred ninety-nine. A certificate
  of such an acknowledgment shall be subject to the provisions of  section
  three hundred nine-a of this article.


§  309-a.    Uniform  forms of certificates of acknowledgment or proof
  within this state.  1. The certificate of an acknowledgment, within this
  state, of a conveyance or other instrument in respect to  real  property
  situate  in this state, by a person, must conform substantially with the
  following form, the blanks being properly filled:
  State of New York }ss.:
  County of ........}
  On the .......... day of ........ in  the  year  .....  before  me,  the
  undersigned,  personally  appeared  ........,  personally known to me or
  proved  to  me  on  the  basis  of  satisfactory  evidence  to  be   the
  individual(s) whose name(s) is (are) subscribed to the within instrument
  and   acknowledged   to   me  that  he/she/they  executed  the  same  in
  his/her/their capacity(ies), and that by his/her/their  signature(s)  on
  the  instrument,  the  individual(s), or the person upon behalf of which
  the individual(s) acted, executed the instrument.
  (Signature and office of individual taking acknowledgement.)
    2. The certificate for a proof of execution by a subscribing  witness,
  within  this  state,  of  a  conveyance  or other instrument made by any
  person in respect to real property situate in this state,  must  conform
  substantially with the following form, the blanks being properly filled:
  State of New York }ss.:
  County of ........}
  On  the  .......  day  of  ......  in  the  year  ....  before  me,  the
  undersigned, personally appeared ......, the subscribing witness to  the
  foregoing  instrument,  with whom I am personally acquainted, who, being
  by me duly sworn, did depose  and  say  that  he/she/they  reside(s)  in
  ......(if  the  place  of residence is in a city, include the street and
  street number, if any, thereof); that  he/she/they  know(s)...........to
  be   the   individual  described  in  and  who  executed  the  foregoing
  instrument; that said subscribing  witness  was  present  and  saw  said
  .......execute  the  same;  and  that  said  witness  at  the  same time
  subscribed his/her/their name(s) as a witness thereto.
    (Signature and office of individual taking proof.)
    3. A certificate of an acknowledgement or proof  taken  under  section
  three  hundred  of this article shall include the additional information
  required by that section.
    4. For the purposes of this  section,  the  term  "person"  means  any
  corporation, joint stock company, estate, general partnership (including
  any   registered   limited  liability  partnership  or  foreign  limited
  liability  partnership),  limited   liability   company   (including   a
  professional   service   limited  liability  company),  foreign  limited
  liability company (including  a  foreign  professional  service  limited
  liability  company), joint venture, limited partnership, natural person,
  attorney in fact, real estate investment trust, business trust or  other
  trust,  custodian,  nominee or any other individual or entity in its own
  or any representative capacity.


§  309-b.  Uniform  forms  of certificates of acknowledgement or proof
  without this state.  1. The certificate of an  acknowledgement,  without
  this  state,  of  a  conveyance or other instrument with respect to real
  property situate in this state, by a person, may  conform  substantially
  with the following form, the blanks being properly filled:
  State, District of Columbia, Territory, Possession, or Foreign Country
                 ) ss.:
 
  On  the  _______  day  of  __________ in the year _______ before me, the
  undersigned, personally appeared ______________, personally known to  me
  or  proved  to  me  on  the  basis  of  satisfactory  evidence to be the
  individual(s) whose name(s) is (are) subscribed to the within instrument
  and  acknowledged  to  me  that  he/she/they  executed   the   same   in
  his/her/their  capacity(ies),  and that by his/her/their signature(s) on
  the instrument, the individual(s), or the person upon  behalf  of  which
  the individual(s) acted, executed the instrument.
 
  (Signature and office of individual taking acknowledgement.)
    2.  The certificate for a proof of execution by a subscribing witness,
  without this state, of a conveyance or  other  instrument  made  by  any
  person  in  respect  to real property situate in this state, may conform
  substantially with the following form, the blanks being properly filled:
  State, District of Columbia, Territory, Possession, or Foreign Country
                 )ss.:
 
  On the _______ day of ________ in  the  year  ________  before  me,  the
  undersigned,   personally  appeared  ________________,  the  subscribing
  witness  to  the  foregoing  instrument,  with  whom  I  am   personally
  acquainted,  who, being by me duly sworn, did depose and say that he/she
  resides in _____________________ (if the place  of  residence  is  in  a
  city,  include  the  street  and  street  number, if any, thereof); that
  he/she knows _____________ to be the individual  described  in  and  who
  executed  the  foregoing  instrument;  that said subscribing witness was
  present and saw said _____________  execute  the  same;  and  that  said
  witness at the same time subscribed his/her name as a witness thereto.
 
  (Signature and office of individual taking proof.)
    3. No provision of this section shall be construed to:
    (a)  modify  the  choice  of  laws  afforded  by  sections two hundred
  ninety-nine-a and three hundred one-a of this article pursuant to  which
  an acknowledgement or proof may be taken;
    (b)  modify  any  requirement  of  section three hundred seven of this
  article;
    (c) modify any requirement for a seal imposed by  subdivision  one  of
  section three hundred eight of this article;
    (d)  modify any requirement concerning a certificate of authentication
  imposed by section three hundred  eight,  three  hundred  eleven,  three
  hundred  twelve,  three  hundred  fourteen, or three hundred eighteen of
  this article; or
    (e) modify any requirement imposed by any provision  of  this  article
  when  the certificate of acknowledgment or proof purports to be taken in
  the manner prescribed by the laws of  another  state,  the  District  of
  Columbia, territory, possession, or foreign country.
    4.  A  certificate  of an acknowledgement or proof taken under section
  three hundred of this article shall include the  additional  information
  required by that section.
    5.  For the purposes of this section, the term "person" means a person
  as defined in subdivision four of section three hundred nine-a  of  this
  article.
    6.  The  inclusion  within  the  body  (other  than  the  jurat)  of a
  certificate of acknowledgment or proof made under this  section  of  the
  city  or  other  political subdivision and the state or country or other
  place the acknowledgment was taken shall  be  deemed  a  non-substantial
  variance from the form of a certificate authorized by this section.


§  310.  Authentication  of acknowledgments and proofs made within the
  state. 1. When a certificate of acknowledgment or proof is made,  within
  this  state,  by  a  commissioner of deeds, a justice of the peace, town
  council member, village police justice, or  a  judge  of  any  court  of
  inferior  local  jurisdiction,  such  certificate  does  not entitle the
  conveyance so acknowledged or proved to be read in evidence or  recorded
  in  any county of this state except a county in which the officer making
  such certificate is authorized to act at the time of  making  the  same,
  unless  such  certificate is authenticated by a certificate of the clerk
  of  such  county;  provided,   however,   that   all   certificates   of
  acknowledgment  or proof, made by a commissioner of deeds of the city of
  New York residing in any part therein, shall  be  authenticated  by  the
  clerk  of any county within said city, in whose office such commissioner
  of deeds shall have filed a certificate under the hand and seal  of  the
  city  clerk  of said city, showing the appointment and term of office of
  such commissioner; and no other certificates shall be required from  any
  other  officer  to  entitle  such  conveyance  to be read in evidence or
  recorded in any county of this state.
    2.  Except  as  provided  in   this   section,   no   certificate   of
  authentication  shall  be required to entitle a conveyance to be read in
  evidence or recorded in this state when acknowledged  or  proved  before
  any  officer  designated  in  section  two  hundred ninety-eight of this
  article  to  take  such  acknowledgment  or  proof,   nor   shall   such
  authentication  be  required  for  recording  in  the office of the city
  register of the city of New York of such acknowledgment or  proof  by  a
  commissioner of deeds of the city of New York.


§  311.  Authentication of acknowledgments and proofs made without the
  state. 1. When a certificate of acknowledgment or proof is made,  either
  within  or  without  the  United  States,  by  a  commissioner  of deeds
  appointed pursuant to the laws of this state to take acknowledgments  or
  proofs  without  this state, the conveyance so acknowledged or proved is
  not entitled to be read in evidence or recorded in this state, except as
  provided in subdivision  five  of  section  one  hundred  eight  of  the
  executive   law,   unless  such  certificate  is  authenticated  by  the
  certificate of the secretary of state of the state of New York.
    2. When a certificate of acknowledgment or proof is made by  a  notary
  public  in  a  foreign  country  other  than  Canada,  the conveyance so
  acknowledged or proved is  not  entitled  to  be  read  in  evidence  or
  recorded  in  this state unless such certificate is authenticated (a) by
  the certificate of the clerk or other certifying officer of a  court  in
  the  district  in which such acknowledgment or proof was made, under the
  seal of such court, or (b) by the certificate of  the  clerk,  register,
  recorder,  or  other  recording  officer  of  the district in which such
  acknowledgment or proof was made, or  (c)  by  the  certificate  of  the
  officer having charge of the official records of the appointment of such
  notary,  or  having  a record of the signature of such notary, or (d) by
  the certificate of a consular officer of the United States  resident  in
  such country.
    3. When a certificate of acknowledgment or proof, made by the mayor or
  other  chief  civil officer of a city or other political subdivision, is
  not under the seal of such city  or  other  political  subdivision,  the
  conveyance  so  acknowledged  or  proved  is  not entitled to be read in
  evidence  or  recorded  in  this  state  unless  such   certificate   is
  authenticated  by  the  certificate  of  the clerk of such city or other
  political subdivision, or by the certificate of a  consular  officer  of
  the  United  States  resident in the country where the acknowledgment or
  proof was made.
    4. When a certificate of acknowledgment or proof is made  pursuant  to
  the provisions of subdivision five of section two hundred ninety-nine or
  of  subdivision seven of section three hundred one of this chapter by an
  officer or person not elsewhere in either of said sections  specifically
  designated   to  take  acknowledgments  or  proofs,  the  conveyance  so
  acknowledged or proved is  not  entitled  to  be  read  in  evidence  or
  recorded  within this state unless such certificate is authenticated (a)
  by the certificate of the secretary of state  of  a  state,  or  of  the
  secretary  of  a  territory,  of  the  United  States,  or  (b)  by  the
  certificate of any officer  designated  in  subdivision  three  of  this
  section  to authenticate certificates of acknowledgment or proof, or (c)
  by the certificate of any officer designated in clauses (a)  or  (b)  of
  subdivision   two  of  this  section  to  authenticate  certificates  of
  acknowledgment or proof, or (d) by the certificate of the officer having
  charge of the official  records  showing  that  the  person  taking  the
  acknowledgment  or proof is such officer as he purports to be, or having
  a record of the signature of such person.
    5.  Except  as  provided  in   this   section,   no   certificate   of
  authentication  shall  be required to entitle a conveyance to be read in
  evidence or recorded in this state when acknowledged  or  proved  before
  any  officer designated in section two hundred ninety-nine or in section
  three hundred one of this chapter to take such acknowledgment or proof.


§  312.  Contents  of  certificate  of  authentication.  1. An officer
  authenticating a certificate of acknowledgment or proof must subjoin  or
  attach to the original certificate a certificate under his hand.
    2. When the certificate of acknowledgment or proof is made by a notary
  public,  without  the  state  but within the United States or within any
  territory, possession, or dependency of the United States, or within any
  place over which the United States, at the time when such acknowledgment
  or proof is taken, has or exercises jurisdiction, sovereignty,  control,
  or  a  protectorate,  the  certificate  of  authentication must state in
  substance that, at the time when such original certificate  purports  to
  have  been  made, the person whose name is subscribed to the certificate
  was such officer as he is therein represented to be.
    In every other case the certificate of authentication  must  state  in
  substance  (a) that, at the time when such original certificate purports
  to have been made, the person whose name is subscribed to  the  original
  certificate  was  such  officer  as he is therein represented to be; (b)
  that the authenticating officer is acquainted with  the  handwriting  of
  the  officer  making  the  original  certificate,  or  has  compared the
  signature of such officer upon the original certificate with a  specimen
  of his signature filed or deposited in the office of such authenticating
  officer, or recorded, filed, or deposited, pursuant to law, in any other
  place,  and  believes  the  signature  upon  the original certificate is
  genuine; and (c), if the original certificate is required  to  be  under
  seal, that the authenticating officer has compared the impression of the
  seal  affixed  thereto  with  a  specimen  impression  thereof  filed or
  deposited in his office, or recorded, filed, or deposited,  pursuant  to
  law,  in  any  other place, and believes the impression of the seal upon
  the original certificate is genuine.
    3. When such original certificate is made pursuant to subdivision five
  of section two hundred ninety-nine of this chapter, such certificate  of
  authentication  must  also  specify that the person making such original
  certificate, at the time  when  it  purports  to  have  been  made,  was
  authorized,  by  the laws of the state, District of Columbia, territory,
  possession, dependency, or other place where the acknowledgment or proof
  was made, to take the acknowledgment or proof of deeds  to  be  recorded
  therein.
    4.  When  such  original  certificate  is made pursuant to subdivision
  seven of section three hundred one of this chapter, such certificate  of
  authentication  must  also  specify that the person making such original
  certificate, at the time  when  it  purports  to  have  been  made,  was
  authorized, by the laws of the country where the acknowledgment or proof
  was  made,  to  take acknowledgments of conveyances of real estate or to
  administer oaths in proof of the execution thereof.


§  313.  Notary public. The term "notary public, " as used in sections
  two hundred ninety-nine, three hundred one,  three  hundred  eight,  and
  three  hundred eleven, of this chapter, includes any person appointed to
  perform notarial functions.


§  313-a.  Deputies. When any officer, designated by the provisions of
  this article to take acknowledgments or proofs of  conveyances  of  real
  estate  to  be  read  in  evidence  or  recorded  in  this  state, or to
  authenticate certificates of such acknowledgment or proof, is authorized
  by law to appoint a deputy, or when such officer has by  law  a  deputy,
  such deputy may take such acknowledgments or proofs, or may authenticate
  such certificates.


§  314.  Recording  of  conveyances acknowledged or proved without the
  state, when parties and certifying officer are dead. When the  execution
  of  a  conveyance  of real property within this state is acknowledged or
  proved according to the laws of any other state of  the  United  States,
  and  a  certificate of the acknowledgment or proof signed by the officer
  taking it is annexed to or indorsed upon the instrument, if such officer
  and the grantor or mortgagor be dead and the death of  all  of  them  be
  proved by affidavit, sworn to in such state before an officer authorized
  by  its  laws  to  administer  an oath therein, the conveyance, with the
  affidavit or affidavits  annexed  thereto,  on  being  authenticated  as
  required  by  this  section, may be read in evidence and recorded in the
  same manner, and with like effect, as if the conveyance was acknowledged
  or proved and certified as required  by  the  laws  of  this  state.  To
  entitle  such  conveyance  and  affidavits  to  be  read in evidence, or
  recorded, a certificate of the clerk, recorder, register or prothonotary
  of the county in which the deceased officer resided, authenticating  his
  signature,  and  also  certifying that the conveyance is acknowledged or
  proved in all respects, as required by the laws of such state,  must  be
  annexed  to  the  original  certificate;  and a like certificate of such
  clerk, recorder, register or prothonotary, authenticating the  signature
  of  the  officer,  before  whom  the  affidavits proving the deaths were
  taken, must be annexed to  such  affidavits.  The  affidavits  on  being
  recorded,  are  presumptive evidence of the matters of fact, required to
  be stated therein.


§  314-a.  Proof  when  witnesses  are  dead.  When the witnesses to a
  conveyance, authorized to be recorded, are dead, its  execution  may  be
  proved  before  any  officer  authorized  to  take  within the state the
  acknowledgment and proof of conveyances, other than  a  commissioner  of
  deeds,  a  notary  public,  or a justice of the peace.  The proof of the
  execution must be made by satisfactory evidence of the death of all  the
  witnesses  thereto, and of the handwriting of such witnesses, or any one
  of them, and of the grantor, which evidence, with the name and residence
  of each witness examined, must be set forth by the  officer  taking  the
  same,  in  his  certificate  of  proof.  A  conveyance  so  proved,  and
  certified, may be  recorded  in  the  proper  office,  if  the  original
  conveyance  be  at  the same time deposited in the same office, there to
  remain for the inspection of all persons desiring to examine  the  same.
  If  the  conveyance  affects  real  property  in two or more counties, a
  certified copy of the conveyance, with the proof and  certificates,  may
  be  recorded  in  each  of such counties. Such recording and deposit are
  constructive  notice  of  the  execution  of  such  conveyance  to   all
  purchasers of the same real property, or any part thereof, from the same
  vendor,  his  heirs or assigns, subsequent to such recording, but do not
  entitle the conveyance or the record thereof, or  a  transcript  of  the
  record, to be read in evidence.


§  315.  Recording  books. Different sets of books must be provided by
  the recording officer of each county, for the  recording  of  deeds  and
  mortgages; in one of which sets he must record all conveyances and other
  instruments absolute in their terms, which are not intended as mortgages
  or  securities  in  the nature of mortgages, and all executory contracts
  for the sale, purchase  or  exchange  of  real  property,  or  memoranda
  thereof,  and  all  instruments  canceling  or extending such contracts,
  which conveyances,  contracts  or  instruments  are  delivered  to  him,
  pursuant  to  law,  to  be  so  recorded,  and  all  forms pertaining to
  commitments of land to continued agricultural production required to  be
  so recorded pursuant to section three hundred six of the agriculture and
  markets  law;  and  in the other set, such mortgages and securities, and
  assignments of rent, delivered to him; excepting that if  the  recording
  is  by  microphotography  or  other  photographic process, the recording
  officer shall not be required to maintain books for  such  records,  but
  shall  provide  such  filing  equipment  as he may deem appropriate. The
  recording officer may, in his discretion, record  in  consecutive  order
  the  instruments received by him, and shall not be required to segregate
  mortgages from deeds or other classes of instruments.


§ 316. Indexes. Each recording officer must provide, at the expense of
  his  county,  proper  books  for  making  general indexes of instruments
  recorded in his office, and must form indexes therein, so as  to  afford
  correct  and  easy reference to the records in his office. There must be
  one set of  indexes  for  mortgages  or  securities  in  the  nature  of
  mortgages  and  assignments of rent; and another set for conveyances and
  other instruments not intended as  such  mortgages  or  securities,  and
  executory  contracts for sale, purchase or exchange of real property, or
  memoranda  thereof,  and  instruments  canceling   or   extending   such
  contracts.  Each  set  must contain two lists in alphabetical order, one
  consisting of the names of the grantors  or  mortgagors  and  assignors,
  followed  by  the  names of their grantees, mortgagees or assignees, and
  the other list consisting of the names of the grantees or mortgagees and
  assignees, followed by the  names  of  their  grantors,  mortgagors,  or
  assignors,  with  proper  blanks  in each class of names, for subsequent
  entries, which entries must be made as  instruments  are  delivered  for
  record.  This  section,  so  far  as  relates  to the preparation of new
  indexes, shall not apply to a county where the recording officer now has
  general numerical indexes.
    A recording officer who records  a  conveyance  of  real  property  or
  assignment  of  rent,  sold  by virtue of an execution, or by a sheriff,
  referee or other person, pursuant to a  judgment,  the  granting  clause
  whereof  states  whose right, title or interest was sold, must insert in
  the proper index, under the head, "grantors" or "assignors", the name of
  the officer executing the conveyance, and of each  person  whose  right,
  title or interest is so stated to have been sold.
    Such  indexes  shall  form  a  part  of  the record of each instrument
  hereafter recorded.
    A  county  clerk  may  adopt   a   new   indexing   system   utilizing
  electro-mechanical, electronic or any other method he deems suitable for
  maintaining the indexes.


§  316-a.  Indexing  and  reindexing  conveyances, mortgages and other
  instruments. 1. Every instrument affecting real estate or chattels real,
  situated in the county of Suffolk, which shall be, or which  shall  have
  been recorded in the office of the clerk of said county on and after the
  first  day of January, nineteen hundred fifty-one, shall be recorded and
  indexed pursuant to the provisions of this act.
    2. The clerk of the county of Suffolk is hereby directed and required,
  immediately upon the passage of this act, to cause to be prepared one or
  more books for each town in the said county of Suffolk for the  indexing
  therein,  under  the  proper  town so designated, of all instruments now
  required by law to be recorded in the books  of  conveyances.  And  said
  clerk shall also cause to be prepared one or more books for each of said
  towns  in said county for the indexing therein, under the proper town so
  designated, of all instruments now required by law to be recorded in the
  books of mortgages. Said indexes shall be deposited  in  the  office  of
  said  clerk.  They  shall  be  prepared  so  as  to  contain the date of
  recording  of  each  instrument,  the  names  of  the  parties  to  each
  instrument  and  the  liber  and page of the record thereof and shall be
  substantially the forms of  the  schedules  hereto  annexed,  designated
  respectively  as  schedule  A, schedule B, schedule C, schedule D, which
  schedules shall be deemed and taken to be a part of this act. Said books
  shall  be  entitled  "town  indexes  of   conveyances   and   mortgages"
  respectively,  and  shall  indicate the towns to which they respectively
  relate.
    3. It shall be the duty of the said clerk to provide and keep  in  his
  office,  besides  said  town  indexes,  a  "daily  index,  or tickler of
  conveyances," and a "daily index, or  tickler  of  mortgages,"  together
  with  books  or records in which shall be recorded at length conveyances
  and mortgages recorded in his office, each of which shall be endorsed in
  its proper liber number.
    4. Every instrument presented to said clerk for record, and  requiring
  to  be indexed under this act after the date when this act shall go into
  operation, in order to entitle the  same  to  be  recorded,  shall  have
  included  therein,  in the description of the premises, a designation of
  the town in said county in which the land  affected  by  the  instrument
  lies,  and  if  it  lies in two or more towns of said county the name of
  each and every town in which the land  affected  by  the  instrument  is
  situated. Every assignment of a mortgage, and every agreement respecting
  a  mortgage,  to  entitle  the  same to be recorded, shall have included
  therein a designation of the town in said county in which the land  lies
  which  is affected by the mortgage to which such assignment or agreement
  relates, and if such land lies in two or more towns of said  county  the
  name  of  each and every town in which the land affected by the mortgage
  to which such assignment or agreement  relates.  And  a  record  of  the
  instrument  shall  not  be  effectual  by  way  of  notice  to bona fide
  purchasers or encumbrancers in respect to any land situated in any  town
  of said county not so designated except as hereinafter provided.
    5.  Whenever  any  instrument  affecting  or  relating to land in said
  county entitled to be recorded and required  to  be  indexed  under  the
  provisions  of this act shall be presented to the said clerk for record,
  he shall forthwith endorse  thereupon  the  date,  hour  and  minute  of
  acceptance  for  recording  by  him,  and  enter  in the proper index or
  tickler the name of every party executing said instrument, the  date  of
  record  thereof  and  the name of every town designated as aforesaid for
  the indexing of such instrument and as soon  as  practicable  thereafter
  shall  cause  the  said  instrument  to be indexed in the proper book or
  books of the town indexes under the proper town designated in which such
  property is situated.
    6.  The  entries  made  in  said  indexes  in  conformity   with   the
  requirements  of  this act shall for the purpose of notice be deemed and
  taken to be a part of the record of the instrument to which such entries
  respectively refer and shall be notice to such subsequent purchasers  or
  encumbrancers  to  the  same  extent  and  with  the  like effect as the
  recording of such instruments in the office of said clerk now is or  may
  be notice.
    7.  For  the purposes of indexing under the provisions of this act all
  conveyances, mortgages, or other instruments  recorded  and  indexed  or
  reindexed  under  the  provisions  of  this  act  shall be so indexed or
  reindexed  under  the  proper  town  book  of  index  indicated  in  the
  description  hereinbefore  provided  for,  and  in an order and sequence
  known as the "first letter of the last name  and  first  letter  of  the
  first  named  method".  The  corporate  names shall be indexed under the
  first  letter  of  the  first  substantive  word  of  the  name  of  the
  corporation,  or  in the event of a corporation using the proper name of
  an individual, such as John Smith,  Inc.,  such  index  shall  be  under
  Smith, John, Inc., as well as John Smith, Inc.
    8. In cases where any instrument shall have been recorded without such
  designation  as required by this act, or with erroneous designation, the
  said clerk shall, on presentation of proper proof  thereof,  enter  such
  instrument  in  the  proper index of the proper town, the designation of
  which shall have been erroneously stated or omitted, and  shall  at  the
  same time make a note of such entry and the date thereof, in every place
  in which such instrument may have been erroneously indexed, opposite the
  entry  thereof,  and also upon the record of the instrument and upon the
  instrument itself, if the same be in his possession or produced  to  him
  for the purpose, and the record of such instrument shall be constructive
  notice as to the property in any town not duly designated at the time of
  such record, only from the time when the same shall be properly indexed.
    9.  No  entry  in  any  book  or index in said clerk's office shall be
  erased so as to be illegible, but in case of any  correction,  the  same
  shall  be made without destroying the original by drawing a line through
  such original entry, and in such cases  the  date  of  such  correction,
  attested  by  the signature of the clerk or his deputy, shall be entered
  upon the same page on which such  correction  is  made,  on  the  margin
  opposite  such  correction.  In the event the indexes are in a microfilm
  the correction shall be made by a  hole  being  punched  in  the  margin
  adjacent  to  the  corrected  entry.  No initials being required in this
  event.
    10. Any person presenting to said  clerk  an  instrument  for  record,
  under  this  act,  shall  pay to said clerk, in addition to the fees now
  required by law for recording like instruments, the further sum  of  one
  dollar  for  each additional town beyond one under which said instrument
  is required to be indexed, and the sum of one dollar for each town shall
  be payable whenever an instrument already recorded  is  required  to  be
  reindexed under section eight.
    11.  The  provisions  of  this  act shall not apply to the indexing of
  general assignments, wills, powers of attorney, executory contracts  for
  sale  or  purchase  of  land  or  satisfaction  of  mortgages,  but such
  instruments shall be filed or recorded as now required by law  and  when
  recorded they shall be indexed in separate alphabetical indexes.
    12. For the purpose of carrying out the various provisions of this act
  the clerk may employ such necessary clerical help as may in his judgment
  be required.
    13.  The  board of supervisors of said county is hereby authorized and
  directed to appropriate, for the purpose of carrying out the  provisions
  of this act, all such sums of money as may be necessary therefor.
    14.  The  records  and  indexes  herein  provided to be made under the
  authority of this act shall be deposited in the office of the  clerk  of
  said county for public use and the same shall be public records.
    15. To the extent that the provisions herein are inconsistent with any
  general or special law, this act shall be controlling.
    16.  This  act  shall  be  deemed  and  taken to be a public and not a
  private act.
    17. The county  clerk  may  adopt  a  new  indexing  system  utilizing
  electro-mechanical,  electronic,  or  any other method he deems suitable
  for maintaining the indexes. Such system shall be approved by the county
  legislature before being implemented.


§  316-b. Inactive hazardous waste disposal site registry index. 1. On
  and after July first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-three,  each  recording
  officer  must  provide,  at  the expense of his county, proper books for
  making an index of present owners of inactive hazardous  waste  disposal
  sites  contained  in  the  registry  required  by section 27-1305 of the
  environmental conservation law. The index shall contain an  alphabetical
  listing  of  all  owners  listed  in such annual report completed by the
  department of environmental conservation, together with a reference, for
  each present owner, to the page and year of the report where information
  regarding the inactive hazardous waste site may be  located.  The  index
  shall  also  contain the tax map parcel number or the section, block and
  lot number of the site.
    2. (a) No recording officer shall be liable for the failure to  comply
  with  the  provisions  of  this  section  prior  to July first, nineteen
  hundred ninety-three.
    (b) Any entries,  index  or  other  listing  contained  in  the  books
  required  to  be  provided by this section prior to July first, nineteen
  hundred ninety-three shall be null, void and of  no  effect,  nor  shall
  such  entries,  index  or  listing  be  considered  to provide actual or
  constructive notice of inactive hazardous waste disposal sites  for  any
  purpose.
    3.  Each  recording officer shall record and index such instruments as
  may be required to be recorded pursuant to title thirteen or fourteen of
  article twenty-seven of the environmental  conservation  law,  or  title
  five  of  article  fifty-six  of  the environmental conservation law, or
  article twelve of the navigation  law,  or  any  regulation  promulgated
  pursuant thereto, or any order or agreement entered into under authority
  thereof or of any such regulations.


§  317. Order of recording. Every instrument, entitled to be recorded,
  must be recorded by the recording officer in the order  and  as  of  the
  time  of  its  delivery  to  him  or her therefor, during business hours
  maintained by the recording officer, and is considered recorded from the
  time of  such  delivery;  provided,  however,  that  a  digitized  paper
  document  or  an  electronic  record  shall  be considered delivered for
  purposes of this section at the date and time of receipt indicated on an
  electronic or other written notification which shall be provided by  the
  recording officer immediately upon receipt of a digitized paper document
  or electronic record.


§   318.   Certificate   to   be  recorded.  The  certificate  of  the
  acknowledgment or proof of the  execution  of  an  instrument,  and  the
  certificate  authenticating  the  signature  or  seal  of the officer so
  certifying, or both, if required, must be  recorded  together  with  the
  instrument  so  acknowledged  or proved; otherwise neither the record of
  the instrument nor a transcript thereof can be read in evidence.


§  319. Time of recording. The recording officer must make an entry in
  the record, immediately after the copy of every instrument  recorded  by
  him,  stating  the  hour, day, month and year, when it was recorded, and
  must endorse upon every such instrument a certificate, stating the  time
  as  aforesaid, when, and the book and page where, the same was recorded.
  If the recording is by microphotography or other  photographic  process,
  the  recording  officer  must  endorse  on the instrument the hour, day,
  month and year when it was recorded, and the serial number or such other
  designation as  will  permit  easy  reference  to  the  record  of  such
  instrument,  and  he  must,  in  addition,  place  thereon a certificate
  stating that the instrument has been recorded in deeds or  mortgages  as
  the case may be.


§ 320. Certain deeds deemed mortgages. A deed conveying real property,
  which, by any other written instrument, appears to be intended only as a
  security in the nature of a mortgage, although an absolute conveyance in
  terms,  must  be considered a mortgage; and the person for whose benefit
  such deed is made, derives no  advantage  from  the  recording  thereof,
  unless  every  writing,  operating  as  a  defeasance  of  the  same, or
  explanatory of its being desired to have the effect only of a  mortgage,
  or conditional deed, is also recorded therewith, and at the same time.


§ 321. Recording discharge of mortgage. 1. The recording officer shall
  mark  on  the  record  of a mortgage the word "discharged" when there is
  presented to him a certificate or  certificates  signed  as  hereinafter
  provided,  and acknowledged or proved and certified in like manner as to
  entitle a conveyance to be recorded, specifying that  the  mortgage  has
  been paid or otherwise satisfied and discharged.
    (a)  When  it does not appear from the record that any interest in the
  mortgage has been  assigned,  the  discharge  shall  be  signed  by  the
  mortgagee or by his personal representative.
    (b)  When  it  appears  from  the  record  that  the mortgage has been
  assigned, whether or not the assignment was made as collateral security,
  the discharge shall be signed by the person who appears from the  record
  to be the last assignee thereof or by his personal representative.
    (c)  When  the  mortgage  or  an  assignment thereof names two or more
  persons as mortgagees or assignees, the discharge shall be signed by the
  person or persons designated by the mortgage or  assignment  to  receive
  payment  of  the mortgage debt or to give full acquittance and discharge
  therefor.  When no such person or persons are designated by the mortgage
  or assignment, the certificate of discharge shall be signed  by  all  of
  the  persons  named,  in  the  mortgage  or assignment, as mortgagees or
  assignees, as the case may be, or by their personal representatives,  if
  the  mortgage  or  assignment (i) specifies their respective interest in
  terms of a sum of money, or in terms of a  fraction  or  percentage,  or
  (ii)  states  that  such  persons  shall share equally in, or shall have
  equal shares in the mortgage, or (iii) describes such persons as tenants
  in common of the mortgage. When it appears  from  the  record  that  the
  mortgage  is  held  by  trustees,  the certificate of discharge shall be
  signed by a majority of such trustees or of the survivors of them or  by
  the  survivors  or  survivor of them, unless the instrument creating the
  trust provides otherwise. Except as required above, the discharge may be
  signed by any one of the persons named in the mortgage or assignment, as
  mortgagees or assignees,  as  the  case  may  be,  or  by  the  personal
  representative  of  the  last  survivor  of  them.  If  the  mortgage or
  assignment states that  the  persons  named  therein  as  mortgagees  or
  assignees  shall hold the mortgage jointly, or describes such persons as
  joint tenants or tenants by the entirety of the mortgage,  or  expressly
  creates  a right of survivorship among them, the discharge may be signed
  by any one of such persons or by the personal representative of the last
  survivor  of  them  notwithstanding  that  the  mortgage  or  assignment
  specifies their respective interests in the mortgage or states that they
  shall share equally or have equal shares therein.
    (d)  When the mortgage has been partially assigned, the certificate of
  discharge shall be signed by all  of  the  persons,  or  their  personal
  representatives, who in the aggregate are the holders of all portions of
  the  mortgage, including each partial assignee, and the assignor in case
  any portion of the mortgage has not been  assigned;  provided,  however,
  that  if  any partial assignment names two or more persons as assignees,
  the person or persons who may  sign  the  certificate  discharging  such
  partial  interest  shall be determined in accordance with the provisions
  of paragraph (c) of this subdivision.
    (e) Whenever two or more persons are required to execute a certificate
  of discharge as provided in this subdivision, there may be presented  in
  lieu  of such certificate, separately executed certificates of discharge
  as to the respective interests of each in the mortgage so that  together
  the several certificates purport to discharge the entire mortgage.
    (f)  In  place of any of the persons specified in paragraphs (a), (b),
  (c) or (d) of this  subdivision,  a  certificate  of  discharge  of  the
  mortgage  or  of  any interest therein may be signed (i) by an agent who
  has been authorized by any such person to demand or receive  payment  or
  to  give  a  certificate  of  discharge  of  the  mortgage by a power of
  attorney, provided such power of attorney is of  record  in  the  office
  where the mortgage is recorded, and no instrument of revocation has been
  recorded;  or  (ii)  by  any person in whom title to such mortgage or to
  such interest, or authority to act on behalf of or in  exercise  of  the
  right  or  power  of  the holder of such mortgage or of such interest is
  vested, in a fiduciary capacity, by virtue of an order or  decree  of  a
  court  having  jurisdiction  thereof, including, but not limited to, the
  guardian of a minor, the committee of  an  incompetent  person,  or  the
  conservator  of  a  conservatee,  whether  domestic  or  foreign,  and a
  receiver in bankruptcy or trustee in bankruptcy. A certificate  executed
  by  any  person  specified in clause (ii) of this paragraph shall recite
  the name of the court and the venue of  the  proceedings  in  which  his
  appointment was made, or the order or decree vesting him with such title
  or authority was entered.
    (g)  If the mortgage is stated in the certificate of discharge to have
  been taken by the noncitizen property custodian under  and  pursuant  to
  the  trading  with  the enemy act adopted by the United States congress,
  and approved  October  sixth,  nineteen  hundred  sixteen,  or  any  act
  amendatory  thereof,  or  supplemental  thereto, such certificate may be
  executed by such noncitizen property custodian or  such  person  as  the
  president  may  appoint to give full acquittance and discharge for money
  or property belonging to an enemy or ally  of  an  enemy  which  may  be
  conveyed, assigned, delivered or transferred to said noncitizen property
  custodian,  with  like  effect  as  if the same had been executed by the
  mortgagee, or the personal representative or assignee of such mortgagee.
  Such certificate may be  recorded,  and  such  certificate,  the  record
  thereof  and  a  certified  copy  of  such  record  may be introduced in
  evidence in all courts of this state.
    2. (a) The recording officer shall record and file such certificate or
  certificates together with the certificates of acknowledgment or  proof,
  and  shall  note  on  the  record  of  the  mortgage  the  book and page
  containing such record of such certificate or certificates or the serial
  number of such record in the minute of the discharge of  such  mortgage,
  made  by  the  officer  upon  the record thereof. The provisions of this
  paragraph shall not apply to the county of Suffolk, if the block  method
  of  index  is  in  use, or a separate index of satisfactions recorded is
  maintained.
    (b) The recording officer shall also  record  every  other  instrument
  relating to a mortgage which is presented to him, acknowledged or proved
  in  like  manner  as  to  entitle a conveyance to be recorded, including
  certificates purporting to discharge a mortgage or an  interest  therein
  which  are  signed  by  persons  other than those specified in the first
  subdivision of this section, and also including,  but  not  limited  to,
  assignments,   releases,   partial   discharges,   reductions,  estoppel
  certificates, extensions, discharges of  partial  interest  and  partial
  discharges  of  partial interest, regardless by whom any such instrument
  has been executed. When any  such  instrument  has  been  recorded,  the
  recording officer, except in counties where the block method of indexing
  is in use, or in Suffolk county, if a separate index of said instruments
  is  maintained,  shall enter a minute upon the record of the mortgage to
  which such instrument relates, indicating the nature of such  instrument
  and the book and page where it has been recorded or the serial number of
  such record.
    3.  Every  certificate  presented  to  the  recording officer shall be
  executed and acknowledged or proved in  like  manner  as  to  entitle  a
  conveyance  to  be recorded. If the mortgage has been assigned, in whole
  or in part, the certificate shall set forth the date of each  assignment
  in  the chain of title of the person or persons signing the certificate,
  the names of the assignor and assignee, the interest assigned,  and,  if
  the  assignment  has  been recorded, the book and page where it has been
  recorded or the serial number of such record; or if  the  assignment  is
  being  recorded  simultaneously  with  the certificate of discharge, the
  certificate of discharge shall so state. If the mortgage  has  not  been
  assigned of record, the certificate shall so state.
    No  certificate  presented  to  the recording officer shall purport to
  discharge more than  one  mortgage,  except  that  one  certificate  may
  purport  to discharge two or more mortgages where the certificate states
  that one of such mortgages corrects,  perfects  or  modifies  the  other
  mortgage  or  mortgages,  or  spreads  the lien of the other mortgage or
  mortgages over the property subject to the lien  of  such  mortgage,  or
  consolidates  the  lien of the other mortgage or mortgages with the lien
  of such mortgage to constitute a single lien, or where  the  certificate
  states that the liens of the mortgages which the certificate purports to
  discharge  have  been  so  spread  or  so  consolidated  by  a  separate
  instrument and such instrument has been recorded; provided that in  such
  case  the  certificate  of  discharge  shall  identify and describe each
  mortgage which it purports to discharge, in a separate paragraph, in the
  same manner and with the same particularity, and setting forth the  same
  information  with  respect  to assignments thereof, as would be required
  for a separate certificate discharging that  mortgage,  and  shall  also
  state, in a separate paragraph for each instrument, the date of any such
  separate instrument by which the liens of the mortgages have been spread
  or consolidated, the names of the parties thereto, and the book and page
  where  it  has been recorded or the serial number of such record. In any
  such case, except where otherwise expressly provided by law, the fee  or
  fees  which  the recording officer is entitled to receive for filing and
  entering  a  certificate  of  discharge  of  a  mortgage  and  examining
  assignments  of  such  mortgage  shall  be  payable with respect to each
  mortgage which the certificate purports to discharge, to the same extent
  as if a separate certificate  of  discharge  had  been  filed  for  such
  mortgage.
    4.  After  the  record  of  the mortgage has been marked with the word
  "discharged," the recording officer shall make and deliver to any person
  tendering the lawful fees therefor, his certificate  setting  forth  the
  names  of  the  mortgagor and the mortgagee, the book and page at which,
  the date when such mortgage was recorded, and  the  date  on  which  the
  record  of  such  mortgage  was  so  marked,  except  in  a county where
  recording is done by microphotography  or  photostating  in  the  manner
  permitted by law, in which case, after microphotography or photostating,
  such certificate of discharge and the certificates of its acknowledgment
  or  proof  shall,  in  lieu  of  filing  as provided in paragraph (a) of
  subdivision two of this section, be returned to the party  leaving  same
  for record.
    5.  The  term  "personal representative" as used in this section shall
  include the following:
    (a) An executor, administrator or voluntary administrator  or  one  of
  two  or  more  executors,  administrators  or  voluntary administrators,
  whether domestic or foreign, including the public administrator, and  an
  ancillary  administrator appointed in this state. A certificate executed
  by any such personal representative shall recite the name of  the  court
  and the venue of the proceedings in which his letters testamentary or of
  administration were issued.
    (b)  All  of  the distributees of a person dying intestate for whom no
  administrator shall have been appointed, provided that two  years  shall
  have  elapsed  since  the date of death of such intestate. A certificate
  executed by such distributees shall recite the  date  of  death  of  the
  intestate, his place of residence at the time of death, the fact that he
  died  intestate,  that no administrator has been appointed and that they
  constitute all the distributees of the intestate.
    6. The provisions of this section authorizing the recording officer to
  mark on the record of a mortgage the  word  "discharged"  shall  not  be
  deemed   to  enlarge,  diminish  or  alter  the  legal  effect  which  a
  certificate executed by any person or persons, or any  payment  made  by
  the  mortgagor  or other transaction with respect to the mortgage or the
  mortgage debt, would otherwise have upon the rights of the mortgagor  or
  of any person claiming a right or interest in the mortgage, the mortgage
  debt or the property subject to the mortgage.
    7. In a county in which recording is accomplished by microfilm process
  and  in  which a block index of mortgages is also maintained it will not
  be necessary to mark the record of the  mortgage  "discharged",  but  it
  will  be  deemed  sufficient  compliance  with  this section if there is
  entered upon the block index of such mortgage the date of filing and the
  serial number of the certificate effecting the discharge.
    7-a. If in any county, recording is accomplished by microfilm  process
  and  a  separate  index  for  satisfactions recorded is maintained or in
  which a block index of mortgages is  also  maintained  it  will  not  be
  necessary  to  mark the record of the mortgage "discharged", but it will
  be deemed sufficient compliance with this section if  there  is  entered
  upon the index of such mortgage the date of filing and the serial number
  of the certificate effecting the discharge.
    8.  Certificates  of  discharge  of mortgage and certificates of their
  acknowledgment or proof heretofore or hereafter recorded and filed,  may
  be  returned  personally or by mail to the party leaving same for record
  or destroyed after microfilming or photostating where proper indices are
  Maintained.


§ 321-a. Recording discharge of rent assignment. An assignment of rent
  to accrue from real property, heretofore recorded, or hereafter recorded
  pursuant  to  section two hundred ninety-four-a of this chapter, must be
  discharged upon the record  thereof,  by  the  recording  officer,  upon
  presentation  to  him of a certificate signed by the assignee, or by his
  personal representative or his assignee, and acknowledged or proved  and
  certified  in  like  manner  to  entitle  a  conveyance  to be recorded,
  specifying that the obligation secured by the  assignment  of  rent  has
  been  satisfied  or  discharged,  or  that  the  assignment  of  rent is
  canceled. When so signed and acknowledged or proved and certified,  such
  certificate  may  be recorded, and such certificate, the record thereof,
  and a certified copy of such record may be introduced in evidence in all
  courts of this state. The certificate of discharge, and the certificates
  of its acknowledgment or proof,  must  be  recorded  and  filed;  and  a
  reference  must  be  made to the book and page containing such record in
  the minute of the discharge of such assignment  of  rent,  made  by  the
  officer upon the record thereof.  After such discharge has been recorded
  the  recording  officer  shall  make  and deliver to the person in whose
  interest such discharge of assignment of rent is executed and  recorded,
  his  certificate  setting  forth the names of the assignor and assignee,
  the liber and page at which, the time when such assignment of  rent  was
  recorded,  and  the  date on which said assignment of rent was satisfied
  and discharged.


§ 324. Effect of recording assignment of mortgage. The recording of an
  assignment of a mortgage is not in itself a notice of such assignment to
  a  mortgagor,  his  heirs or personal representatives, or to an owner of
  the mortgaged premises where such assignment is recorded  subsequent  to
  the recording of the conveyance of such premises to such owner, so as to
  invalidate  a  payment  made  by either of them to the mortgagee or to a
  prior assignee of the mortgage.


§  325.  Recording  of conveyances made by treasurer of Connecticut. A
  conveyance of real property, executed at any time since the tenth day of
  March, eighteen hundred and twenty-five, by the treasurer of  the  state
  of  Connecticut,  acknowledged  by  him before the secretary of state of
  such state, and  the  acknowledgment  of  which  is  certified  by  such
  secretary  of state under the seal of such state, in the manner required
  for the acknowledgment and certification of  a  conveyance  within  this
  state,  may  be recorded in the proper office within this state, without
  further proof thereof.


§  326.  Revocation  to  be  recorded.  A  power  of attorney or other
  instrument, recorded pursuant to this article, is not deemed revoked  by
  any  act  of  the  party  by whom it was executed, unless the instrument
  containing such revocation is also recorded in the same office in  which
  the instrument containing the power was recorded.


§  327.  Penalty  for  using  long  forms  of covenants. The recording
  officer of any county may charge for  the  recording  of  an  instrument
  containing  any  of  the  covenants mentioned in section two hundred and
  fifty-three and two hundred and fifty-four of this  chapter,  at  large,
  instead  of the short forms thereof, in said sections contained, the sum
  of five dollars in addition to the  fees  chargeable  by  law  for  such
  Recording.


§  328.  Certain  acts not affected. Nothing contained in this article
  repeals  or  affects  any  act  providing  for  recording  and  indexing
  instruments  affecting  real property in the city of New York, according
  to city blocks or other limited areas.


§  329.  Actions  to  have  certain instruments canceled of record. An
  owner of real property or of any  undivided  part  thereof  or  interest
  therein  or  an  owner  of  rent  to accrue from a tenancy or subtenancy
  thereof, may maintain an action  to  have  any  recorded  instrument  in
  writing  relating  to such real property or interest therein, other than
  those required by law to be recorded, or any recorded assignment of rent
  to accrue from a tenancy or subtenancy  of  such  property  or  interest
  therein declared void or invalid, or to have the same canceled of record
  as  to  said  real  property,  or his undivided part thereof or interest
  therein, or as to the rent to accrue therefrom belonging to him.


§ 329-a. Lapse of oil and gas interest within Allegany state park. The
  provisions  of  this  section  shall apply to oil and gas interests that
  were previously severed from interests in lands that are currently owned
  by the state within Allegany state park.
    1. Any interest in oil and gas shall, if unused for a period of twenty
  years immediately prior to  the  effective  date  of  this  section,  be
  extinguished,  and  the  ownership  thereof  shall  revert to the state,
  unless a statement  of  claim  is  filed  within  two  years  after  the
  effective  date  of this section, in accordance with subdivision five of
  this section.
    2. Such oil and gas interest shall mean the interest which is  created
  by   an   instrument  transferring,  either  by  grant,  assignment,  or
  reservation or otherwise, an interest  of  any  kind,  in  oil  and  gas
  located  on  or  beneath  lands owned by the state within Allegany state
  park; provided, however, that such interest shall not  include  a  lease
  for a fixed term.
    3.  Such oil and gas interest shall be deemed to be used when: (a) oil
  and gas is produced; (b) operations are being conducted  for  injection,
  withdrawal, storage or disposal of water, gas or other fluid substances;
  (c)  rentals  or  royalties  are being paid by the owner thereof for the
  purpose of delaying or enjoying the use or exercise of such rights;  (d)
  any  such  use is being carried out on any tract with which such oil and
  gas interest is being unitized or pooled for production purposes; or (e)
  taxes are paid on such oil and gas interest by the  owner  thereof.  Any
  use  pursuant  to  or authorized by the instrument creating such oil and
  gas interest shall be effective to continue in force all rights  granted
  by such instrument.
    4.  Within  thirty  days after the effective date of this section, the
  office of parks, recreation and historic preservation shall cause to  be
  published  in  three  successive  issues  of three newspapers of general
  circulation published in the county of Cattaraugus, a notice  announcing
  the  enactment  of  the  provisions of this section, including a summary
  thereof in plain English.
    5. The statement of claim provided in subdivision one of this  section
  shall  be  filed  by  the  owner of such oil and gas interest within two
  years immediately following the effective date of this section and shall
  contain the  name  and  address  of  the  owner  of  such  interest  and
  description  of  the land on or under which such oil and gas interest is
  located. Such statement of claim shall be accompanied by a copy  of  the
  instrument creating or reserving such interest and shall be filed in the
  office of the clerk of the county of Cattaraugus. Where such an interest
  is co-owned by more than one party, any one owner may file the statement
  of claim on behalf of all owners.
    6.  Failure  to  file a statement of claim within the time provided in
  subdivision five of this section shall not cause an oil and gas interest
  to be extinguished if the owner of such oil and gas interest:
    (a) made diligent effort to preserve all of such interests as were not
  being used, and did within the period provided in  subdivision  five  of
  this  section  preserve  other oil and gas interests, in said county, by
  the filing of statements of claim as required by this section; and
    (b) failed to preserve such interest through inadvertence; and
    (c) filed the statement of claim required by this section within sixty
  days after publication of notice as provided  in  subdivision  seven  of
  this section or, if no such notice is published, within sixty days after
  receiving  actual  knowledge  that  such  oil  and gas interest had been
  extinguished.
    7. At any time following the expiration  of  the  period  provided  in
  subdivision  five  of  this section, the office of parks, recreation and
  historic preservation may give notice of the lapse of any such  oil  and
  gas   interest  by  publishing  the  same  in  a  newspaper  of  general
  circulation in the county of Cattaraugus, and, if the  address  of  such
  oil  and gas interest owner is shown of record or can be determined upon
  reasonable inquiry, by mailing within ten days after such publication  a
  copy  of  such  notice  to  the  owner of such oil and gas interest. The
  notice shall state the name of the owner of such oil and gas interest as
  shown of record and a description of the land. If a copy of such notice,
  together with an affidavit of service thereof, shall be  promptly  filed
  in  the  office of the clerk in the county wherein such land is located,
  the  record  thereof  shall  be  prima  facie  evidence  in  any   legal
  proceedings that such notice was given.
    8.  Upon  the  filing  of  the  statement  of  claim  provided  for in
  subdivision five of this section or the proof of service  of  notice  as
  provided  in subdivision seven of this section in the clerk's office for
  the county of Cattaraugus, the clerk shall record the same in a book  to
  be  kept  for that purpose, which shall be known as the "dormant oil and
  gas interest record," and shall indicate by  marginal  notation  on  the
  instrument  creating the original oil and gas interest the filing of the
  statement of claim or affidavit of publication and service of notice.
    9. The filing of the statement of claim provided in this section shall
  not be evidence of title to or ownership of the interest claimed therein
  for any purpose other than that provided in this section.


§  330.  Officers guilty of malfeasance liable for damages. An officer
  authorized to take the acknowledgment or proof of a conveyance or  other
  instrument, or to certify such proof or acknowledgment, or to record the
  same,  who  is  guilty  of  malfeasance  or  fraudulent  practice in the
  execution of any duty prescribed by law in relation thereto,  is  liable
  in damages to the person injured.


§  331.  Laws  and  decrees of foreign countries appointing agents and
  attorneys and recording of the same. A  copy  of  a  law  of  a  foreign
  country  or  of  a  decree  of  the  executive  power of such a country,
  appointing an agent or attorney with power to execute and deliver in the
  name or on behalf of such foreign country,  any  instrument  in  writing
  granting,  assigning, surrendering or in any manner affecting any estate
  or interest of such government in real property within  this  state,  or
  assigning  or discharging any lien or claim of such government upon real
  property within this state, or of a  law  or  decree  revoking  such  an
  appointment,  if  in  English, or a translation into English of any such
  law or decree, if the original thereof  be  in  a  language  other  than
  English,  when  certified and recorded as hereinafter provided, shall be
  presumptive evidence  of  the  authority  of  such  agent  or  attorney.
  Certification  of such copy or translation shall be made under the great
  seal of such foreign country and shall be to the effect that the same is
  a true copy or translation  of  such  law  or  decree.    Such  copy  or
  translation of such law or decree, when so certified, may be recorded in
  the  office  of  the  clerk or register of any county of this state, and
  such copy or translation when so certified and recorded, or a  certified
  copy  of  the record thereof, shall be received as evidence in any court
  of this state. The authority conferred under any instrument so  recorded
  shall not be deemed revoked as to property situated in any county except
  by  the  recording  in  such county of a copy or translation of a law or
  decree to  that  effect,  duly  certified  in  the  manner  hereinbefore
  provided.  Nothing  in this section shall in any way affect the right or
  power of a foreign country to acquire, hold or convey real  property  in
  this state, or be construed to confer any such right or power.


§ 332. The record of certain conveyances validated. 1. The record made
  prior  to  July  first, nineteen hundred fifty-five in the office of the
  recording officer of any county in this state  of  any  deed,  mortgage,
  assignment  or  satisfaction piece of a mortgage, or other conveyance or
  power  of  attorney,  otherwise  authorized  to  be  recorded   therein,
  notwithstanding  that the certificate of acknowledgment or proof did not
  set forth the place of residence  of  a  subscribing  witness  or  of  a
  corporate  officer  or director, or did not set it forth with sufficient
  particularity, and notwithstanding any other defect in the form  of  the
  certificate  of acknowledgment or proof or the failure to append thereto
  a  certificate  as  to  the  authority  of  the  person  who  took   the
  acknowledgment  or proof, to take the same, or any defect in the form of
  such certificate of authority, shall be in all  respects  as  valid  and
  effectual  as  though  such  certificate  of  acknowledgment or proof or
  certificate of authority had been in proper form or such certificate  of
  authority  had been appended to such instrument. Provided only that such
  person  was  duly  authorized  at  the  time  of  taking  the  proof  or
  acknowledgment  to  take  the same in the county where the instrument is
  recorded or in the place, whether within or without the  United  States,
  where the same was taken.
    2.  All  acknowledgments or proofs of conveyance of real property made
  or taken prior to April tenth, nineteen hundred thirty, before a  judge,
  clerk,  deputy clerk or special deputy clerk of a court not of record of
  this state are confirmed.
    3. All acts of the secretary of state of any state or territory of the
  United States in authenticating a certificate of acknowledgment or proof
  of a conveyance of real property  within  the  state,  performed  before
  October  first,  nineteen  hundred  twenty-five,  are  hereby confirmed,
  provided that the said certificate of  authentication  is  in  the  form
  required  by  the  laws  of  this  state on March twenty-third, nineteen
  hundred twenty-six or now required by law.
    4. If an instrument is recorded hereafter notwithstanding the omission
  from the certificate of acknowledgment or proof of the street and street
  number of a subscribing witness or of a corporate  officer  or  director
  contrary to the provisions of sections three hundred four, three hundred
  nine, three hundred nine-a and three hundred nine-b of this article, the
  record  of  such  instrument  shall not be invalidated by reason of such
  omission nor shall the title founded  on  such  instrument  be  impaired
  thereby.
    5.  Nothing  in  this  section  shall  effect  any  pending  action or
  proceeding nor the rights of any purchaser  in  good  faith  and  for  a
  valuable  consideration  whose  conveyance shall have been duly recorded
  before this section as amended shall take effect.


§   332-a.   Validation   of   the  record,  execution  and  proof  or
  acknowledgment of certain other instruments.  The record made  prior  to
  the  day  when  this  act  takes  effect  in the office of the recording
  officer of any county in this state  or,  the  execution  and  proof  or
  acknowledgment  made prior to the day when this act takes effect, of any
  deed,  mortgage,  assignment  or  satisfaction  piece  of  a   mortgage,
  discharge  or release of part of mortgaged premises, or other conveyance
  or a power of attorney, the acknowledgment of the execution of which  by
  a  corporation was made by an officer thereof, or the execution of which
  was proven by a subscribing witness, such acknowledgment or proof having
  been taken or made before an officer or person thereto  authorized,  and
  the certificate or certification thereof or therefor being sufficient as
  to form in all respects except that it either did not state the place of
  residence  of  such  officer  of  the corporation or of such subscribing
  witness or did not state it with sufficient particularity, shall  be  in
  all  respects  as  valid  and  effectual  as  though such certificate or
  certification had contained a sufficient statement as to such  place  of
  residence;  but  this  section shall not affect any action or proceeding
  pending at the time of the taking effect thereof.


§  332-b.  The  record  of certain other conveyances validated. 1. The
  record made subsequent to February thirteenth,  nineteen  hundred  forty
  and  prior  to  the time this section shall take effect in the office of
  the recording officer of any county in this state of any deed, mortgage,
  assignment or satisfaction piece of a mortgage, or other  conveyance  or
  power   of  attorney,  otherwise  authorized  to  be  recorded  therein,
  notwithstanding  any  defect  in  the  form  of   the   certificate   of
  acknowledgment  or  proof or the failure to append thereto a certificate
  as to the authority of the person who took the acknowledgment or  proof,
  to  take  the  same,  or  any  defect in the form of such certificate of
  authority, shall be in all respects as valid  and  effectual  as  though
  such  certificate of acknowledgment or proof or certificate of authority
  had been in proper form  or  such  certificate  of  authority  had  been
  appended  to  such  instrument.  Provided only that such person was duly
  authorized at the time of taking the proof or acknowledgment to take the
  same in the county where the instrument is recorded  or  in  the  place,
  whether within or without the United States, where the same was taken.
    2.  Nothing  in  this  section  shall  affect  any  pending  action or
  proceeding nor the rights of any purchaser  in  good  faith  and  for  a
  valuable  consideration  whose  conveyance shall have been duly recorded
  before this section shall take effect.


§  333. When conveyances of real property not to be recorded. 1. After
  September thirtieth, nineteen hundred and ten, a recording officer shall
  not record or accept for record any conveyance of real property executed
  subsequent to said September thirtieth, nineteen hundred and ten, unless
  the residence of the purchaser and if in a city  of  over  five  hundred
  thousand  inhabitants  according  to  the last federal census the street
  number of the residence of the purchaser shall  be  stated  therein  and
  such  residence and street number shall be recorded with the conveyance.
  After May first, nineteen hundred  and  fourteen,  a  recording  officer
  shall  not  record  or accept for record any conveyance of real property
  executed subsequent to said first  day  of  May,  nineteen  hundred  and
  fourteen,  if  in  a  city  of  over  two  hundred  thousand inhabitants
  according to the last federal census, unless the street  number  of  the
  residence  of  the  purchaser shall be stated therein and such residence
  and street number shall  be  recorded  with  the  conveyance;  provided,
  however,   that  this  section  shall  not  operate  to  invalidate  any
  conveyance of real property, heretofore or hereafter executed, in  which
  the  residence  or  street  number  of the purchaser shall not have been
  stated, nor affect the record of any such conveyance accepted for record
  and recorded, heretofore or hereafter, contrary  to  the  provisions  of
  this  section,  nor  impair  any  title  founded on such a conveyance or
  record. After July first,  nineteen  hundred  thirty-five,  a  recording
  officer  of  the  county of Nassau shall not record or accept for record
  any conveyance of real property executed subsequent to said first day of
  July, nineteen hundred thirty-five,  unless  the  city  or  incorporated
  village in which such real property is located be stated therein, and if
  not  located  in  a  city  or incorporated village, then the township in
  which located shall be stated  therein;  provided,  however,  that  this
  section shall not operate to invalidate any conveyance of real property,
  heretofore  or  hereafter  executed,  in  which the description fails to
  designate the city or incorporated village in which the real property is
  located, nor affect the record  of  any  such  conveyance  accepted  for
  record  and recorded, heretofore or hereafter contrary to the provisions
  of this section, nor impair any title founded on such  a  conveyance  or
  record.
    1-a.  After  September  first,  nineteen  hundred  forty,  a recording
  officer shall not record or accept for record  any  conveyance  of  real
  property  executed  subsequent  to said first day of September, nineteen
  hundred forty, unless the residence of the seller and of the  purchaser,
  including the street and street number of the residence if any there be,
  shall be stated therein and such residences, including street and street
  number if any, shall be recorded with the conveyance; provided, however,
  that  the provisions of this subdivision shall not operate to invalidate
  any conveyance of real property, executed subsequent to said  first  day
  of  September, nineteen hundred forty, in which the residence, including
  street and street number if any, of the  seller  and  of  the  purchaser
  shall  not  have  been  stated,  nor  affect  the record contrary to the
  provisions of this subdivision, nor impair any title founded on  such  a
  conveyance or record.
    1-b.  With  respect  to  instruments  executed  after September first,
  nineteen hundred forty-four, the terms seller and purchaser, as used  in
  this section, shall include any party to a conveyance of real property.
    1-c.  With  respect  to  instruments  executed  after September first,
  nineteen hundred forty-four, the term conveyance  of  real  property  as
  used  in  this  section  shall  include  any  conveyance  as  defined in
  subdivision three of section two hundred ninety of the real property law
  and any instrument entitled to be recorded  under  section  two  hundred
  ninety-four of the real property law.
    1-d.  After  September  first, nineteen hundred fifty-five a recording
  officer shall not record or accept  for  record  any  deed  transferring
  title  to real property executed subsequent to September first, nineteen
  hundred fifty-five, unless the city, town and village in which such real
  property  is  located  be  stated  therein; provided, however, that this
  section shall not operate to invalidate any  such  deed,  heretofore  or
  hereafter  executed,  in  which  the  description fails to designate the
  city, town and village in which the real property is located, nor affect
  the record of any such deed accepted for record and recorded, heretofore
  or hereafter contrary to the provisions of this section, nor impair  any
  title founded on such deed or record.
    1-e.  i.  A recording officer shall not record or accept for recording
  any conveyance of real property affecting land in New York state  unless
  accompanied by one of the following:
    (1)  a  receipt  issued  by  the  commissioner of taxation and finance
  pursuant to subdivision (c) of section fourteen hundred twenty-three  of
  the tax law; or
    (2)  a transfer report form prescribed by the commissioner of taxation
  and finance, and the fee prescribed pursuant  to  subdivision  three  of
  this section.
    ii. Such transfer report form shall contain information as required by
  such commissioner including:
    (1) the mailing address of the new owner;
    (2)  the  tax  billing  address, if different from the owner's mailing
  address;
    (3) the appropriate tax map designation, if any;
    (4) a statement of the full sales price relating thereto;
    (5) a statement  indicating  whether  the  parcel  is  located  in  an
  agricultural  district  and, if so, whether a disclosure notice has been
  provided pursuant  to  section  three  hundred  thirty-three-c  of  this
  article  and  section  three  hundred ten of the agriculture and markets
  law;
    (6) a statement indicating whether the property described in such deed
  is the entire parcel owned by the transferor or transferors;
    (7) in the event the parcel conveyed by such deed is a portion of  the
  parcel  owned  by  the transferor or transferors, a statement indicating
  whether the city, town or village in which such property is situated has
  a planning board or other entity empowered to approve subdivisions; and
    (8) in the event such planning board or other entity is  empowered  to
  approve subdivisions, a statement indicating whether the parcel conveyed
  by such deed is (a) not subject to such subdivision approval or (b) such
  subdivision  has  been  approved by the respective city, town or village
  planning board or other entity empowered to approve subdivisions.
    iii. Such transfer report form shall not constitute  part  of  nor  be
  retained with the record of conveyance.
    iv. For the purposes of this subdivision:
    (1) "Tax billing address" means the address designated by the owner to
  which tax bills shall be sent.
    (2) "Full sales price" means the price actually paid or required to be
  paid for the real property or interest therein, whether paid or required
  to  be  paid  by money, property, or any other thing of value, including
  the cancellation or discharge of an indebtedness or obligation, and  the
  amount  of  any  lien  or  encumbrance  on the real property or interest
  therein which existed before the delivery of the deed and which  remains
  thereon  after  the  delivery of the deed, but excluding the fair market
  value of any personal property received by the buyer.
    (3) "Qualifying farm property" means property for which  the  property
  classification  code on the latest final assessment roll, as reported on
  the transfer report form, is in the agricultural category.
    (4)  "Qualifying  residential property" means property which satisfies
  at least one of the following conditions:
    (a) The property classification code assigned to the property  on  the
  latest  final  assessment roll, as reported on the transfer report form,
  indicates that the property is a one, two or  three  family  home  or  a
  rural residence, or
    (b)  The  transfer report form indicates that the property is one, two
  or three family residential property that has been newly constructed  on
  vacant land, or
    (c)  The  transfer  report  form  indicates  that  the  property  is a
  residential condominium.
    v. (1) The  provisions  of  this  subdivision  shall  not  operate  to
  invalidate  any  conveyance  of  real  property where one or more of the
  items designated as subparagraphs one through eight of paragraph  ii  of
  this  subdivision,  have not been reported or which has been erroneously
  reported, nor affect the record  contrary  to  the  provisions  of  this
  subdivision, nor impair any title founded on such conveyance or record.
    (2) Subject to the provisions of section fourteen hundred twenty-three
  of  the  tax  law,  such  form  shall  contain  an affirmation as to the
  accuracy of the contents made both by the transferor or transferors  and
  by  the  transferee  or  transferees.  Provided,  however,  that  if the
  conveyance of real property occurs as a result of a  taking  by  eminent
  domain,   tax   foreclosure,   or   other  involuntary  proceeding  such
  affirmation may be made only by either the condemnor, tax  district,  or
  other  party  to whom the property has been conveyed, or by that party's
  attorney. The affirmations required by this paragraph shall be  made  in
  the  form  and  manner  prescribed  by  the  commissioner, provided that
  notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, affirmants may  be
  allowed,   but   shall  not  be  required,  to  sign  such  affirmations
  electronically.
    vi. Any deed executed and delivered  prior  to  July  first,  nineteen
  hundred  ninety-four  may  nevertheless be recorded in the office of the
  county clerk providing there is submitted therewith,  and  in  place  of
  such  form, a separate statement signed by the transferor or transferors
  and the transferee  or  transferees  or  any  person  having  sufficient
  knowledge to sign such form which contains the same information required
  by   the   commissioner   of  taxation  and  finance  as  set  forth  in
  subparagraphs one through four of paragraph ii of this subdivision.
    1-f. Each conveyance of real property affecting land in Suffolk county
  presented to the recording officer of such county for  recording  shall,
  in  addition  to complying with the requirements of subdivision one-e of
  this section, contain in the body thereof or have endorsed  thereon  the
  map  designation  or  designations  of  the  property  maps  of the real
  property tax service agency of such county.  The  recording  officer  of
  such  county  shall  not  record or accept for record, any conveyance of
  real property affecting land in such county unless  said  instrument  of
  conveyance  is  accompanied by a three dollar certification fee for each
  parcel of real property conveyed, to defray the cost  of  verifying  the
  tax  map designation prior to recording. This certification fee shall be
  payable to the Suffolk county clerk and shall  be  in  addition  to  any
  other  applicable  recording  fees  or  charges.  The provisions of this
  subdivision shall not operate to invalidate any conveyance of such  real
  property  on which the appropriate map designation or designations shall
  not have been stated or which  may  have  been  erroneously  stated  nor
  affect  the  record  contrary to the provisions of this subdivision, nor
  impair any title founded on such conveyance or record.
    2.  A  recording  officer  shall  not  record or accept for record any
  conveyance of real property, unless said conveyance in its entirety  and
  the  certificate  of  acknowledgment  or  proof  and  the authentication
  thereof, other than  proper  names  therein  which  may  be  in  another
  language  provided  they  are  written in English letters or characters,
  shall be in the English language, or unless such conveyance, certificate
  of  acknowledgment  or  proof,  and  the   authentication   thereof   be
  accompanied  by  and  have attached thereto a translation in the English
  language duly executed and acknowledged by the person or persons  making
  such  conveyance and proved and authenticated, if need be, in the manner
  required of conveyances for recording in this  state,  or,  unless  such
  conveyance,   certificate   of   acknowledgment   or   proof,   and  the
  authentication thereof be accompanied by and  have  attached  thereto  a
  translation in the English language made by a person duly designated for
  such  purpose  by  the county judge of the county where it is desired to
  record such conveyance or a justice of the supreme  court  and  be  duly
  signed,  acknowledged  and  certified  under oath or upon affirmation by
  such person before such judge, to be a true and accurate translation and
  contain a certification of the designation of such person by such judge.
    3. (i) When a recording officer is presented  with  a  conveyance  for
  recording that is accompanied by a receipt issued by the commissioner of
  taxation  and  finance  pursuant  to subdivision (c) of section fourteen
  hundred twenty-three of the tax law, such  recording  officer  shall  be
  relieved  of  the  responsibility  to  collect the fee described by this
  subdivision. He or she shall nonetheless be entitled to the  portion  of
  such  fee  that he or she would otherwise have deducted pursuant to this
  subdivision, as provided by subdivision (b) of section fourteen  hundred
  twenty-three of the tax law.
    (ii)  When  a  recording  officer  is  presented with a conveyance for
  recording that is not accompanied by such a receipt,  he  or  she  shall
  impose  a fee of two hundred fifty dollars, or in the case of a transfer
  involving  qualifying  residential  or  farm  property  as  defined   by
  paragraph  iv of subdivision one-e of this section, a fee of one hundred
  twenty-five dollars, for every real  property  transfer  reporting  form
  submitted  for recording as required under subparagraph two of paragraph
  i of subdivision one-e of this section. In the city  of  New  York,  the
  recording  officer  shall  impose  a fee of one hundred dollars for each
  real property  transfer  tax  form  filed  in  accordance  with  chapter
  twenty-one of title eleven of the administrative code of the city of New
  York,  except  where  a  real  property  transfer reporting form is also
  submitted for recording for the transfer as required under  subparagraph
  two  of  paragraph i of subdivision one-e of this section. The recording
  officer shall deduct nine dollars from such fee and remit the  remainder
  of  the  revenue  collected  to the commissioner of taxation and finance
  every month for deposit into the general fund. The amount duly  deducted
  by  the recording officer shall be retained by the county or by the city
  of New York.


§  333-a.  Same;  maps to be filed.  No conveyance of real property or
  other document relating to real property,  executed  on  or  after  July
  first,  nineteen  hundred  thirty-one,  which contains a recital of or a
  reference to a map made on or after that date  or  which  has  thereunto
  attached  such  a  map, shall be received for record or recorded by such
  recording officer unless and until a duplicate of such map, prepared  in
  the  same  manner  as  prescribed for the preparation of maps in section
  three hundred and thirty-four of this chapter, shall  be  filed  in  the
  office  of such recording officer and no map, attached to any conveyance
  or other document relating to real property, shall exceed  the  standard
  legal  cap  size,  except that in the county of Putnam the size shall be
  not less than twenty by twenty inches and not more  than  thirty-six  by
  forty-eight  inches  in size and that in the counties of Westchester and
  Dutchess the size shall not  be  more  than  thirty-six  by  forty-eight
  inches. This section shall not apply to the counties of New York, Kings,
  Queens, Nassau, Suffolk, Bronx, Onondaga, Erie, Monroe or Richmond.
    Notwithstanding  any of the provisions of this section a conveyance of
  real property or other document relating to real property shall  not  be
  invalid  or  void  for  failure to file therewith any map referred to in
  such conveyance or document.




    § 333-b. Recording of maps or plot plans. 1. Notwithstanding any other
  provisions  of  this  article,  a  map  or  plot  plan  showing property
  boundaries and data not relating to subdivisions and the filing  thereof
  may be recorded in the same manner as a deed, if the map or plot plan is
  attached  to  the  conveying  instrument.  A  map  or plot plan recorded
  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  clearly  delineate  and  locate   by
  dimensions  the  parcel  or  interest  conveyed in such manner that such
  parcel or interest can be located on the premises affected. Such map  or
  plot  plan  may appear on one or more pages as needed, shall be drawn on
  legal size paper and shall have lettering thereon no smaller than  elite
  type,  and  all  lines  shall be legible and of sufficient size for easy
  reading after photocopying or microfilming. The  recording  officer  may
  reject or refuse to record any map or plot plan that is unclear, crowded
  and not suitable for photocopying.
    2.  If  the  property  is  situated  in a county maintaining a tax map
  department, it shall be the duty of the person, corporation or agent who
  offers such map or plot plan for recording to deliver to and leave  with
  the  recording  officer  a  duplicate copy of the map or plot plan. Such
  duplicate copy shall be transmitted to the  tax  map  department  on  or
  before  the  fifteenth  day of each month by the recording officer or by
  such other officer  or  agency  as  may  be  designated  by  the  county
  legislative body.


§  333-c.  Lands  in  agricultural  districts; disclosure. 1. When any
  purchase and sales contract is presented  for  the  sale,  purchase,  or
  exchange  of  real  property  located  partially  or  wholly  within  an
  agricultural district established pursuant to the provisions of  article
  twenty-five-AA  of  the  agriculture  and  markets  law, the prospective
  grantor shall present to the prospective  grantee  a  disclosure  notice
  which states the following:
    "It  is  the  policy  of  this  state  and this community to conserve,
  protect and encourage the development and  improvement  of  agricultural
  land  for  the  production of food, and other products, and also for its
  natural and ecological  value.  This  disclosure  notice  is  to  inform
  prospective  residents  that the property they are about to acquire lies
  partially or wholly within an agricultural  district  and  that  farming
  activities  occur  within  the  district.  Such  farming  activities may
  include, but not be limited to, activities that cause  noise,  dust  and
  odors.  Prospective  residents  are  also  informed that the location of
  property within an agricultural  district  may  impact  the  ability  to
  access  water  and/or  sewer  services  for  such property under certain
  circumstances.  Prospective purchasers are urged to contact the New York
  State  Department  of  Agriculture  and  Markets  to  obtain  additional
  information  or  clarification  regarding  their  rights and obligations
  under article 25-AA of the Agriculture and Markets Law."
    2. Such disclosure notice shall be signed by the  prospective  grantor
  and  grantee  prior  to  the  sale,  purchase  or  exchange of such real
  property.
    3. Failure of the seller to provide  such  information  to  the  buyer
  shall not prevent the recording officer from filing such deed.


§  334.  Maps  to  be filed; penalty for nonfiling. 1. It shall be the
  duty of every person or corporation who, as owner or  agent,  subdivides
  real  property  into  lots,  plots,  blocks  or  sites,  with or without
  streets, for the purpose of offering such lots, plots, blocks  or  sites
  for  sale  to  the  public,  to  cause  a  map  thereof, together with a
  certificate of the licensed  land  surveyor  filing  said  map  attached
  showing  the  date of the completion of the survey by said land surveyor
  and of the making of the map by said land surveyor and the name  of  the
  subdivision  as  stated  by  the owner, to be filed in the office of the
  county clerk or, in any county having a register of deeds, in the office
  of the register of deeds, of the county where the property  is  situated
  prior to the offering of any such lots, plots, blocks or sites for sale;
  and  a  duplicate  copy of such map shall also be filed in the office of
  the city, town or village clerk, where the property is situated, and, if
  situated in a county maintaining a tax map department, a copy shall also
  be filed with such department, before any such sale.
    2. All such maps must be printed upon linen or canvas-backed paper  or
  drawn  with  a pen and India ink upon tracing cloth or printed on mylar,
  and must be a minimum of eight and one-half inches by eleven inches, and
  a maximum of thirty-four inches by forty-four  inches  in  size,  except
  that  in  the  counties  of  Westchester,  Putnam  and Rockland all maps
  presented for filing must be printed or drawn  with  pen  and  ink  upon
  tracing  cloth  or  printed  on  mylar;  except  that in the counties of
  Saratoga, Otsego, Dutchess and Monroe, all maps presented for filing  in
  the  office  of  the  county clerk must be printed or drawn with pen and
  India ink  upon  transparent  tracing  cloth  or  printed  on  mylar  or
  polyester film or be photographic copies on transparent tracing cloth or
  printed  on  mylar  or  polyester film and further, that such maps to be
  filed in the counties of Saratoga and Otsego  shall  be  not  less  than
  eight and one-half inches by fourteen inches nor more than thirty inches
  by  forty-two  inches  in size; except that in the county of Clinton all
  maps presented for filing in the office of  the  county  clerk  must  be
  printed  or  drawn  with pen and ink upon tracing cloth or canvas-backed
  paper or printed  on  mylar  and  must  be  either  eighteen  inches  by
  twenty-four  inches  or twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches in size,
  and in the county of Putnam must be  not  less  than  twenty  inches  by
  twenty  inches and not more than thirty-six inches by forty-eight inches
  in size, and in the counties of Warren, Sullivan  and  Greene  all  maps
  presented  for  filing  must  be printed or drawn with pen and India ink
  upon transparent tracing cloth or polyester film or printed on mylar  or
  be photographic copies on transparent tracing cloth or polyester film or
  printed  on  mylar  and  further,  that  such maps to be filed in Warren
  county, must be not less than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches
  nor more than twenty-two inches by thirty-four inches, in the county  of
  Sullivan  must  be  not  less  than  eight and one-half inches by eleven
  inches nor more than twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches and in  the
  county  of Greene must be not less than twelve inches by eighteen inches
  nor more than  twenty-four  inches  by  thirty-six  inches  and  in  the
  counties  of  Westchester  and  Dutchess  must  be  thirty-six inches by
  forty-eight inches or less in size, and that such maps to  be  filed  in
  the  county  of  Monroe shall be in any one of the following sizes only:
  seventeen inches by twenty-two inches, twenty-two inches by  thirty-four
  inches   or   thirty-four   inches  by  forty-four  inches.  Every  such
  subdivision map of property in  the  towns  of  Tonawanda,  Evans,  West
  Seneca,  Cheektowaga, Amherst, Lancaster, Grand Island, Aurora, Concord,
  Collins, Alden, Newstead, Clarence, Elma, Orchard Park and Hamburg, Erie
  county, located wholly or partly outside an incorporated village,  shall
  before  the  filing thereof as herein provided, have attached thereto in
  writing, the approval of the town board of such town, and every such map
  of property located wholly or partly in an incorporated village in  such
  town,  shall,  if  located  wholly  within the village have attached the
  approval  of the board of trustees of the village, and if located partly
  within a village and partly within one of such towns, have attached  the
  approval of both the town board of the town and the board of trustees of
  the village.
    2-a.  Notwithstanding  any  other provisions in this article, a county
  clerk may adopt a  system  to  receive  and  retain  maps  utilizing  an
  electro-mechanical,  electronic  or  any other method they deem suitable
  for receiving and retaining maps.
    3. Every such map of subdivided land, whether intended as an  original
  subdivision  or  as  an  alteration  of  a prior subdivision, shall have
  endorsed thereon or annexed thereto at the time such map is  offered  to
  be  filed  a  certificate  of the county treasurer or of an abstract and
  title company and a certificate of the tax  collecting  officer  of  any
  county,  city, town or village wherein such property or any part thereof
  is situate, stating that all taxes levied and unpaid  and  in  addition,
  all taxes which are a lien prior to the time such original or subsequent
  map is offered to be filed, whether assessed against the entire tract of
  land  or against any lot or other part of such land, have been paid, and
  a certificate of the county director of real property tax services  that
  the  fee  authorized  by section five hundred three of the real property
  tax law, if any, has been paid and the county clerk shall not  file  any
  such  map  without  such  endorsements or certificates. All of such maps
  shall be placed and kept, by some suitable method, in consecutive  order
  and  shall  be  consecutively  numbered in the order of their filing and
  shall be indexed under the initial letters of all  substantives  in  the
  title of the subdivision.
    4.  A  failure  to  file any such map as required by the provisions of
  this section shall subject the owner of  such  subdivision,  or  of  the
  unsold lots therein, to a penalty to the people of the state of not less
  than  twenty-five  dollars  and  not more than three hundred dollars for
  each and every lot therein sold and conveyed by or for such owner  prior
  to the due filing of such map.
    Such penalty shall be recovered in an action brought by the city, town
  or village in which the subdivision or part thereof is located.
    5.  In  case the lands sought to be shown upon the subdivision map are
  contiguous to the navigable waters of the state  and  have  frontage  on
  such  waters, such map shall show the extension of the littoral property
  line or lines of such lots, plots,  blocks,  sites  or  units  from  the
  intersection  of  said  line or lines with the high water mark into said
  navigable waters of the state. Such map shall show  sufficient  data  to
  define  the  location of the riparian/littoral area associated with such
  lots, plots, blocks, sites or units.
    6. All moneys recovered as penalties for the violation of this section
  by town justices shall be paid to the state  comptroller  in  accordance
  with  the provisions of section twenty-seven of the town law, and moneys
  so recovered by village justices shall be paid to the state  comptroller
  in  accordance  with the provisions of section 4-410 of the village law.
  The state  comptroller  shall  retain  one-third  of  such  penalty  and
  transmit one-third to the town or village in which the remitting town or
  village  justice  is  located to be credited to the general fund of such
  town or village. The state comptroller shall also send to the county  in
  which  the  property is located one-third of such penalty to be credited
  to the general fund of the county.
    7. Except in a city with a population of  one  million  or  more,  all
  moneys  recovered  as  penalties  for the violation of this section by a
  city court shall be paid to the chief fiscal officer of the city  within
  thirty  days  of  receipt  by  the city court. Such chief fiscal officer
  shall send one-third of such penalty recovered to the state  comptroller
  and  one-third  of  such  funds  to  the general fund of the county. The
  balance shall be credited to the general fund of the city.


§  334-a.  Filing  of  subdivision  maps in Nassau county; penalty for
  non-filing. 1. It shall be the duty  of  every  person  or  corporation,
  excepting  church  cemetery  corporations attached to a religious parish
  within the county of Nassau, who, as owner or  agent  of  real  property
  situated  in the county of Nassau, subdivides the same into lots, plots,
  blocks, sites, or units with or without  streets,  for  the  purpose  of
  offering  such  lots,  plots,  blocks,  sites,  or units for sale to the
  public, regardless of whether they are offered or conveyed by lot,  plot
  or   block  designations,  units  (including  shares  in  a  cooperative
  corporation), or by metes and bounds, prior  to  the  offering  of  such
  lots,  plots,  blocks,  sites  or units for sale, to file or cause to be
  filed in the office of the clerk of Nassau county a map or maps of  such
  real property, subject to the following exceptions:
    (a)  where  real  property is subdivided into not more than four lots,
  plots, blocks, sites or units that conform to  the  applicable  planning
  and  zoning  regulations  or ordinances of the city, town or village, as
  the case may be, and such subdivision does not involve the laying out of
  a street or the extension of a previously laid out street, the owner  or
  agent  may  make  written  application  to  the  planning  commission or
  planning authorities having jurisdiction for  a  waiver  of  the  filing
  requirements  hereunder  upon forms supplied by the appropriate planning
  commission. Such a waiver may be granted by such planning commission  or
  planning  authorities after determining that such subdivision plat is in
  compliance  with  this  section  and  with  the  zoning   and   planning
  regulations  of  the city, town or village, as the case may be, in which
  the property is located. The request for a waiver shall  be  acted  upon
  without  a  public  hearing  within fifteen days after the filing of the
  application unless such period shall have been extended  by  consent  of
  the  applicant.  Where real property is capable of being subdivided into
  more than four lots, plots, blocks, sites or units that conform  to  the
  applicable  planning  and  zoning regulations or ordinances of the city,
  town or village, as the case may  be,  and  such  subdivision  does  not
  involve the laying out of a street or the extension of a previously laid
  out  street,  the  planning  commission  or  planning authorities having
  jurisdiction may, in the sole discretion of such planning commission  or
  planning authorities deny such waiver application and require the filing
  in  the  office of the clerk of Nassau county a map or maps of such real
  property, subject to appropriate conditions as in the judgment  of  such
  planning  commission  or  planning  authorities  as are requisite in the
  interest of the public health, safety and general welfare; or
    (b) where a subdivision map has been filed prior to  January  twelfth,
  nineteen hundred forty-five, and alterations made thereon do not involve
  any  change,  or extensions of previously laid out streets and where the
  only alterations are changes in lot boundaries which are made solely for
  the purpose of adhering to applicable zoning regulations, it  shall  not
  be necessary to file such altered map or obtain a waiver therefor; or
    (c)  where  there is a conversion of an existing structure into units,
  which structure: (1) was in existence  and  legally  occupied  prior  to
  August fifth, nineteen hundred eighty-seven; and (2) where title to said
  units  is  to  be  held  in  a condominium, cooperative or mixed form of
  ownership; and (3) the use thereof is in compliance with the zoning  and
  planning  regulations  of the city, town or village, as the case may be,
  in which the structure is located.
    As used in this section, the term "units" shall include space used  or
  to  be  used  for  either  residential,  commercial,  mixed or other use
  whether title is held in fee  simple,  a  condominium,  cooperative,  or
  mixed  form  of  ownership. It shall be unlawful, after a map or maps of
  such property has been filed, to subdivide said  property  in  a  manner
  other  than  as  shown  on said map unless said map has been amended and
  approved in accordance with the provisions of subdivision  six  of  this
  section.
    2. Such map or maps must be thirty-six inches by forty-eight inches or
  less  in  size,  drawn with pen and ink upon tracing cloth or printed on
  mylar upon a scale of not more than one hundred feet  to  the  inch  and
  oriented  with  the  north point at the top of the map. At no time shall
  the north point vary more than  twenty  degrees  east  or  west  of  the
  perpendicular border.
    3. In case the lands sought to be shown upon the map are too extensive
  to  be shown upon a map thirty-six inches by forty-eight inches in size,
  then a key map thirty-six inches by forty-eight inches  in  size,  drawn
  upon a reduced scale, but without detail, showing the entire quantity of
  land,  subdivided into units embracing the entire map, shall be made and
  filed, and each subdivision or unit shall be shown upon a separate map.
    4. Said map shall set forth the courses,  measurements  and  adjoining
  property  owners  with sufficient definiteness to determine the location
  of said property, and upon each map shall appear the name of the  record
  owner  and  the  name of the subdivision as stated by the owner and said
  name shall be approved by the county clerk as a name not so  similar  to
  the  name  appearing  upon  any  filed  subdivision map as to deceive or
  mislead the public as to the identity of such subdivision.
    5. Upon each and every of said maps shall appear the name or names  of
  the  town or towns, city or cities, incorporated village or incorporated
  villages in which said lands are located wholly or in part, and endorsed
  thereon shall be a certificate of the licensed land surveyor who made or
  caused the said map to be made, certifying that the  map  or  maps  were
  made  from  an  actual  survey  of the property that was performed by or
  under the direction of said licensed land surveyor and the date  of  the
  completion  of  the  survey.  Said certificate shall state that stone or
  concrete monuments have been set at not less than two corners  of  every
  street  intersection as indicated on such map or maps and that the lands
  shown thereon have been monumented in a manner to indicate the  distance
  from  the nearest established street, avenue, road or highway, provided,
  however, that where the planning  board  or  other  governmental  agency
  having  jurisdiction  over  the  approval  of said maps has required the
  subdivider  to  deposit  with  the  town  or  local  governing  body   a
  performance  bond  or bonds to secure the installation and completion of
  all site improvements, including setting stone or concrete monuments  in
  the streets as aforesaid, and simultaneously with the filing of said map
  the  subdivider files with the county clerk a written certification from
  the town or local governing body that such bond or bonds have been  duly
  deposited and accepted by the town or local governing body and that said
  bond  or  bonds  expressly  include  the  setting  of  stone or concrete
  monuments as aforesaid, the said surveyor's certificate may  state  that
  stone  or concrete monuments will be set at not less than two corners of
  every street intersection as indicated on such map  upon  completion  of
  the installation of said streets and that the surveyor shall execute and
  deliver  a  further  written  certification  of  the  completion of such
  monumentation to both the county clerk and the town or  local  governing
  body  prior  to  and  as a condition for the release of said performance
  bond or bonds.
    6. Before such filing each and every of said maps shall be approved by
  the planning commission or planning commissions having  jurisdiction  in
  the area embraced within said maps in accordance with the regulations of
  such  planning  commission  or  planning commissions and the approval of
  such planning commission  or  planning  commissions  shall  be  endorsed
  thereon.
    6-a.  Before  such  filing  each  and  every  of  said maps shall have
  endorsed thereon the consent to such filing of the  mortgagees  of  such
  real property.
    7. The planning commission or planning authorities having jurisdiction
  shall not approve any such map until the commissioner of public works of
  Nassau  county  has  endorsed  thereon  a statement that he has approved
  plans for grades of the streets, avenues, roads  or  highways  shown  on
  such map, and the drainage thereof. The commissioner of public works may
  require that separate and distinct plans for the grading and drainage be
  prepared.   Such   plans  shall  show  sufficient  data  to  enable  the
  commissioner of public works to determine the adequacy thereof.  He  may
  require  any changes in grades or plans which he deems necessary to make
  such grades or plans conform with  any  general  or  comprehensive  plan
  adopted  for the county, or to serve the best interests of the county as
  a whole. Upon his approval of plans for the grades and drainage for  the
  streets,  avenues,  roads or highways shown on said map he shall endorse
  such approval on the plans submitted to him, or as they shall have  been
  revised,  and  shall  file  same  in  his office, and shall file a print
  thereof in the office of each planning authority having jurisdiction. He
  shall further endorse on the map submitted to the planning authority for
  approval a statement that he has approved grades and  drainage  for  the
  streets,  avenues,  roads  or highways shown thereon, in accordance with
  detailed plans on file in his office.
    8. At the time of filing such map with the county clerk an abstract of
  title and tax search of all of the property shown on said  map  together
  with a certificate of title, certifying to the county of Nassau the name
  or names of the owner or owners of said property together with all liens
  thereon, shall be delivered to the county clerk and filed in his office.
  Such  abstract  and  search  shall  cover  a period of not less than the
  twenty years immediately preceding the date of the certificate and  such
  certificate  shall  be  made  by  a  title company duly incorporated and
  authorized to transact business in the state of New  York  or  a  person
  duly  authorized  to  certify  titles under the laws of the state of New
  York. In the event the title to said property has been  duly  registered
  pursuant to the provisions of the real property law for the registration
  of  titles  to  real  property,  that  fact  shall be set forth upon the
  original map together with the number of the certificate of the title so
  registered and an index of such  abstracts  and  registrations  made  to
  clearly  indicate the maps to which they refer and the abstract of title
  and certificate of title above referred to shall not be required. In the
  case of a tax title, the fee title for a period of at least twenty years
  prior to the date of the tax sale under which tax title is claimed  must
  be submitted as a part of the abstract.
    9.  Every  such map, whether intended as an original subdivision or as
  an alteration of a prior subdivision in such county, shall have endorsed
  thereon at the time such map is offered to be filed the certificates  of
  the county treasurer and the receiver of taxes of each town and city and
  the tax collecting officer of each incorporated village within which any
  part  of the tract of land shown on said map or maps is located, or of a
  title company authorized to transact business in the state of  New  York
  stating that all taxes and assessments which are liens prior to the time
  such original or subsequent map is offered to be filed, whether assessed
  against  the  entire  tract  of land or against any lot or other part of
  said land, shown on the tax search required to be filed with the  county
  clerk, have been paid.
    10.  At  the  time  of  the  filing  of  such  map there shall also be
  furnished to the county clerk a copy of such map, prepared upon  tracing
  cloth  by  such  process  as  he  shall  prescribe,  which shall be duly
  certified by him to be a true copy of the original and  which  shall  be
  forwarded by him to the board of assessors of the county.
    11.  The  clerk of the county of Nassau upon receiving such maps shall
  file them by some suitable method in consecutive order and they shall be
  consecutively numbered in the order of  filing  and  indexed  under  the
  initial letters of all substantives in the titles.
    12.  The fee of the county clerk for receiving and filing each of said
  separate maps or sheets and indexing the same shall be five dollars, and
  an additional fee for every block created, which fee shall be  the  same
  as  the  additional fee provided for block indexing by the Nassau county
  administrative code.
    13. Failure to file said map or maps as required by the provisions  of
  this  section,  shall  subject  the  owner of such lands shown upon such
  maps, or of unsold lots, plots or units thereon, to  a  penalty  to  the
  people  of  the  state  of New York of five hundred dollars for each and
  every lot, plot or unit thereon subdivided, sold or conveyed by  or  for
  such owner prior to the due filing of such map or maps.
    14. Whenever at least two years have elapsed since the filing of a map
  of  the  subdivision  of  any  tract of land into lots, plots, blocks or
  sites, with or without opened or  proposed  roads,  the  owner  of  such
  tract,  or  of any part thereof having an area equivalent to that of any
  two or more contiguous lots or an area of not less than  one-half  acre,
  may  abandon  and  cancel  the  subdivision  of the property so owned by
  recording in the office of the county clerk  a  written  certificate  of
  abandonment,  duly  executed  and  acknowledged,  which  shall contain a
  description of the property to be abandoned, the complete title or  name
  of  the  map,  the  filing  date and file number thereof, except that no
  opened or proposed streets, other than those entirely within the  bounds
  of  the  property  to  be  abandoned,  or the area within such bounds of
  streets which as laid out on said map come to  a  dead-end  within  such
  bounds, shall be abandoned unless each owner of a lot or interest in the
  subdivision consents to the abandonment thereof by instrument in writing
  duly  executed,  acknowledged  and  recorded  with  the  certificate  of
  abandonment; provided, however, that whenever at least twenty years have
  elapsed since the filing of said map, the owner of the  property  to  be
  abandoned  may,  without  such  consent, abandon any streets or portions
  thereof shown on said map  and  which  are  within  the  bounds  of  the
  property to be abandoned if such streets or portions thereof are neither
  opened,  nor  public highways, nor used by the public, nor necessary for
  the use of owners, occupants or any other persons having an interest  in
  any  part  of the subdivision; but nothing herein shall prevent an owner
  using or a seller of land from conveying part of a  lot,  plot  or  site
  separately  or  together with an adjoining lot, plot or site, subject to
  the provisions of local zoning ordinances. Whenever  there  is  on  file
  more than one map of the property to be abandoned, such property must be
  abandoned  in the manner herein provided as to each of such maps. A copy
  of each certificate of abandonment  must  be  filed  with  the  assessor
  and/or  board  of assessors of each town and village wherein any portion
  of the property to be abandoned is  situated,  and  the  endorsement  of
  approval  by  each  such  assessor  and/or  board  of  assessors must be
  endorsed on the original of each certificate  presented  to  the  county
  clerk  for  recording.  An  abstract  of  title  to  the  property to be
  abandoned covering a period of at least twenty years last  past,  and  a
  certificate  of the county treasurer of Nassau county to the effect that
  there are no unpaid tax liens against such property, must  be  submitted
  to  the  county clerk and be approved by him at the time the certificate
  of  abandonment  and  cancellation  is  offered  for   recording.   Said
  certificates  and abstracts shall be filed in the county clerk's office,
  a suitable index shall be kept of the same, and notice thereof shall  be
  endorsed  by  the  recording officer upon the map therein referred to at
  the  time  of  recording  the  certificate  of  abandonment.  Where  the
  endorsement  of  approval of the town or village assessor above referred
  to includes a recitation to the effect that the  municipality  has  duly
  adopted an urban renewal plan pursuant to article fifteen of the general
  municipal  law  which  plan  provides  for adequate street access to all
  properties within and adjacent to the planning area,  and  further  that
  the  property  to  be  abandoned  is  subject  to  said  plan,  and  its
  abandonment is required thereunder, the clerk shall  accept  and  record
  the  certificate of abandonment tendered therefor regardless of the area
  thereof, and notwithstanding that the property  to  be  abandoned  is  a
  portion  of  an  opened  or proposed street for which the consent to the
  abandonment thereof required in this subdivision has not been  obtained.
  Upon  the  abandonment  of  subdivided  property as herein provided such
  property shall, for all purposes, be regarded as a single tract of land.
  No abandonment of lot divisions shall be made under this section for the
  purpose of reviving or making effective any  other  subdivision  of  the
  same  tract  of land and no map may be reinstated as it was prior to the
  filing of any abandonment certificate. The fee of the county  clerk  for
  such  filing  and indexing each certificate and abstract therewith shall
  be ten dollars and shall be  paid  by  the  party  presenting  them  for
  filing.  Provided,  however, that the Nassau county board of supervisors
  shall have full authority to abandon any subdivision of property or  any
  portion  thereof  which  the  county of Nassau now owns or may hereafter
  acquire through the sale of tax liens, by causing to be filed  with  the
  county  clerk  of  Nassau  county,  a  certificate  of abandonment, duly
  executed by the said county board, without regard to any  of  the  other
  foregoing  requirements  of  this  section.  Nothing  contained  in this
  section shall be construed to prevent  the  filing  of  a  new  map  and
  certificate  of  a subdivision of real property in the manner prescribed
  herein, after, and in the area of,  a  subdivision  or  portion  thereof
  abandoned in accordance with the provisions of this section.


§  335.  Filing  of  maps  and  abandonment of subdivisions in Suffolk
  county; penalty for nonfiling. 1. It shall be the duty of  every  person
  or  corporation,  excepting church cemetery organizations, attached to a
  religious parish within the county of Suffolk, who  as  owner  or  agent
  subdivides  real  property in Suffolk county into lots, plots, blocks or
  sites, with or without streets, for the purpose of offering  such  lots,
  plots,  blocks  or  sites for sale to the public, regardless of how they
  are conveyed, to file or cause to be filed in the office of  the  county
  clerk of Suffolk county a map thereof together with a certificate of the
  surveyor  endorsed  on the face of such map certifying same to have been
  made from an actual survey of the property  that  was  performed  by  or
  under  the  direction of said surveyor and the date of the completion of
  the  survey.  Said  certificate  shall  state  that  stone  or  concrete
  monuments  have  been  set  at not less than two corners of every street
  intersection as indicated on such map, provided, however, that where the
  planning board or other governmental agency having jurisdiction over the
  approval of said maps has required the subdivider to  deposit  with  the
  town  or  local governing body a performance bond or bonds to secure the
  installation and completion of all site improvements, including  setting
  stone   or   concrete   monuments  in  the  streets  as  aforesaid,  and
  simultaneously with the filing of said map the subdivider files with the
  county clerk a written certification from the town  or  local  governing
  body  that  such  bond or bonds have been duly deposited and accepted by
  the town or local governing body and that said bond or  bonds  expressly
  include  the  setting  of  stone or concrete monuments as aforesaid, the
  said surveyor's certificate may state that stone or  concrete  monuments
  will be set at not less than two corners of every street intersection as
  indicated  on  such  map  upon  completion  of  the installation of said
  streets and that the  surveyor  shall  execute  and  deliver  a  further
  written  certification  of  the completion of such monumentation to both
  the county clerk and the town or local governing body prior to and as  a
  condition  for  the  release of said performance bond or bonds. All lots
  and blocks on such map shall be numbered consecutively. Said  map  shall
  set  forth  the courses, measurements and adjoining property owners with
  sufficient definiteness to determine the location of said  property  and
  the  name  of  the  subdivision  as  stated by the owner. Said name must
  differ from any name already filed with the county  clerk  and  must  be
  approved  by  the  county clerk before the acceptance of the map. At the
  time of the filing of such map there shall  also  be  furnished  to  the
  county  clerk  two copies of such map for each town and village in which
  any portion of the mapped property is located. Such copies shall be duly
  certified by him to be true copies of the  original  and  one  certified
  copy shall be forwarded by said county clerk to the assessor or board of
  assessors,  as  the  case  may  be, of each town or village in which any
  portion of said property is located. At the time of filing such map with
  the county clerk an abstract of title of all of the  property  shown  on
  said  map  which  shall cover a period of not less than the twenty years
  last past the date  it  is  submitted,  certified  by  an  attorney  and
  counselor  at  law  of  the  state  of  New  York,  a title company duly
  incorporated and authorized to transact business in  the  state  of  New
  York  or  a  competent  searcher  of  titles, shall be presented to said
  county clerk, and be filed in his  office,  unless  the  title  to  said
  property has been duly registered pursuant to the provisions of the real
  property  law  for the registration of titles to real property, in which
  case this fact shall be set forth upon the original  map  together  with
  the  number  of  the certificate of the title so registered. An index of
  such abstracts and registrations shall be maintained to clearly indicate
  the maps to which they refer. In the case of a tax title, the fee  title
  for  a period of at least twenty years prior to the date of the tax sale
  under which title is  claimed  must  be  submitted  as  a  part  of  the
  abstract.  A key map, made to the scale of six hundred feet to one inch,
  must appear on all maps submitted and must show one or more monuments in
  the  tract  definitely  tied  to  a given point or a monument set at the
  point of the intersection of the side lines (as prolonged, if there is a
  curve) of two established highways; said point or monument shall be that
  which is nearest the  proposed  subdivision  and  shall  not  require  a
  measurement  to be made across any portion of an established highway. No
  re-mapping of subdivided property will  be  accepted  for  filing  until
  there  has been filed with the county clerk a certificate of abandonment
  and cancellation of the original  map  or  the  portion  thereof  to  be
  abandoned  and  cancelled in accordance with the provisions of this act.
  Before a map will be eligible for filing, a certificate  of  the  county
  treasurer  of Suffolk county or the report of a tax search by a licensed
  title company must be submitted by the  party  presenting  the  map  for
  filing as a part of the abstract of title showing the payment in full of
  all taxes due and payable at the date of filing. Such maps and abstracts
  of title shall be filed as aforesaid and a copy of said map filed in the
  office  of  the  clerk of each town or village where any portion of said
  property is located prior to the offering for sale  of  any  lot,  plot,
  block  or  site  thereon.  All  such  maps must be printed or drawn upon
  tracing cloth or linen or printed on mylar and must  be  of  a  standard
  size  of eighteen inches by twenty inches or thirty-six inches by twenty
  inches and the original of such maps filed in said county clerk's office
  shall be placed and kept by some suitable method in  consecutive  order,
  be  consecutively  numbered  in the order of filing and shall be indexed
  under the initial letters of all of the substantives in the title of the
  subdivision. However, he may  maintain  a  record  of  such  maps  in  a
  microfilm  format  provided  he  supplies facilities for displaying said
  maps through projection with microfilm to the aforesaid standard  sizes.
  The  fee  of  the  county clerk for such filing, certifying and indexing
  each  map  and  copy  thereof,  and  abstract  of  title  therewith  and
  forwarding  copies of said map to the assessors, boards of assessors and
  clerks of the towns and villages where the property therein described is
  located, shall be ten dollars and be paid by the party  presenting  them
  for  filing.  Failure to file any such map as required by the provisions
  of this section shall subject the owner of such subdivision  or  of  the
  unsold lots therein, to a penalty to the people of the state of New York
  of  two  hundred  fifty  dollars for each and every lot therein sold and
  conveyed by or for such owner prior to the due filing of  such  map  and
  abstract of title as aforesaid. The requirements as provided for in this
  section  may  be  applied  to  the  filing of each and every kind of map
  submitted for filing which is not a subdivision map of real property, at
  the discretion of the county clerk, and the filing fee  of  ten  dollars
  shall be paid for the filing of any non-subdivision map so submitted.
    2.  Every  such  subdivision  map  of  property in any of the towns of
  Suffolk county located wholly or partly outside an incorporated  village
  in  such  towns,  shall,  before  the  filing  thereof,  as hereinbefore
  provided, have indorsed on the face thereof in writing the  approval  of
  the  planning  board  of such towns, or in the towns not having planning
  boards, the approval of the town board. Likewise, every such subdivision
  map of property located wholly or partly within an incorporated village,
  shall before the filing thereof, as hereinbefore provided, have endorsed
  on the face thereof in writing the approval of  the  planning  board  of
  such  village, or in a village not having a planning board, the approval
  of the board of trustees. In addition, every  such  subdivision  map  of
  property  in  any of the towns of the county of Suffolk, whether located
  wholly or partly, inside or outside, an  incorporated  village  in  such
  towns,  shall  before the filing thereof, as hereinbefore provided, have
  endorsed on the face thereof in  writing  the  approval  of  the  county
  department of health.
    3.  Whenever at least two years have elapsed since the filing of a map
  of the subdivision of any tract of land  into  lots,  plots,  blocks  or
  sites,  with  or  without  opened  or  proposed roads, the owner of such
  tract, or of any part thereof, may abandon and cancel the subdivision of
  the property so owned by recording in the office of the county  clerk  a
  written  certificate  of  abandonment,  duly  executed and acknowledged,
  which shall contain a description of the property to be  abandoned,  the
  complete  title  or  name  of  the  map, the filing date and file number
  thereof, except that no opened or proposed  streets,  other  than  those
  entirely  within the bounds of the property to be abandoned, or the area
  within such bounds of streets which as laid out on said map  come  to  a
  dead-end  within  such bounds, shall be abandoned unless each owner of a
  lot or interest in the subdivision consents to the  abandonment  thereof
  by  instrument  in writing duly executed, acknowledged and recorded with
  the certificate of abandonment;  provided,  however,  that  whenever  at
  least  twenty years have elapsed since the filing of said map, the owner
  of the property to be abandoned may, without such consent,  abandon  any
  streets  or  portions thereof shown on said map and which are within the
  bounds of the property to be  abandoned  if  such  streets  or  portions
  thereof are neither opened, nor public highways, nor used by the public,
  nor  necessary  for  the  use  of owners, occupants or any other persons
  having an interest in any part of the subdivision;  but  nothing  herein
  shall  prevent an owner using or a seller of land from conveying part of
  a lot, plot or site separately or together with an adjoining  lot,  plot
  or  site, subject to the provisions of local zoning ordinances. Whenever
  there is on file more than one map of the property to be abandoned, such
  property must be abandoned in the manner herein provided as to  each  of
  such maps.  A copy of each certificate of abandonment must be filed with
  the  assessor and/or board of assessors of each town and village wherein
  any portion of the  property  to  be  abandoned  is  situated,  and  the
  endorsement  of approval by each such assessor and/or board of assessors
  must be endorsed on the original of each certificate  presented  to  the
  county  clerk  for recording. An abstract of title to the property to be
  abandoned covering a period of at least twenty years last  past,  and  a
  certificate of the county treasurer of Suffolk county to the effect that
  there  are  no unpaid tax liens against such property, must be submitted
  to the county clerk and be approved by him at the time  the  certificate
  of   abandonment   and  cancellation  is  offered  for  recording.  Said
  certificates and abstracts shall be filed in the county clerk's  office,
  a  suitable index shall be kept of the same, and notice thereof shall be
  endorsed by the recording officer upon the map therein  referred  to  at
  the  time  of  recording  the  certificate  of  abandonment.  Where  the
  endorsement of approval of the town or village assessor  above  referred
  to  includes  a  recitation to the effect that the municipality has duly
  adopted an urban renewal plan pursuant to article fifteen of the general
  municipal law which plan provides for  adequate  street  access  to  all
  properties  within  and  adjacent to the planning area, and further that
  the  property  to  be  abandoned  is  subject  to  said  plan,  and  its
  abandonment  is  required  thereunder, the clerk shall accept and record
  the certificate of abandonment tendered therefor regardless of the  area
  thereof,  and  notwithstanding  that  the  property to be abandoned is a
  portion of an opened or proposed street for which  the  consent  to  the
  abandonment  thereof required in this subdivision has not been obtained.
  Upon the abandonment of subdivided  property  as  herein  provided  such
  property shall, for all purposes, be regarded as a single tract of land.
  No abandonment of lot divisions shall be made under this section for the
  purpose  of  reviving  or  making effective any other subdivision of the
  same  tract  of land and no map may be reinstated as it was prior to the
  filing of any abandonment certificate. The fee of the county  clerk  for
  such  filing  and indexing each certificate and abstract therewith shall
  be ten dollars and shall be  paid  by  the  party  presenting  them  for
  filing.  Provided, however, that the Suffolk county board of supervisors
  shall have full authority to abandon any subdivision of property or  any
  portion  thereof  which  the county of Suffolk now owns or may hereafter
  acquire through the sale of tax liens, by causing to be filed  with  the
  county  clerk  of  Suffolk  county,  a  certificate of abandonment, duly
  executed by the said county board, without regard to any  of  the  other
  foregoing  requirements  of  this  section.  Nothing  contained  in this
  section shall be construed to prevent  the  filing  of  a  new  map  and
  certificate  of  a subdivision of real property in the manner prescribed
  herein, after, and in the area of,  a  subdivision  or  portion  thereof
  abandoned in accordance with the provisions of this section.


§  335-a.  Easements  of necessity. The owner of any lot, plot, block,
  site or other parcel of real estate being a subdivision  or  part  of  a
  subdivision  of any larger parcel or parcels of real property shown upon
  a map of said parcel or parcels of real property and of its  subdivision
  or  subdivisions,  filed  in  the  office  of the county clerk or of the
  register of deeds of the county where the property is situated, prior to
  the sale or conveyance of such lot, plot, block, site or  other  parcel,
  or subdivision thereof by the seller thereof, upon which map any road or
  street  is  indicated  or  shown  as giving access to or egress from any
  public road or street to such lot, plot, block, site or other parcel  of
  real  estate  thereon  indicated or to any part thereof, sold or granted
  after such filing, and the owner of any lot, plot, block, site or  other
  parcel  of  real  estate, the conveyance whereof shall specifically give
  the right of access to or egress from the same by any  private  road  or
  street  over  lands  belonging to the maker of such conveyance and which
  road or street is described in such conveyance, may, when  necessary  to
  the  enjoyment  of  the lot, plot, block or site or other parcel of real
  estate so sold or conveyed and when the same is not bounded by a  public
  road,  lay,  beneath  the roads or streets indicated and shown upon such
  map or described in such conveyance as giving access to or  egress  from
  any  public  road  to  such  property  so sold or conveyed as aforesaid,
  wires, conduits, and water lines for the purpose of supplying  the  said
  property  with electric light, telephone, and water service. Such wires,
  conduits, or lines shall be laid only  on  condition  that  the  private
  roads or streets on which the owner has the right of access to or egress
  from  such  property  shall  be  restored as nearly as possible to their
  original condition and that the person or persons entitled to the fee of
  such private roads or streets or having an easement over the same  shall
  be compensated for actual damage occasioned by the laying of such wires,
  conduits, or lines.
    Nothing  in this section shall be deemed to affect in any manner lands
  acquired by the city of New York for  the  purpose  of  construction  or
  development of its water supply system.


§ 335-b. Recording of solar energy easements. 1. Any easement obtained
  for the purpose of exposure of a solar energy device shall be created in
  writing  and  shall  be  subject to the same conveyancing and instrument
  recording requirements as other easements.
    2. Any instrument creating a solar energy easement shall include,  but
  the contents shall not be limited to:
    (a) The vertical and horizontal angles, expressed in degrees, at which
  the  solar energy easement extends over the real property subject to the
  solar energy easement.
    (b) Any terms or conditions or  both  under  which  the  solar  energy
  easement is granted or will be terminated.
    (c)  Any  provisions  for  compensation  of  the owner of the property
  benefiting from the solar energy easement in the event  of  interference
  with  the  enjoyment of the solar energy easement or compensation of the
  owner  of  the  property  subject  to  the  solar  energy  easement  for
  maintaining the solar energy easement.


§  336.  Effect  of  recording  demands  or requirements of noncitizen
  property custodian. The recording in any county  clerk's  or  register's
  office  of  a  demand  or  requirement  against  real property described
  therein, made by or on behalf of the noncitizen property custodian under
  and pursuant to the trading with the enemy act  adopted  by  the  United
  States  congress  and  approved  October  sixth,  nineteen  hundred  and
  seventeen, or any act amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto, or any
  executive order or proclamation issued in pursuance thereof,  when  duly
  indexed against the name of the person or corporation whose property has
  thereby  been demanded or required, shall have the same force and effect
  as the making of, delivery and recording of a deed of such real property
  or interest therein by such person or  corporation  to  said  noncitizen
  property  custodian.  All  recitals  contained  in  any  such  demand or
  requirement, and in any  deed  made  by  such  custodian  heretofore  or
  hereafter  recorded  of  all  facts  required or permitted by said acts,
  proclamations or executive orders to be  found  or  determined  by  said
  noncitizen  property  custodian,  and  all  recitals  of  conclusions or
  determinations  by  said  acts,  proclamations   or   executive   orders
  authorized  to  be  made by such individual, and all recitals of acts or
  things done by said custodian  or  agents  thereof  in  respect  to  the
  seizure  of  said  property shall be evidence of the facts, conclusions,
  determinations, acts and things so recited in any court of this state in
  any action or proceeding affecting the title to  or  ownership  of  such
  real  property.  Three  months  after  this section takes effect and the
  recording of the instrument containing such  recitals,  the  same  shall
  become   conclusive   evidence   of   all   such   facts,   conclusions,
  determinations, acts and things as are so recited therein in any  action
  in  any  court  affecting the title to or ownership of said land, unless
  said action shall have been commenced  before  the  expiration  of  such
  three months.


ARTICLE 9-A
                              SUBDIVIDED LANDS
  Section 337.   Definitions.
          337-a. Provisions governing sale or lease of subdivided lands.
          337-b. Offering statement; contents; prohibitions.
          337-c. Right to cancel.
          338.   Inspection   power   of  department  of  state;  unlawful
                   practices; penalties.
          339.   Filing fees.
          339-a. Rules and regulations.
          339-b. Powers of department.
          339-c. Action by department of state.


§  337. Definitions. As used in this article: 1. The words "subdivided
  lands" and "subdivision" mean vacant land or lands sold or leased on the
  installment plan or offered for sale or lease  on  such  plan  and  also
  vacant  land or lands situated outside the state of New York and sold or
  leased or offered for sale or lease on the installment plan or upon  any
  and all other plans, terms and conditions of sale or lease.
    2.  The  word  "subdivider"  shall  include every person, partnership,
  corporation, company or association who or  which  engages  directly  or
  through  an  agent  in  the business of selling, leasing or offering for
  sale or lease subdivided lands and subdivisions to the  public  in  this
  state.
    3.  The  words  "installment  plan"  mean  any  plan,  arrangement  or
  agreement pursuant to the terms, covenants and  conditions  whereof  the
  proposed  purchaser of vacant land or lands to be acquired amortizes the
  purchase price by periodic payments and whereby the conveyance of  title
  to  the  purchaser  of  such vacant land or lands is deferred until such
  time as all said periodic payments have been made and shall also include
  the provision in a plan, arrangement or agreement or lease  requiring  a
  consideration  from the lessee in addition to the periodic payments as a
  condition precedent to the conveyance of title to the lessee.
    4. The words "a lease of land or lands on the installment  plan"  mean
  and  include  a  plan,  arrangement or agreement whereunder the periodic
  payments made are designated as rent and upon  the  completion  of  such
  payments  the  lessee is entitled to a conveyance of title to the vacant
  land or lands leased.
    5. The words "fraudulent practice" or "fraudulent practices" mean  any
  device, scheme or artifice employed by a subdivider to defraud or obtain
  money  or  property  by  means  of any false pretense, representation or
  promise, or that a subdivider makes or attempts to  make  fictitious  or
  pretended  purchases,  sales  or  leases  of vacant land or lands to the
  public in this state, or engages  in  or  is  about  to  engage  in  any
  practice  or transaction or course of business relating to the purchase,
  sale or lease of  vacant  land  or  lands  which  is  fraudulent  or  in
  violation  of  law  and  which  has operated or which would operate as a
  fraud  upon  the  purchaser,  or  that  any  owner  or   subdivider   as
  hereinbefore  defined  has  sold or offered for sale or is attempting to
  sell or is offering for sale any vacant land or lands  in  violation  of
  the provisions of this article.


§  337-a.  Provisions governing sale or lease of subdivided lands.  No
  subdivider shall sell, lease, or offer for sale or lease to  the  public
  within   this  state,  as  principal,  broker  or  agent  or  otherwise,
  subdivided vacant lands or any  part  thereof,  unless  and  until  such
  subdivider  shall have caused to be filed in the department of state (a)
  an offering statement containing the information and  data  required  by
  section  three hundred thirty-seven-b of this article, (b) such data and
  information as the department may require as provided in  section  three
  hundred  thirty-nine-b of this article and (c) a statement subscribed by
  the subdivider and affirmed by  him  as  true  under  the  penalties  of
  perjury, containing:
    1. The name of such owner and subdivider,
    2.  The  address of the principal office of such owner and subdivider,
  wherever situated, and the address or addresses of the principal  office
  and all branch offices of the owner and subdivider within this state, if
  any,
    3.  The  name  of  the  person,  partnership,  company, corporation or
  association who or which acquired a legal or equitable title to the land
  or lands for sale or lease and who or which will subdivide  vacant  land
  or  lands  offered  for  sale  or lease for the purpose of offering such
  subdivided vacant lands or any part thereof to the general public,
    4. If such owner and subdivider be an  individual  or  individuals,  a
  statement  of  their  respective  connections  during the preceding five
  years with any person, partnership, corporation, company or  association
  engaged  in  the business of selling or leasing subdivided vacant lands,
  and the description of the last project or projects in subdivided vacant
  lands, the whole or any part of which have been sold or offered for sale
  or lease by such owner and subdivider,
    5. If such owner and subdivider be a partnership, the names, residence
  and business addresses of the partners,  including  special  or  limited
  partners,  and  of  all other individuals participating as principals in
  the profits of such business, specifying as to each the  nature  of  his
  relation  to  such  business  and giving with respect to each all of the
  information required by subdivision four of this section to be given  by
  an owner and subdivider who is an individual,
    6.  If  such  owner  and  subdivider  be  other  than an individual or
  partnership, the name of the state  or  country  where  incorporated  or
  organized,  and  the  names,  residence  and  business  addresses of its
  principal officers, wherever located, and of  its  officers  and  branch
  managers in this state, specifying as to each the nature of his relation
  to such business, and giving with respect to each all of the information
  required by subdivision four of this section to be given by an owner and
  subdivider who is an individual,
    7.  A  statement  as to whether such owner and subdivider, or, if such
  owner and subdivider be other than an individual, whether  any  partner,
  principal,  officer,  director  or  branch  manager  thereof,  has  been
  convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction in any state  or  country
  of any criminal offense in connection with any transaction involving the
  sale  or  offer  for  sale  of subdivided lands, or has been enjoined or
  restrained by order of any court of competent jurisdiction from  selling
  or offering for sale subdivided vacant lands in any state or country, or
  continuing any practices in connection therewith,
    8. The complete description of the land offered for subdivision or any
  part  thereof  by lots, plots, blocks or sites, with or without streets,
  together with maps  certified  to  by  a  duly  licensed  land  surveyor
  accompanied  by  a  certificate attached thereto showing the date of the
  completion of the survey and of the making of the map and  the  name  of
  the  subdivision  for  the  purpose  of identification of the subdivided
  lands or any part thereof. Where subdivisions were surveyed  and  mapped
  prior  to  March first, nineteen hundred thirty-six, a certified copy of
  the map covering the property, on file in the office of the clerk of the
  county  wherein the property is located, shall be deemed compliance with
  the provisions herein.
    9. A search of the title to the land,  accompanied  by  a  certificate
  either  of an attorney and counselor at law duly licensed to practice in
  the state of New York, or a certificate from a duly  incorporated  title
  search  company  or  the certificate of an attorney and counselor at law
  duly licensed to practice in the state wherein the  lands  are  situated
  reciting  in  detail  all of the liens, encumbrances and clouds upon the
  title to such land, and which defects of title, if any, render the title
  to such land unmarketable,
    10. The provisions, covenants, terms and conditions upon which  it  is
  the  intention  of  the  owner  and  subdivider  to  sell  or lease such
  subdivided land accompanied by proposed forms of contracts  contemplated
  for execution and delivery upon the consummation of sales or leases,
    11.  Such  other and further data and information as the department of
  state  may,  in  its  discretion,  demand  to  be  executed  upon  forms
  prescribed by it for filing pursuant to the provisions of this article.


§  337-b. Offering statement; contents; prohibitions. 1. Contents. The
  offering statement shall contain  (a)  the  names,  addresses,  business
  background of the subdivider, and if such subdivider is a partnership or
  corporation, the names, addresses and business background of each of the
  partners,  officers  and  principal  stockholders,  the  nature of their
  fiduciary relationship and their financial relationship,  past,  present
  and  future, to the subdivider; (b) a duly certified financial statement
  of the assets and liabilities of the subdivider, as of a date  not  more
  than three months prior to the date of the filing, in such detail as the
  department  may  require;  (c) a description of the subdivision and each
  unit or lot into which it has or will be divided, in such detail as  the
  department  may  require;  (d)  the  material terms of any encumbrances,
  liens and restrictions upon the subdivision and each such unit  or  lot;
  (e)  data  and  information  concerning improvements, including streets,
  water supply and sewerage  disposal  facilities,  in  existence  on  the
  subdivision,   and   the   estimated   cost,   date  of  completion  and
  responsibility for construction of improvements to  be  made  which  are
  referred to in connection with the sale or lease or offering for sale or
  lease  of  the  subdivision  or any unit or lot thereon; (f) each of the
  terms and conditions under which each such unit or lot  is  offered  for
  sale; and (g) such additional data and information as the department may
  require  as being necessary or appropriate in the public interest or for
  the protection of purchasers or lessees.
    2. There may be  omitted  from  any  offering  statement  any  of  the
  information  required  under  subdivision  one of this section which the
  department may by rules and regulations designate as not being necessary
  or  appropriate  in  the  public  interest  or  for  the  protection  of
  purchasers.
    3. Limitations. No offer to sell or lease subdivided lands by means of
  advertisements  in periodicals or newspapers, or on television or radio,
  or by motion picture  or  otherwise  shall  be  made  unless  each  such
  advertisement  contains reference to the fact that an offering statement
  has been filed with the department and that a copy of such statement  is
  available, upon request, from the subdivider.
    4.  Except  as provided in subdivision three of this section, no offer
  of sale or lease of subdivided lands shall be made unless such offer  is
  accompanied  by  a copy of the current offering statement filed pursuant
  to this article.
    5. The first page of the  offering  statement  and  the  face  of  all
  advertising  and  literature  employed in the sale or lease or offer for
  sale or lease of subdivided lands shall contain a  statement  in  easily
  readable  print,  that the filing of the verified statement and offering
  statement with the department of state does not constitute  approval  of
  the  sale or lease or offer for sale or lease by the department of state
  or any officer thereof, or that the department of state has in  any  way
  passed upon the merits of such offering.
    6.  No  sale  or  lease  of  subdivided  lands  shall  be  made unless
  accompanied or preceded by the delivery to the prospective purchaser  of
  an offering statement complying with the provisions of this section.
    7.  No  change  or  amendment  of  an offering statement shall be made
  unless a copy of such change or amendment has first been filed with  the
  department.
    8.  The  subdivider,  within thirty days after the anniversary date of
  the filing of an offering statement, shall file with the  department  of
  state  a  new  current  and  up-to-date offering statement setting forth
  therein all changes which have taken place  during  the  preceding  year
  with  respect  to  any  and  all data and information required to be set
  forth in such offering statement.  Only  a  current  offering  statement
  shall  be  used  to  sell  or lease or offer to sell or lease any of the
  subdivided lands.
    9.  The  offering  statement  shall include the following statement in
  easily readable capital letters of not less than nine-point type:   "THE
  OFFEROR  HAS FILED ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ON THIS LAND OFFERING WITH THE
  DEPARTMENT OF STATE PURSUANT TO SECTION 337-A OF THE REAL PROPERTY  LAW.
  THIS INFORMATION INCLUDES A DESCRIPTION AND MAPS OF THE PROPERTIES BEING
  OFFERED;  A  CERTIFICATE  STATING  IN  DETAIL ALL LIENS, ENCUMBRANCES OR
  CLOUDS UPON THE TITLE TO THE LAND; AND STATEMENTS OF ANY PRIOR  CRIMINAL
  CONVICTIONS  OF  THE  PRINCIPALS MAKING THIS OFFERING WHICH INVOLVED THE
  SALE OR  OFFERING  FOR  SALE  OF  SUBDIVIDED  LANDS.  INFORMATION  FILED
  PURSUANT TO SECTION 337-A OF THE REAL PROPERTY LAW IS AVAILABLE PURSUANT
  TO  THE  FREEDOM  OF INFORMATION LAW FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE AT THE
  FOLLOWING ADDRESS: THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE,  SUBDIVIDED  LANDS  SECTION,
  ALBANY, NEW YORK 12231-0001."


§  337-c.   Right to cancel.  Every contract or agreement for the sale
  or lease of subdivided lands shall expressly grant to the  purchaser  or
  lessee  the  absolute  right  to cancel the contract or agreement within
  seven days following the signing of the contract or agreement, by giving
  the subdivider notice of cancellation  at  the  address  listed  in  the
  offering  statement  filed by the subdivider, by registered or certified
  mail return receipt requested.  Within ten days of  receipt  of  such  a
  notice  of  cancellation the subdivider shall return to the purchaser or
  lessee all consideration paid or delivered on account of  such  contract
  or agreement.


§  338.  Inspection  power of department of state; unlawful practices;
  penalties. 1. The department of state may cause an investigation and  an
  inspection  to  be made of any subdivision of vacant land proposed to be
  offered for sale or lease in this state pursuant to this article and may
  make a report of its findings thereon.
    2. Where an inspection is to be made  of  subdivided  lands,  situated
  outside  of  the  state  of  New York and being offered for sale in this
  state, the statement required by section  three  hundred  thirty-seven-a
  shall  be  accompanied  by the filing fee and in addition there shall be
  remitted to the department of state an amount equivalent to the cost  of
  travel  from  New  York  to  the  location of the project and return, as
  estimated by the department of state, and a further amount estimated  to
  be necessary to cover the additional expenses of such inspection, not to
  exceed  fifteen  dollars a day, for each day consumed in the examination
  of the project.
    3. It shall be unlawful for the subdivider or his  or  its  agent,  to
  change  the  financial  structure  of such offering after the submission
  thereof  to  the  department  of  state  without  first  notifying   the
  department in writing of such intention.
    4.  Where the vacant lands to be subdivided shall be subject to a lien
  or encumbrance securing or evidencing the payment of  money  other  than
  taxes  or  assessments levied by public authority, or where the interest
  of the owner and subdivider or his or its agent be held under option  or
  contract  of  purchase  or  in  trust,  it shall be unlawful to sell any
  vacant  land  in  such  subdivision  unless  provision  in  such   lien,
  encumbrance,  option,  contract  or  trust agreement, or in an agreement
  supplementary thereto, enables the vendor to convey valid title to  each
  parcel  so  sold  or  leased  free  of  such  lien, encumbrance, option,
  contract or  trust  agreement,  upon  completion  of  all  payments  and
  performance  of  all  the  terms  and conditions required to be made and
  performed  by  the  vendee  under  the  agreement  of  sale.  Where  the
  consideration  price  for  the lot or lots sold has been amortized to an
  extent that the balance due and owing thereunder  equals  in  an  amount
  required   to   release  such  lot  or  lots  from  any  existing  lien,
  encumbrance, tax, assessment, option contract or  first  agreement,  and
  the initial cost for said vacant land has not been paid for by the owner
  or  subdivider, that in such event all moneys thereafter received by the
  owner or subdivider from the purchaser of said  lot  or  lots  shall  be
  segregated  and kept in a separate account and be impressed with a trust
  which shall be applied towards the clearance of title to the vacant land
  thereafter intended to be conveyed to  the  purchaser.    After  default
  shall  have  occurred in the payment of any tax or assessment levied and
  assessed against the premises or after default shall have occurred under
  and pursuant to the terms of any  contract,  mortgage  lien,  charge  or
  encumbrance,  all  moneys  received  by the owner or subdivider from the
  purchaser of said lot or lots shall be segregated and kept in a separate
  account and be impressed with a trust which shall be applied towards the
  clearance of title to the vacant land thereafter intended to be conveyed
  to the purchaser. Certified or verified copies of  documents  containing
  such provisions shall be filed with the department of state prior to the
  sale or lease or offer of sale or lease of any part of the subdivision.
    5.  (a)  Every  person,  officer,  director,  agent  or  employee of a
  company, partnership, association or corporation who or which  knowingly
  offers to sell or to lease, or sells or leases subdivided lands prior to
  the filing of the offering statement and the verified statement required
  by this article shall be guilty of a felony.
    (b)  Except  as  provided  in  subdivision  (a)  hereof, every person,
  officer,  director,  agent  or  employee  of  a  company,   partnership,
  corporation,  or  association who or which knowingly authorizes, directs
  or aids in the publication, advertisement, distribution  or  circulation
  of  any  device,  scheme  or artifice for obtaining money or property by
  means  of  any  false pretense, representation or promise concerning any
  vacant land or lands or subdivision thereof, offered for sale or  lease,
  and  every  person,  officer,  director, agent or employee of a company,
  partnership, corporation or association who or which shall have made  or
  attempts to make in the state fictitious or pretended purchases or sales
  of  vacant  lands,  or  who,  in any other respect, wilfully violated or
  fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article, or knowingly
  omits or neglects to obey, observe or comply  with  any  order,  permit,
  decision,  demand  or  requirement  of the department of state under the
  provisions of this article,  is  guilty  of  a  misdemeanor  and,  if  a
  licensee  under  article  twelve  (a) of this chapter, the department of
  state also may revoke or suspend his license in the manner  provided  in
  such  article. The commission of a single act prohibited by this article
  shall constitute a violation thereof. All courts  of  special  sessions,
  within  their  respective territorial jurisdiction, are hereby empowered
  to hear, try, and determine such violations without indictment,  and  to
  impose the punishments prescribed by law therefor.
    6.  It  shall  be  the  duty  of the attorney-general to prosecute all
  violations of the provisions of this article; such prosecutions  may  be
  instituted  upon  the  written  request  or  demand of the department of
  state.  In all criminal proceedings, the attorney-general may appear  in
  person or by his deputy before any court of record or any grand jury and
  exercise  all  the  powers and perform all the duties in respect of such
  actions or proceedings which the district attorney  would  otherwise  be
  authorized  or  required to exercise or perform; or the attorney-general
  may in his discretion transmit evidence, proof  and  information  as  to
  such offense to the district attorney of the county or counties in which
  the  alleged violation has occurred, and every district attorney to whom
  such evidence, proof and information is so transmitted  shall  forthwith
  proceed  to prosecute any corporation, company, association, or officer,
  manager or agent thereof, or  any  firm  or  person  charged  with  such
  violation.  In  any  such  proceeding,  wherein the attorney-general has
  appeared either in person or by deputy, the district attorney shall only
  exercise such powers and perform such duties as are required of  him  by
  the  attorney-general  or  the deputy attorney-general so appearing. The
  attorney-general shall,  upon  a  conviction  for  a  violation  of  any
  provision of this article, and within ten days thereafter, make and file
  with  the department of state a detailed report showing the date of such
  conviction, the name of the person convicted and the exact nature of the
  charge.
    7. Any false statement contained  in  any  statement  or  supplemental
  statement   filed   with   the  department  of  state  pursuant  to  the
  requirements of this article, or  in  any  affidavit  attached  thereto,
  shall constitute a violation of this article.
    8.  Any  person,  partnership,  corporation,  company  or  association
  representing in any manner that the state, the department of  state,  or
  any  officer thereof has recommended or acquiesced in the recommendation
  of the purchase of any subdivided lands offered for sale  or  lease,  in
  advertising  or  offering such subdivided lands for sale or lease, shall
  be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of  not  more  than  one
  thousand  dollars, or imprisonment for not more than one year or by both
  such fine and imprisonment.


§ 339. Filing fees. Each filing made pursuant to section three hundred
  thirty-seven-a  of  subdivided  lands  situated outside the state of New
  York shall be accompanied by a filing fee of seven hundred fifty dollars
  plus an additional fee of ten dollars for each  lot  to  be  offered  in
  excess of seventy-five lots.


§ 339-a. Rules and regulations. The department of state shall have the
  power  to adopt from time to time or amend such rules and regulations as
  it may deem necessary to carry out the provisions of this article.


§  339-b.  Powers  of  department.  The  department  of state may also
  require such other data and information as it may deem relevant and  may
  make  such  special  and  independent  investigations  as  it  may  deem
  necessary in connection with the administration  of  this  article.  The
  department of state by its examiner or other officer designated by it is
  empowered  to  subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance, examine them
  under oath before him or a magistrate, a court of record or a  judge  or
  justice  thereof and require the production of any books or papers which
  he deems relevant or material to the inquiry. Such power of subpoena and
  examination shall not abate or terminate by  reason  of  any  action  or
  proceeding  brought  by  the department of state under this article. The
  provisions for payment of witness fee and/or mileage do not apply to any
  officer, director or person in the employ of  any  person,  partnership,
  corporation,  company,  trust  or association whose conduct or practices
  are being investigated. A subpoena issued under this  section  shall  be
  regulated  by  the  civil  practice law and rules and, in addition, if a
  person subpoenaed to attend such inquiry fails to obey the command of  a
  subpoena  without  reasonable  cause,  or if a person in attendance upon
  such inquiry shall without reasonable cause refuse to be sworn or to  be
  examined  or  to  answer  a  question or to produce a book or paper when
  ordered so to do by the officer conducting such inquiry, or if a person,
  partnership, corporation, company, trust or association fails to perform
  any act required hereunder to be performed, he  shall  be  guilty  of  a
  misdemeanor.    It  shall  be  the  duty  of  all public officers, their
  deputies, assistants, subordinates, clerks or employees  and  all  other
  persons  to  render and furnish to the department of state, its examiner
  or  other  designated  officer  when  requested  all   information   and
  assistance  in  their  possession  or  within  their  power. Any officer
  participating in such inquiry who shall disclose  to  any  person  other
  than  the  secretary  of  state  the name of any witness examined or any
  other information obtained upon such inquiry except as directed  by  the
  secretary of state shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.


§  339-c. Action by department of state. 1. Whenever the department of
  state shall believe from evidence satisfactory to it that  a  subdivider
  has engaged in, is engaged or is about to engage in any of the practices
  or  transactions  heretofore referred to as fraudulent practices, it may
  have an action brought in the manner hereinafter provided  in  the  name
  and  on  behalf  of  the  people  of  the state of New York against such
  subdivider and any other person or persons theretofore concerned  in  or
  in  any  way participating in or about to participate in such fraudulent
  practices, to enjoin such subdivider and such other  person  or  persons
  from  continuing  such fraudulent practices or engaging therein or doing
  any act or acts in furtherance thereof or, if the  department  of  state
  should believe from such evidence that such subdivider has or is engaged
  in  any such fraudulent practice, it may have included in such action an
  application to enjoin permanently such subdivider and such other  person
  or  persons  as  may  have  been  or may be concerned with or in any way
  participating in such fraudulent practice, from selling or offering  for
  sale  to  the public within this state, as principal, owner, subdivider,
  broker or agent or otherwise, any vacant land or lands. In  said  action
  an order or a judgment may be entered awarding the relief applied for or
  so  much  thereof  as  the  court may deem proper. Upon a showing by the
  department of state in the application  brought  in  its  behalf  for  a
  preliminary  injunction hereunder that the defendant named in the action
  or an officer thereof has refused to be sworn or to be  examined  or  to
  answer a material question or to produce a book or paper relevant to the
  inquiry  when  duly  ordered  so  to  do  by  the  officer or judge duly
  conducting an inquiry into the subject matter forming the basis  of  the
  application for such preliminary injunction, such refusal shall be prima
  facie  proof  that  such  defendant is or has been engaged in fraudulent
  practices as set forth in such application and a preliminary  injunction
  may  issue  from  the  supreme  court without any further showing by the
  department of state.
    2. If the vacant land or lands  of  a  foreign  corporation,  company,
  association  or  non-resident  individual  are offered or advertised for
  sale within the  state  of  New  York  and  such  corporation,  company,
  association  or  non-resident  individual has not filed pursuant to laws
  heretofore or hereafter existing the designation of a person  upon  whom
  process  against  him  or  it  may  be  served or the designation of the
  secretary of state as such person pursuant to section two hundred ten of
  the general corporation  law  or  other  laws  heretofore  or  hereafter
  existing  or in lieu thereof, an instrument in writing duly acknowledged
  and filed in the office  of  the  secretary  of  state  designating  the
  secretary  of  state as the person upon whom may be served any subpoena,
  subpoena  duces  tecum  or  other  process  directed  to  such   foreign
  corporation,  company, association or non-resident individual and issued
  in any investigation, examination or proceeding pending or about  to  be
  instituted  under  and  pursuant  to  the  provisions of this article, a
  notice  may  be  served  upon  such  foreign  corporation,  company   or
  association,  or  upon  any  non-resident  officer  thereof,  or  upon a
  non-resident individual, by  mailing  the  same  in  a  securely  sealed
  postpaid  wrapper  addressed  to  such  foreign  corporation, company or
  association, or officer thereof, or non-resident individual, at  its  or
  his  last  known  place of business or residence, and may in such notice
  require that such foreign corporation, company or association,  or  such
  officer   thereof,   or   non-resident  individual,  furnish  a  written
  statement, verified as required in said notice, giving  the  information
  therein  specified relating to the vacant land or lands offered or to be
  offered in the state of New York by such foreign  corporation,  company,
  association or non-resident individual or, in the alternative, that such
  foreign  corporation,  company  or association, by its proper officer or
  officers,  or  such  non-resident  individual,  shall  appear  within  a
  reasonable  time  from  the  date of mailing such notice at a designated
  place  within  this  state for examination and shall produce at the time
  and place of such examination such books  and  papers  of  such  foreign
  corporation,  company, association or non-resident individual, as may be
  designated in such notice.
    If such foreign corporation, company,  association,  or  such  officer
  thereof, or non-resident individual, shall fail to furnish the statement
  called  for  by such notice, or shall fail to appear pursuant thereto or
  to produce the books and papers required  thereby  to  be  produced,  or
  refuse  to  submit  to examination or to answer any proper question, the
  proof of such failure or refusal shall constitute prima  facie  evidence
  that  the  sale  or offering for sale or advertisement of vacant land or
  lands of such foreign corporation, company, association or  non-resident
  individual  constitutes a fraudulent practice within the meaning of this
  act and may in the discretion of the court be treated  as  a  sufficient
  basis  for  a  permanent  injunction  against  the  continuance  of such
  fraudulent practice.
    3. In any action brought in behalf  of  the  department  of  state  as
  provided  in this article, the court at any stage of the proceedings may
  appoint a receiver of any and all property derived by the  defendant  or
  defendants  or  any  of  them by means of any such fraudulent practices,
  including also all property with which such property has been mingled if
  such property can not be identified in kind because of such commingling,
  together with any or all books of account and  papers  relating  to  the
  same.    The  judgment  entered  in  such  action  may provide that such
  receiver shall take title to any or  all  such  property  and  books  of
  account  and  papers relating to the same and liquidate such property or
  any part thereof for the benefit of all persons intervening in the  said
  action  and  establishing an interest in such property. The judgment may
  also provide that all such property, the title to or interest  in  which
  has  not  been established in such action by intervenors or otherwise by
  due process to be in  a  person  or  persons  other  than  defendant  or
  defendants,  shall  be  returned to the defendant or defendants as their
  interest may appear. Such receiver shall be subject to all the duties of
  receivers appointed in civil actions as far as practicable  except  that
  such  provisions  relating  to  commissions or compensation of receivers
  shall not be applicable to receivers appointed pursuant to this section,
  but such commissions or compensation shall be fixed by the court in  any
  amount  which  it  may determine to be just and equitable. In any action
  brought in behalf of the department of state as provided in this article
  the court may grant such other and further relief as may be proper.
    4. Whenever the department of state  has  determined  to  commence  an
  action  under  this article, it may have the attorney-general present to
  any justice of the supreme  court,  before  beginning  such  action,  an
  application  in  writing  for  an  order directing the person or persons
  mentioned in the application to appear before the justice of the supreme
  court or referee designated in such order and answer such  questions  as
  may  be  put  to  them  or  to  any  of them, or to produce such papers,
  documents and books concerning the alleged fraudulent practices to which
  the action which  the  department  of  state  has  determined  to  bring
  relates, and it shall be the duty of the justice of the supreme court to
  whom  such  application for the order is made to grant such application.
  The application for such order may  simply  show  upon  information  and
  belief  that  the  testimony  of  such person or persons is material and
  necessary. The provisions of the civil practice law and rules,  relating
  to  an  application for an order for the examination of witnesses before
  the commencement of an action and  the  method  of  proceeding  on  such
  examination shall not apply except as herein prescribed. The order shall
  be  granted  by the justice of the supreme court to whom the application
  has  been made with such preliminary injunction or stay as may appear to
  such justice to be proper and expedient and shall specify the time  when
  and  place  where  the  witnesses are required to appear. The justice or
  referee may adjourn such examination from time  to  time  and  witnesses
  must  attend  accordingly.    The  testimony  of  each  witness  must be
  subscribed by him and all must be filed in the office of  the  clerk  of
  the county in which such order for examination is filed.
    5. The order for such examination must be signed by the justice making
  it  and  service of a copy thereof with an endorsement by the department
  of state or the attorney-general, to the effect that  the  person  named
  therein  is required to appear and be examined at the time and place and
  before the justice and referee specified in such endorsement,  shall  be
  sufficient  notice for the attendance of witnesses, such endorsement may
  contain a clause requiring such person to produce  at  such  examination
  all  books,  papers and documents in his possession or under his control
  relating to the subject of such examination. The order shall  be  served
  upon  the  person  named in the endorsement aforesaid by showing him the
  original order and delivering to and leaving with him at the same time a
  copy thereof, endorsed as above provided, and by paying or tendering  to
  him  the  fee allowed by law to witnesses subpoenaed to attend trials of
  civil actions in any court of record in this state.
    6. The referee appointed as provided in this article possesses all the
  powers and is subject to all the duties of  a  referee  appointed  in  a
  civil  action,  so  far  as  practicable,  and may punish for contempt a
  witness duly served with the papers as prescribed in  this  article  for
  non-attendance or refusal to be sworn or to testify or to produce books,
  papers  and  documents  according  to  the  direction of the endorsement
  aforesaid, in the same manner and to the same extent  as  a  referee  to
  hear, try and determine an issue of fact or of law.
    7.  The  provisions of the civil practice law and rules shall apply to
  all actions brought  under  this  article  except  as  herein  otherwise
  provided.
    8.  If any person shall ask to be excused from testifying or producing
  any book, paper or other document before the department of state or  the
  attorney-general or his deputy, or other officer designated by it or him
  or  before  any  court,  or  magistrate,  or  referee,  upon  any trial,
  investigation or proceeding initiated by the department  of  state,  the
  attorney-general, district attorney, grand jury or court pursuant to the
  provisions  of  this  article upon the ground or for the reason that the
  testimony or evidence, documentary or otherwise,  required  of  him  may
  tend  to  incriminate him or convict him of crime or to subject him to a
  penalty or forfeiture, and shall  notwithstanding  be  directed  by  the
  court,  referee, magistrate or officer conducting the inquiry to testify
  or to produce such book, paper or document, he must none the less comply
  with such direction but  in  such  event  he  shall  not  thereafter  be
  prosecuted  or  subjected to any penalty or forfeiture for or on account
  of any transaction, matter or thing concerning which he was  ordered  to
  testify  or produce evidence, documentary or otherwise, pursuant thereto
  and no testimony so given or produced shall be received against him upon
  any criminal action, suit or proceeding, investigation,  inquisition  or
  inquiry.
    Provided,  however,  no  person  so  testifying  shall  be exempt from
  prosecution or punishment for  any  perjury  committed  by  him  in  his
  testimony  given  as  herein  provided  for, nor shall immunity apply to
  corporations or to the officers as such.


ARTICLE 9-B
                               Condominium Act
  Section 339-d.  Short title.
          339-e.  Definitions.
          339-f.  Application of article.
          339-g.  Status of units.
          339-h.  Ownership of units.
          339-i.  Common elements.
          339-j.  Compliance with by-laws and rules and regulations.
          339-k.  Certain work prohibited.
          339-l.  Liens  against  common  elements;  liens  against units;
                    liens for labor performed or materials furnished.
          339-m.  Common profits and expenses.
          339-n.  Contents of declaration.
          339-o.  Contents of deeds and leases of units.
          339-p.  Copy of floor plans to be filed.
          339-q.  Filing with board.
          339-r.  Blanket mortgages and other blanket  liens  affecting  a
                    unit at time of first conveyance.
          339-s.  Recording.
          339-t.  Withdrawal from provisions of this article.
          339-u.  By-laws.
          339-v.  Contents of by-laws.
          339-w.  Books  of  receipts  and  expenditures; availability for
                    examination.
          339-x.  Waiver of use of common elements; abandonment  of  unit;
                    conveyance to board of managers.
          339-y.  Separate taxation.
          339-z.  Lien   for  common  charges;  priority;  exoneration  of
                    grantor and grantee.
          339-aa. Lien for common charges; duration; foreclosure.
          339-bb. Insurance.
          339-cc. Repair or reconstruction.
          339-dd. Actions.
          339-ee. Effect of other laws.
          339-ff. Mortgage  investments  on  units  by   state   agencies,
                    insurers,   banking   organizations  and  fiduciaries;
                    limitation to first mortgages.
          339-gg. Severability.
          339-hh. Reservation of power.
          339-ii. Construction.
          339-jj. Borrowing by board of managers.
          339-kk. Rents.
          339-ll. Electric vehicle charging station installation.


§  339-d. Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as
  the "condominium act."


§  339-e.  Definitions.  As  used  in this article, unless the context
  otherwise requires:
    1. "Building" means a multi-unit building or buildings, or a group  of
  buildings  whether  or  not attached to each other, comprising a part of
  the property.
    2. "Common charges" means  each  unit's  proportionate  share  of  the
  common expenses in accordance with its common interest.
    3.  "Common  elements,"  unless otherwise provided in the declaration,
  means and includes:
    (a) The land on which the building is located;
    (b) The foundations, columns, girders, beams,  supports,  main  walls,
  roofs,  halls,  corridors, lobbies, stairs, stairways, fire escapes, and
  entrances and exits of the building;
    (c) The basements, cellars, yards, gardens, recreational or  community
  facilities, parking areas and storage spaces;
    (d)  The premises for the lodging or use of janitors and other persons
  employed for the operation of the property;
    (e) Central and appurtenant installations for services such as  power,
  light, gas, hot and cold water, heating, refrigeration, air conditioning
  and incinerating;
    (f)   The   elevators,   escalators,   tanks,   pumps,  motors,  fans,
  compressors, ducts  and  in  general  all  apparatus  and  installations
  existing for common use;
    (g)  Such  facilities  as  may be designated as common elements in the
  declaration; and
    (h) All other parts of the property necessary  or  convenient  to  its
  existence, maintenance and safety, or normally in common use.
    4. "Common expenses" means and includes:
    (a) Expenses of operation of the property, and
    (b)  All  sums  designated  common  expenses  by  or  pursuant  to the
  provisions of this article, the declaration or the by-laws.
    5. "Common interest" means the (i) proportionate,  undivided  interest
  in  fee  simple  absolute,  or  (ii)  proportionate  undivided leasehold
  interest in the common elements appertaining to each unit, as  expressed
  in the declaration.
    6.  "Common  profits"  means  the excess of all receipts of the rents,
  profits and revenues  from  the  common  elements  remaining  after  the
  deduction of the common expenses.
    7.  "Declaration"  means  the  instrument  by  which  the  property is
  submitted to the provisions of this article,  as  hereinafter  provided,
  and  such  instrument  as from time to time amended, consistent with the
  provisions of this article and of the by-laws.
    8. "Majority" of unit owners means either (i) more than fifty per cent
  in common interest in the aggregate, or (ii) more than fifty per cent in
  number of units in the aggregate, or (iii) more than fifty per  cent  in
  the  aggregate in both common interest and in number of units, as may be
  specified herein or in the declaration or the by-laws  with  respect  to
  any matter or matters. Any specified percentage of unit owners means (i)
  such  percentage  in  common  interest  in  the  aggregate, or (ii) such
  percentage in number of units in the aggregate, or (iii) such percentage
  in common interest and such percentage in number of  units,  as  may  be
  specified  herein  or  in the declaration or the by-laws with respect to
  any matter or matters, provided, however, that different percentages  in
  interest and in number of units may be so specified.
    9.  "Operation  of the property" means and includes the administration
  and  operation  of  the  property  and  the  maintenance,   repair   and
  replacement of, and the making of any additions and improvements to, the
  common elements.
    10.   "Person"  means  a  natural  person,  corporation,  partnership,
  association, trustee or other legal entity.
    11. "Property" means and includes the land, the building and all other
  improvements  thereon,  (i) owned in fee simple absolute, or (ii) in the
  case of a condominium devoted exclusively to  non-residential  purposes,
  held  under  a  lease or sublease, or separate unit leases or subleases,
  the unexpired term or terms of which on the date  of  recording  of  the
  declaration shall not be less than thirty years, or (iii) in the case of
  a  qualified  leasehold  condominium, held under a lease or sublease, or
  separate unit leases or subleases, the unexpired term or terms of  which
  on the date of recording of the declaration shall not be less than fifty
  years,  and  all  easements, rights and appurtenances belonging thereto,
  and  all  other  property,  personal  or  mixed,  intended  for  use  in
  connection therewith, which have been or are intended to be submitted to
  the provisions of this article.
    12.  "Qualified leasehold condominium" means any leasehold interest in
  real property intended to  be  used  for  either  residential  purposes,
  commercial  purposes,  industrial  purposes  or  any combination of such
  purposes, together with any fee simple absolute or leasehold interest in
  the buildings and all other improvements which have been or at any  time
  hereafter  may  be erected upon such real property, which has been or is
  intended to be submitted to the provisions  of  this  article,  provided
  that,  on  the date of the recording of the declaration: (i) the battery
  park city authority or the Roosevelt Island operating corporation is the
  holder of the tenant's interest in such leasehold interest or  (ii)  the
  Queens  West  development  corporation  is  the holder of the landlord's
  interest in such leasehold interest or (iii) the  Brooklyn  bridge  park
  development corporation is the holder of the landlord's interest in such
  leasehold  interest,  or (iv) the New York city educational construction
  fund is the holder of the landlord's interest in such leasehold interest
  for property located in the borough of Manhattan, in  the  city  of  New
  York, bounded on the east by Second Ave, on the west by Third Avenue, to
  the  north  by  East  Fifty-seventh  Street,  and  to  the south by East
  Fifty-sixth Street.
    13. "Recording officer" and "recording" or "recorded" shall  have  the
  meanings stated in section two hundred ninety of this chapter.
    14.  "Unit"  means a part of the property intended for any type of use
  or uses, and with an exit to a public street or highway or to  a  common
  element  or  elements  leading  to  a  public street or highway, and may
  include such appurtenances as garage and other  parking  space,  storage
  room, balcony, terrace and patio, but in no event may utility facilities
  such as those for water or sewerage treatment or power generation appear
  as single units.
    15. "Unit designation" means the number, letter or combination thereof
  or other official designations conforming to the tax lot number, if any,
  designating the unit in the declaration and on the floor plans.
    16.  "Unit  owner"  means  the  person or persons owning a unit in fee
  simple absolute or, in the case either  (i)  of  a  condominium  devoted
  exclusively  to  non-residential purposes, or (ii) a qualified leasehold
  condominium, owning a unit held under a lease or sublease.


§  339-f.  Application of article. 1. This article shall be applicable
  only to property the sole owner or all the owners of  which  submit  the
  same  to  the  provisions  hereof  by  duly  executing  and  recording a
  declaration as hereinafter provided.
    2. Such property shall be submitted and subject to  the  authority  of
  and  review  by  the  county planning agency as set forth in section two
  hundred thirty-nine-n of article twelve-B of the general municipal  law,
  irrespective  of  and  notwithstanding  the  distance requirement of the
  second unnumbered paragraph of such section, and as though the  property
  were  a subdivision plat subject to such section. This subdivision shall
  not be applicable to:
    (i) property which has received local planning board approval prior to
  December twenty-first, nineteen hundred seventy-eight; or
    (ii) property submitted to the provisions of this article on which any
  building or buildings or any portion thereof  has  been  rented  to  any
  tenant or tenants


§  339-g.  Status  of  units.  Each  unit,  together  with  its common
  interest, shall for all purposes constitute real property.


§  339-h. Ownership of units. Each unit owner shall be entitled to the
  exclusive ownership and possession of his unit.


§  339-i. Common elements. 1. Each unit shall have appurtenant thereto
  a common interest as expressed in the declaration. Such  interest  shall
  be  (i) in the approximate proportion that the fair value of the unit at
  the date of the declaration bears to the then aggregate  fair  value  of
  all  the units or (ii) in the approximate proportion that the floor area
  of the unit at the date of the declaration bears to the  then  aggregate
  floor  area  of  all  the  units,  but such proportion shall reflect the
  substantially exclusive advantages enjoyed by one or more  but  not  all
  units in a part or parts of the common elements or (iii) the interest of
  each of the units shall be in equal percentages, one for each unit as of
  the  date  of  filing  the  declaration,  or in equal percentages within
  separate  classifications  of  units  as  of  the  date  of  filing  the
  declaration,  or  (iv) upon floor space, subject to the location of such
  space and the additional factors of relative value to other space in the
  condominium, the uniqueness of the  unit,  the  availability  of  common
  elements  for exclusive or shared use, and the overall dimensions of the
  particular unit.
    2. The common interest appurtenant to each unit as  expressed  in  the
  declaration  shall  have  a permanent character and shall not be altered
  without the consent of all unit owners affected, expressed in an amended
  declaration. However, the declaration may contain provisions relating to
  the appropriation,  taking  or  condemnation  by  eminent  domain  by  a
  federal,   state   or  local  government,  or  instrumentality  thereof,
  including, but not limited to, reapportionment or other  change  of  the
  common  interest appurtenant to each unit, or portion thereof, remaining
  after a  partial  appropriation,  taking  or  condemnation.  The  common
  interest  shall  not  be separated from the unit to which it appertains.
  Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit  the  division  of  any
  unit  and  common interest appurtenant thereto in a non-residential unit
  in the manner permitted by the declaration and bylaws, including changes
  in the number of rooms; in no case may such division result in a greater
  percentage of common interest for  the  total  of  the  new  units  than
  existed  for  the original unit before division. Where authorized by the
  declaration and bylaws, an appropriate amendment to the declaration  may
  be  filed  by  the  new unit owners under the same file number and under
  procedure set forth in section three hundred thirty-nine-p  hereof,  and
  the  local  tax  authorities shall provide and certify upon the proposed
  amendment a conforming tax lot number upon completion of the new units.
    3. The common elements shall remain undivided and no right shall exist
  to partition or divide any thereof, except as otherwise provided in this
  article. Any provision to the contrary shall be null and void.   Nothing
  in  this  subdivision  shall be deemed to prevent ownership of a unit by
  the entireties, jointly or in common.
    4. Each unit owner may use the common elements in accordance with  the
  purpose  for  which they are intended, without hindering the exercise of
  or encroaching upon the rights  of  the  other  unit  owners,  but  this
  subsection  shall  not  be  deemed  to  prevent  some unit or units from
  enjoying substantially exclusive advantages in a part or  parts  of  the
  common elements as expressed in the declaration or by-laws.
    5.  The  unit owners shall have the irrevocable right, to be exercised
  by the board of managers, to have access to each unit from time to  time
  during reasonable hours to the extent necessary for the operation of the
  property,  or  for making emergency repairs therein necessary to prevent
  damage to the common elements or to  another  unit  or  units,  and  the
  by-laws   may   contain   reasonable   rules  and  regulations  for  the
  administration of this provision as the privacy of  the  units  and  the
  protection  of  them  and their contents from burglary, theft or larceny
  Requires.


§  339-j. Compliance with by-laws and rules and regulations. Each unit
  owner  shall  comply  strictly  with  the  by-laws   and   with   rules,
  regulations,   resolutions   and  decisions  adopted  pursuant  thereto.
  Failure to comply with any of the same shall be ground for an action  to
  recover  sums due, for damages or injunctive relief or both maintainable
  by the board of managers on behalf of the unit owners or,  in  a  proper
  case,  by  an  aggrieved unit owner. In any case of flagrant or repeated
  violation by a unit owner, he may be required by the board  of  managers
  to give sufficient surety or sureties for his future compliance with the
  by-laws, rules, regulations, resolutions and decisions.  Notwithstanding
  the  foregoing  provisions  of this section, no action or proceeding for
  any relief may be maintained due to the display of a flag of the  United
  States measuring not more than four feet by six feet.


§  339-k.  Certain  work  prohibited.  No unit owner shall do any work
  which would jeopardize the soundness or safety of the  property,  reduce
  the  value  thereof  or impair any easement or hereditament, nor may any
  unit owner  add  any  material  structure  or  excavate  any  additional
  basement  or  cellar,  without in every such case the consent of all the
  unit owners affected being first obtained.


§ 339-l. Liens against common elements; liens against units; liens for
  labor  performed  or materials furnished. 1. Subsequent to recording the
  declaration and while the property remains subject to this  article,  no
  lien  of  any  nature  shall  thereafter arise or be created against the
  common elements except with the unanimous consent of  the  unit  owners.
  During  such  period,  liens  may  arise  or be created only against the
  several units and their respective common interests.
    2. Labor performed on or materials furnished to a unit  shall  not  be
  the  basis  for the filing of a lien pursuant to article two of the lien
  law against the unit of any unit owner not expressly  consenting  to  or
  requesting  the  same, except in the case of emergency repairs. No labor
  performed on or materials furnished to the common elements shall be  the
  basis  for  a  lien  thereon,  but all common charges received and to be
  received by the board of managers, and the right to receive such  funds,
  shall  constitute trust funds for the purpose of paying the cost of such
  labor or materials performed or furnished at the express request or with
  the consent of the manager, managing agent or board of managers, and the
  same shall be expended first for such purpose before expending any  part
  of the same for any other purpose.


§  339-m.  Common  profits  and  expenses.  The  common profits of the
  property shall be distributed among, and the common  expenses  shall  be
  charged  to,  the  unit  owners  according  to  their  respective common
  interests, provided however, that expenses of insurance may  be  charged
  as provided in section three hundred thirty-nine-bb. Notwithstanding any
  provision  of  this  article,  profits  and  expenses  may  be specially
  allocated and apportioned by the board of managers in a manner different
  from common profits and expenses, to one or more  non-residential  units
  where  so authorized by the declaration and bylaws. In the case of units
  in any  building,  residential  or  non-residential,  or  a  combination
  thereof, profits and expenses may be specially allocated and apportioned
  based  on  special or exclusive use or availability or exclusive control
  of particular units or common areas by particular  unit  owners,  if  so
  authorized  by  the  declaration  and bylaws, in a manner different from
  common profits and  expenses.  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  this
  article,  common expenses may be charged to the owners of units that are
  subject  to  a  regulatory  agreement  with  a  governmental  entity  or
  instrumentality  limiting  the household income of the residents of such
  units upon initial occupancy that are  less  than  the  common  expenses
  charged to owners of other units where such lesser charges are necessary
  to  ensure that the combined common expenses, mortgage and other housing
  costs paid by owners of units subject to such regulatory  agreements  do
  not  exceed  thirty  percent  of the household income limit specified in
  such regulatory agreements. Where so authorized by the  declaration  and
  bylaws,  common  expenses  may  be charged to owners of units subject to
  such regulatory agreements in a manner that (i) is not  proportional  to
  the  respective  common interests of such owners, (ii) limits the amount
  charged to such owners, or (iii) limits the rate  at  which  the  amount
  charged  to  such  owners  may  increase.  The existence of such special
  allocation of common expenses and its financial impact  upon  all  units
  shall be disclosed as a special risk in any offering plan.


§  339-n.  Contents  of declaration. The declaration shall contain the
  following particulars:
    1. A statement of intention to submit the property to  the  provisions
  of this article.
    2.  Description of the land on which the building and improvements are
  or are to be located.
    3. Description of the building, including the location of the building
  by reference to fixed monuments or tax  map  parcel  data,  stating  the
  number  of  stories,  basements and cellars, the number of units and the
  principal materials of which it is or is to be constructed.
    4. The unit designation of each unit, and a statement of its location,
  approximate area, number of  rooms  in  residential  areas,  and  common
  element  to  which it has immediate access, and any other data necessary
  for its proper identification.
    5. Description of the common elements and a statement  of  the  common
  interest of each unit owner.
    6.  Statement of the uses for which the building and each of the units
  are intended.
    7. A designation of the secretary of state as agent of the corporation
  or board of managers upon whom process against it may be served and  the
  post  office address within or without this state to which the secretary
  of state shall mail a copy of any process against it served upon him  or
  her. The designation may include an email address to which the secretary
  of  state  shall  email a notice of the fact that process against it has
  been electronically served upon him or her. Service of  process  on  the
  secretary  of  state  as  agent of such corporation or board of managers
  shall be made in the manner provided by paragraph (a)  or  (b)  of  this
  subdivision.  Either  option  of  service  authorized  pursuant  to this
  subdivision shall be available at no extra cost  to  the  consumer.  (a)
  Personally  delivering  to  and  leaving  with  him or her or his or her
  deputy, or with any person authorized  by  the  secretary  of  state  to
  receive  such  service,  at the office of the department of state in the
  city of Albany, duplicate copies  of  such  process  together  with  the
  statutory fee, which shall be a taxable disbursement. Service of process
  on  such  corporation  or  board  of managers shall be complete when the
  secretary of state is so served. The secretary of state  shall  promptly
  send  one of such copies by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
  such corporation or board of managers, at the post  office  address,  on
  file  in  the  department  of  state,  specified  for  such purpose. (b)
  Electronically submitting a copy of the process  to  the  department  of
  state  together  with  the  statutory  fee, which fee shall be a taxable
  disbursement, through an electronic system operated by the department of
  state, provided the corporation  or  board  of  managers  has  an  email
  address  on  file  in  the department of state to which the secretary of
  state shall email  a  notice  of  the  fact  that  process  against  the
  corporation  or  board of managers has been served electronically on the
  secretary of state. Service of process on such corporation or  board  of
  managers  shall be complete when the secretary of state has reviewed and
  accepted service of such process. The secretary of state shall  promptly
  send  notice  of the fact that process has been served electronically on
  the secretary of state to such corporation or board of managers  at  the
  email  address  on  file  in  the department of state, specified for the
  purpose and  shall  make  a  copy  of  the  process  available  to  such
  corporation  or  board  of  managers.  Nothing in this subdivision shall
  affect the right to serve process in any other manner permitted by  law.
  The  corporation or board of managers shall also file with the secretary
  of state the name and post office address within or without  this  state
  to which the secretary of state shall mail a copy of any process against
  it  served  upon  the  secretary of state and shall update the filing as
  necessary.
    8.  Any  further  details  in  connection  with the property which the
  person or persons executing the declaration may deem  desirable  to  set
  forth.
    9. The method by which the declaration may be amended, consistent with
  the provisions of this article


§  339-o.  Contents  of deeds and leases of units. Deeds and leases of
  units shall include the following particulars:
    1. Description of the land as provided in subsection  two  of  section
  three hundred thirty-nine-n and the liber, page and date of recording of
  the  declaration  or  solely by naming the city, village or town and the
  county in which the unit is located and referring to the liber, page and
  date of recording of the declaration.
    2. The unit designation of the unit in the declaration and  any  other
  data necessary for its proper identification.
    3. Statement of the use for which the unit is intended.
    4. The common interest appertaining to the unit.
    5.  Any  further  details  which  the  grantor  and  grantee  may deem
  desirable to set forth.


§  339-p.  Copy  of  floor  plans to be filed. Simultaneously with the
  recording of the declaration there shall be filed in the office  of  the
  recording  officer  a set of the floor plans of the building showing the
  layout, locations, and approximate dimensions of the units, stating  the
  declarants'  names,  and  bearing the verified statement of a registered
  architect or licensed professional engineer certifying  that  it  is  an
  accurate copy of portions of the plans of the building as filed with and
  approved  by  the  municipal  or  other  governmental subdivision having
  jurisdiction over the  issuance  of  permits  for  the  construction  of
  buildings.  If  such  floor  plans  do  not  contain  unit  designations
  certified by the appropriate local tax authorities as conforming to  the
  official  tax  lot  number,  there  shall  be filed in the office of the
  recording officer prior to the first conveyance of a unit a  floor  plan
  containing  a  unit  designation  certified by the appropriate local tax
  authority as conforming to the official tax lot number. It shall be  the
  duty  of  the appropriate local tax authority to provide such number for
  each unit upon completion of such unit. If such plans do not  include  a
  verified  statement  by such architect or engineer that such plans fully
  and  fairly  depict  the  layout,  location,   unit   designations   and
  approximate  dimensions  of any particular unit or units as built, there
  shall be recorded prior to each first conveyance of such particular unit
  or units an amendment to the declaration to which shall  be  attached  a
  verified  statement  of  a registered architect or licensed professional
  engineer certifying that the plans theretofore  filed,  or  being  filed
  simultaneously  with such amendment, fully and fairly depict the layout,
  location, unit designations and approximate dimensions of the particular
  unit or units as built. Such plans shall  be  designated  "condominium",
  assigned  a file number and kept on file by the recording officer.  Such
  plans shall be indexed under the names of  the  declarants  and  in  the
  block  index  if  any.  The  record  of  the declaration shall contain a
  reference to the file number of the floor plans of the building affected
  Thereby.


§  339-q.  Filing  with  board.  True  copies  of the floor plans, the
  declaration, the by-laws and any rules and regulations shall be kept  on
  file  in  the office of the board of managers and shall be available for
  inspection  at  convenient  hours  of  weekdays  by  persons  having  an
  Interest.


§ 339-r. Blanket mortgages and other blanket liens affecting a unit at
  time  of  first  conveyance. At the time of the first conveyance of each
  unit, every mortgage and other lien affecting such unit  and  any  other
  unit  shall  be paid and satisfied of record, or the unit being conveyed
  and its common interest shall be released therefrom by  partial  release
  duly recorded.


§  339-s.  Recording. 1.  The declaration, any amendment or amendments
  thereof, and  every  instrument  affecting  the  property  or  any  unit
  included  within  the meaning of "conveyance" as used in article nine of
  this chapter, shall be entitled to be indexed and recorded  pursuant  to
  and with the same effect as provided in said article nine. The recording
  officer  shall  not accept such an instrument constituting a condominium
  map unless it has endorsed thereon or attached thereto a certificate  of
  the  county  director  of  real  property  tax  services  that  the  fee
  authorized by section five hundred three of the real property  tax  law,
  if any, has been paid. Neither the declaration nor any amendment thereof
  shall be valid unless duly recorded.
    2.  Each  such  declaration,  and  any amendment or amendments thereof
  shall be filed with the department of state.


§  339-t. Withdrawal from provisions of this article. If withdrawal of
  the property from this article is authorized by at least eighty per cent
  in number and in common interest of the  units,  or  by  at  least  such
  larger  percentage  either  in  number or in common interest, or in both
  number and common interest, as may be specified in the by-laws, then the
  property shall be subject to an action for partition by any  unit  owner
  or lienor as if owned in common, in which event the net proceeds of sale
  shall  be  divided  among  all  the  unit  owners in proportion to their
  respective common interests, provided, however, that no payment shall be
  made to a unit owner until there has first been  paid  off  out  of  his
  share  of  such  net proceeds all liens on his unit.  Such withdrawal of
  the property from this article shall not bar its  subsequent  submission
  to  the  provisions of this article in accordance with the terms of this
  Article.


§  339-u.  By-laws. The operation of the property shall be governed by
  by-laws, a true copy of which shall be annexed to  the  declaration.  No
  modification  of  or  amendment to the by-laws shall be valid unless set
  forth in an amendment to the declaration  and  such  amendment  is  duly
  Recorded.


§  339-v.  Contents  of  by-laws.  1. The by-laws shall provide for at
  least the following:
    (a) The nomination and election of a board of managers, the number  of
  persons  constituting the same, and that the terms of at least one-third
  of the members of such board  shall  expire  annually;  the  powers  and
  duties  of  the  board;  the compensation, if any, of the members of the
  board; the method of removal from office of members of  the  board;  and
  whether  or  not  the  board  may  engage  the  services of a manager or
  managing agent or both, and specifying which of the  powers  and  duties
  granted  to  the  board by this article or otherwise may be delegated by
  the board to either or both of them. Nothing contained herein shall  bar
  the  incorporation of the board of managers under applicable statutes of
  this state;  such  incorporation  must  be  consistent  with  the  other
  provisions of this article and the nature of the condominium purpose.
    (b) Methods of calling meetings of the unit owners; what percentage of
  the  unit  owners,  if other than a majority, shall constitute a quorum;
  and what percentage  shall,  consistent  with  the  provisions  of  this
  section,  be  necessary  to  adopt decisions binding on all unit owners.
  Meetings of unit owners may be held at such physical  place  as  may  be
  fixed  by or under the by-laws, or if not so fixed, as determined by the
  board of managers. Provided, however, that the board of managers may, in
  its sole discretion, determine  that  the  meeting  be  held  solely  or
  partially  by means of electronic communication, the platform/service of
  which shall be the place of the meeting for purposes  of  this  article.
  Nothing  contained  in this paragraph shall prohibit a board of managers
  from holding a meeting at a physical place and allowing unit owners  the
  option  of  attending  such  meeting either at such physical place or by
  means of electronic communication.
    (c) Election of a president from among the board of managers who shall
  preside over the meetings of such board and of the unit owners.
    (d) Election of a secretary who shall keep a record wherein actions of
  such board and of meetings of the unit owners shall be recorded.
    (e) Election of a treasurer who shall keep the financial  records  and
  books of account.
    (f)  Operation  of  the  property,  payment of the common expenses and
  determination and collection of the common charges.
    (g) The manner of designation and removal of persons employed for  the
  operation of the property.
    (h)  Method  of  adopting  and  of  amending  administrative rules and
  regulations governing the details of the operation and use of the common
  elements.
    (i) Such restrictions on  and  requirements  respecting  the  use  and
  maintenance  of  the  units  and the use of the common elements, not set
  forth in the  declaration,  as  are  designed  to  prevent  unreasonable
  interference  with  the  use of their respective units and of the common
  elements by the several unit owners.
    (j) The percentage of the unit owners, but not less than sixty-six and
  two-thirds per cent in number and common interest  except  in  the  case
  where  all  units  are  non-residential, which may at any time modify or
  amend the by-laws.
    2. The by-laws may also provide for the following:
    (a) Provisions governing the alienation,  conveyance,  sale,  leasing,
  purchase,  ownership and occupancy of units, provided, however, that the
  by-laws  shall  contain  no  provision   restricting   the   alienation,
  conveyance,  sale,  leasing,  purchase, ownership and occupancy of units
  because of race, creed, color or national origin.
    (b) Provisions governing the payment, collection and  disbursement  of
  funds,  including  reserves, to provide for major and minor maintenance,
  repairs, additions, improvements,  replacements,  working  capital,  bad
  debts and unpaid common expenses, depreciation, obsolescence and similar
  purposes.
    (c)  The  form by which the board of managers, acting on behalf of the
  unit owners, where authorized by this statute or  the  declaration,  may
  acquire and hold any unit and lease, mortgage and convey the same.
    (d) Any other provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this
  article, relating to the operation of the property.


§   339-w.  Books  of  receipts  and  expenditures;  availability  for
  examination. The manager or board of managers, as the case may be, shall
  keep detailed, accurate records, in chronological order, of the receipts
  and expenditures arising  from  the  operation  of  the  property.  Such
  records and the vouchers authorizing the payments shall be available for
  examination  by  the  unit  owners  at  convenient  hours of weekdays. A
  written report summarizing  such  receipts  and  expenditures  shall  be
  rendered  by  the  board  of  managers  to all unit owners at least once
  Annually.


§  339-x.  Waiver  of  use  of  common  elements; abandonment of unit;
  conveyance to board of managers. No unit owner may exempt  himself  from
  liability  for  his  common charges by waiver of the use or enjoyment of
  any of the common elements or by abandonment of  his  unit.  Subject  to
  such  terms  and conditions as may be specified in the by-laws, any unit
  owner may, by conveying his unit and his common interest to the board of
  managers on behalf of all other unit owners, exempt himself from  common
  charges thereafter accruing.


§  339-y.  Separate  taxation.  1.  (a)  With  respect to all property
  submitted to the provisions of this article other than property which is
  the subject of a qualified leasehold  condominium,  each  unit  and  its
  common interest, not including any personal property, shall be deemed to
  be  a parcel and shall be subject to separate assessment and taxation by
  each assessing unit, school district, special district, county or  other
  taxing  unit, for all types of taxes authorized by law including but not
  limited to special ad valorem levies  and  special  assessments,  except
  that  the  foregoing  shall  not  apply  to  a  unit held under lease or
  sublease unless the declaration requires the unit owner to pay all taxes
  attributable to his unit. Neither the building, the property nor any  of
  the common elements shall be deemed to be a parcel.
    (b)  In  no  event  shall the aggregate of the assessment of the units
  plus their common interests exceed the total valuation of  the  property
  were the property assessed as a parcel.
    (c) For the purposes of this and the next succeeding section the terms
  "assessing  unit",  "assessment",  "parcel",  "special ad valorem levy",
  "special assessment", "special district", "taxation" and  "taxes"  shall
  have  the  meanings  specified  in  section  one hundred two of the real
  property tax law.
    (d) The provisions of paragraph (b)  of  this  subdivision  shall  not
  apply to such real property classified within:
    (i) on and after January first, nineteen hundred eighty-six, class one
  of  section one thousand eight hundred two of the real property tax law;
  or
    (ii) on and after January first,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-four,  the
  homestead  class  of  an  approved  assessing unit which has adopted the
  provisions of section one  thousand  nine  hundred  three  of  the  real
  property  tax  law,  or  the  homestead  class of the portion outside an
  approved assessing unit of an eligible split school district  which  has
  adopted  the  provisions of section nineteen hundred three-a of the real
  property tax law; provided, however, that, in an approved assessing unit
  which adopted the provisions of section one thousand nine hundred  three
  of  the  real  property  tax  law  prior  to  the effective date of this
  subdivision, paragraph (b) of this subdivision shall apply to  all  such
  real  property  (i)  which  is  classified  within  the  homestead class
  pursuant to paragraph one of subdivision (e)  of  section  one  thousand
  nine hundred one of the real property tax law and (ii) which, regardless
  of  classification,  was  on  the assessment roll prior to the effective
  date of this subdivision unless the  governing  body  of  such  approved
  assessing  unit  provides  by  local law adopted after a public hearing,
  prior to the taxable status date of such assessing unit  next  occurring
  after  December  thirty-first,  nineteen hundred eighty-three, that such
  paragraph (b) shall not apply to such real property to which this clause
  applies.  Provided  further,  however,  real  property  subject  to  the
  provisions   of   this   subparagraph  shall  be  assessed  pursuant  to
  subdivision two of section five hundred eighty-one of the real  property
  tax law.
    (e)  On  the  first  assessment  roll with a taxable status date on or
  after the effective date of  a  declaration  filed  with  the  recording
  officer  and  on  every  assessment  roll thereafter, the assessor shall
  enter each unit as a parcel,  as  provided  in  paragraph  (a)  of  this
  subdivision, based upon the condition and ownership of each such unit on
  the  appropriate  valuation  and  taxable status dates. Units owned by a
  developer may be entered as a single parcel with  a  parcel  description
  corresponding  to  the entire development, including the land under such
  development, and excluding those units appearing  separately.  Upon  the
  first  assessment  roll  where each unit is separately assessed, only an
  individual unit and its common interest shall constitute a parcel.
    (f)  The  provisions  of  paragraph  (b) of this subdivision shall not
  apply to a converted condominium unit in a municipal  corporation  other
  than  a  special assessing unit, which has adopted, prior to the taxable
  status date of the assessment roll upon which its taxes will be  levied,
  a  local  law or, for a school district, a resolution providing that the
  provisions of paragraph (b) of this subdivision shall  not  apply  to  a
  converted   condominium   unit  within  that  municipal  corporation.  A
  converted condominium unit for purposes of this paragraph shall  mean  a
  dwelling  unit held in condominium form of ownership that has previously
  been on an assessment roll as a dwelling unit in other than  condominium
  form of ownership, and has not been previously subject to the provisions
  of paragraph (b) of this subdivision.
    (g)  The  provisions  of  paragraph  (b) of this subdivision shall not
  apply to real property owned or leased by a cooperative  corporation  or
  on a condominium basis in the Town of Greenburgh, in Westchester County,
  which  has  adopted,  prior to the taxable status date of the assessment
  roll upon which its taxes will be levied, a local law providing that the
  provisions of paragraph (b) of this subdivision shall not apply to  such
  real  property  within  such  town; provided, however, the provisions of
  this paragraph shall not apply to real property owned  or  leased  by  a
  cooperative  corporation  or  on  a  condominium  basis  that  had  been
  previously  subject  to  the  provisions  of  paragraph  (b)   of   this
  subdivision  prior to January first, two thousand twenty-three; provided
  further, however, the provisions of this paragraph shall  not  apply  to
  real  property  owned  or  leased  by  a cooperative corporation or on a
  condominium basis that is participating in  an  affordable  housing  tax
  credit  program  or has a regulatory agreement with a federal, state, or
  local agency related to affordable housing requirements.
    2. With respect only to qualified leasehold condominiums:
    (a) Each  unit,  its  common  interest,  not  including  any  personal
  property,  and  the  proportionate  undivided  part of the real property
  which is the  subject  of  a  qualified  leasehold  condominium  and  is
  allocated  to  such  unit  (as  expressed  in the declaration), shall be
  deemed to be a parcel, shall be subject to separate  assessment  to  the
  unit  owner  and  shall  be  subject to taxation by each assessing unit,
  school district, special district, county or other taxing unit  for  all
  types  of taxes authorized by law including, but not limited to, special
  ad valorem levies and special assessments.  Neither  the  real  property
  which is the subject of a qualified leasehold condominium, the building,
  the  property  nor  any  of  the common elements shall be deemed to be a
  parcel. In no event shall the aggregate of the assessment of  the  units
  plus their common interests plus their proportionate undivided parts (as
  expressed  in  the  declaration)  of said real property exceed the total
  valuation of the property and said real property assessed  as  a  single
  parcel  owned  in fee. No provision of this paragraph shall be deemed to
  subject to taxation any  parcel  or  part  thereof  which,  pursuant  to
  applicable  law, is either exempt from taxation or with respect to which
  no taxes are payable.
    (b) For the purposes of section five hundred two of the real  property
  tax law, both the unit owner and the owner of the real property which is
  the  subject  of a qualified leasehold condominium shall be deemed to be
  the owner of the parcel  in  which  such  unit  is  included;  provided,
  however, that for the purposes of section nine hundred twenty-six of the
  real  property tax law, only the unit owner shall be deemed the owner of
  the parcel in which such unit is included and only the unit owner  shall
  be  personally liable for the payment of any taxes assessed against such
  parcel. Only the fee owner of  the  land  which  is  the  subject  of  a
  qualified  leasehold  condominium,  however,  shall  be deemed to be the
  owner of the parcel in which a unit is  included  for  the  purposes  of
  determining whether such parcel is subject to or exempt from taxation or
  whether no taxes are payable with respect thereto.
    (c)  The taxes assessed against each unit, its common interest and the
  proportionate undivided part of the real property which is  the  subject
  of  a  qualified  leasehold  condominium  allocated  to  such  unit  (as
  expressed in the declaration), shall constitute a lien  solely  on  that
  unit,  its  common interest and the proportionate undivided part of said
  real property allocated to such unit (as expressed in the  declaration),
  and  such  taxes  shall  not  constitute a lien on any other unit or the
  common interest of any other unit or the proportionate undivided part of
  said real property allocated to any other  unit  (as  expressed  in  the
  declaration).
    (d)  At  such  time  as  the  real  property which is the subject of a
  qualified leasehold condominium is submitted to the provisions  of  this
  article,  the  assessing  unit  shall  make  provision  so that the real
  property  which  (i)  is  not  the  subject  of  a  qualified  leasehold
  condominium  and  (ii) immediately prior to such submission was included
  in a parcel in which there also was included all or any part of the real
  property which  is  (immediately  subsequent  to  such  submission)  the
  subject of a qualified leasehold condominium, is established as a single
  parcel  on  the  assessment  roll  and  tax  map of such assessing unit,
  separate and apart from any real property which  is  the  subject  of  a
  qualified leasehold condominium.
    3.  All  provisions  of  a  declaration relating to a unit, its common
  interest and the proportionate undivided part of the real property which
  is the subject of a qualified leasehold condominium  allocated  to  such
  unit  (as  expressed  in the declaration), which has been sold for taxes
  shall survive and shall be enforceable after the issuance of a tax  deed
  for  such  unit  to  the  same  extent  that  such  provisions  would be
  enforceable against a voluntary grantee of such unit  immediately  prior
  to the delivery of such tax deed.
    4.  The  board  of managers may act as an agent of each unit owner who
  has given his written authorization to seek administrative and  judicial
  review  of an assessment made in accordance with subdivision one of this
  section, pursuant to title one-A  of  article  five  and  title  one  of
  article  seven  of  the real property tax law. The board of managers may
  retain legal counsel on behalf of all unit owners for which it is acting
  as agent and to charge  all  such  unit  owners  a  pro  rata  share  of
  expenses,  disbursements  and  legal fees for which charges the board of
  managers  shall  have  a  lien  pursuant  to   section   three   hundred
  thirty-nine-z.
    5. Notwithstanding the provisions of any general, special or local law
  to  the  contrary, in a city having a population of one million or more,
  the board of managers shall be authorized to act as the  sole  agent  on
  behalf of all unit owners, without authorization of each unit owner, for
  the limited purpose of determining whether or not to waive prospectively
  the  benefit  of  real  property  tax  abatement  and  exemption for the
  property in order to qualify for a partial abatement  of  real  property
  taxes  pursuant  to  section  four  hundred  sixty-seven-a  of  the real
  property tax law.


§ 339-z. Lien for common charges; priority; exoneration of grantor and
  grantee. The board of managers, on behalf of the unit owners, shall have
  a lien on each unit for the unpaid common charges thereof, together with
  interest  thereon,  prior  to  all other liens except only (i) liens for
  taxes on the unit in favor  of  any  assessing  unit,  school  district,
  special district, county or other taxing unit, (ii) all sums unpaid on a
  first  mortgage  of  record,  and (iii) all sums unpaid on a subordinate
  mortgage of record held by the New York job development  authority,  the
  New  York  state  urban development corporation, the division of housing
  and community renewal, the housing trust fund corporation, the New  York
  city  housing  development corporation, or in a city having a population
  of one million or more, the  department  of  housing,  preservation  and
  development.  Upon  the sale or conveyance of a unit, such unpaid common
  charges shall be paid out of the sale proceeds or by  the  grantee.  Any
  grantor  or  grantee of a unit shall be entitled to a statement from the
  manager or board of managers, setting forth the  amount  of  the  unpaid
  common  charges  accrued  against the unit, and neither such grantor nor
  grantee shall be liable for, nor shall the unit conveyed be subject to a
  lien for, any unpaid common charges against such unit accrued  prior  to
  such   conveyance   in   excess   of   the  amount  therein  set  forth.
  Notwithstanding   the   above,   the   declaration   of   an   exclusive
  non-residential condominium may provide that the lien for common charges
  will be superior to any mortgage liens of record.


§  339-aa.  Lien  for  common charges; duration; foreclosure. The lien
  provided for in the immediately preceding  section  shall  be  effective
  from  and  after  the  filing  in the office of the recording officer in
  which the declaration is filed a verified notice  of  lien  stating  the
  name  (if any) and address of the property, the liber and page of record
  of the declaration, the name of the record owner of the unit,  the  unit
  designation,  the  amount  and  purpose for which due, and the date when
  due; and shall continue in effect until all sums secured  thereby,  with
  the interest thereon, shall have been fully paid or until expiration six
  years  from  the  date  of filing, whichever occurs sooner. In the event
  that unpaid common charges are due, any member of the board of  managers
  may  file  a notice of lien as described herein if no notice of lien has
  been filed within sixty days after the unpaid charges are due. Upon such
  payment the unit owner shall be entitled to an instrument duly  executed
  and  acknowledged  certifying  to  the fact of payment. Such lien may be
  foreclosed by suit authorized by and brought in the name of the board of
  managers, acting on behalf of the unit  owners,  in  like  manner  as  a
  mortgage  of real property, without the necessity, however, of naming as
  a party defendant any person solely by reason of  his  owning  a  common
  interest  with respect to the property. In any such foreclosure the unit
  owner shall be required to pay a reasonable rental for the unit for  any
  period prior to sale pursuant to judgment of foreclosure and sale, if so
  provided  in the by-laws, and the plaintiff in such foreclosure shall be
  entitled to the appointment of a receiver to collect the same. The board
  of managers, acting on behalf of the  unit  owners,  shall  have  power,
  unless  prohibited  by  the  by-laws,  to bid in the unit at foreclosure
  sale, and to acquire and hold, lease, mortgage and convey the same. Suit
  to  recover  a  money  judgment  for  unpaid  common  charges  shall  be
  maintainable  without foreclosing or waiving the lien securing the same,
  and foreclosure shall be maintainable notwithstanding  the  pendency  of
  suit to recover a money judgment.
    Notwithstanding  any  other  provision of this article, if a municipal
  corporation acquires title to a unit as  a  result  of  tax  enforcement
  proceedings,  such  municipal  corporation  shall  not be liable for and
  shall not be  subject  to  suit  for  recovery  of  the  common  charges
  applicable  to  such  unit during the period while title to such unit is
  held by the municipal corporation or for the payment of any  rental  for
  the  unit  under the provisions of this section, except to the extent of
  any rent arising from such unit received by such  municipal  corporation
  during such period.
    Except as herein specifically provided, nothing contained herein shall
  affect  or  impair  or  release  the  unit from the lien for such common
  charges or impair or diminish the rights of the manager or the board  of
  managers  on  behalf  of  the unit owners under this section and section
  three hundred thirty-nine-z.


   §  339-bb.  Insurance. The board of managers shall, if required by the
  declaration, the by-laws or by a majority of the unit owners, insure the
  building against loss or damage by fire and such other hazards as  shall
  be  required, and shall give written notice of such insurance and of any
  change therein or termination thereof to each unit owner. In the case of
  a qualified leasehold condominium, such insurance shall be  required  in
  any  event,  and shall be in an amount equal to full replacement cost of
  the building. The policy or policies of such insurance shall be  updated
  annually to maintain such insurance in such amount. Nothing herein shall
  prejudice  the  right  of each unit owner to insure his own unit for his
  own benefit. The premiums for such insurance on the  building  shall  be
  deemed  common expenses, provided, however, that in charging the same to
  the unit owners consideration may be given to the higher  premium  rates
  on some units than on others.


§ 339-cc. Repair or reconstruction. 1. Except as hereinafter provided,
  damage  to or destruction of the building shall be promptly repaired and
  reconstructed by the board of managers, using the proceeds of insurance,
  if any, on the building for  that  purpose,  and  any  deficiency  shall
  constitute  common expenses; provided, however, that if three-fourths or
  more  of  the  building  is  destroyed  or  substantially  damaged   and
  seventy-five  per  cent  or  more  of  the  unit  owners do not duly and
  promptly resolve to proceed with repair or restoration, then and in that
  event the property or so much thereof as shall remain, shall be  subject
  to an action for partition at the suit of any unit owner or lienor as if
  owned  in common, in which event the net proceeds of sale, together with
  the net proceeds of insurance policies, if any, shall be  considered  as
  one fund and shall be divided among all the unit owners in proportion to
  their  respective  common  interests, provided, however, that no payment
  shall be made to a unit owner until there has first been paid off out of
  his share of such fund all liens on his unit.
    2. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one  hereof,  in  the
  case  of a qualified leasehold condominium, any damage to or destruction
  of the building shall be promptly  repaired  and  reconstructed  by  the
  board  of managers, and the proceeds of the insurance policy or policies
  required for qualified leasehold condominiums pursuant to the provisions
  of section three hundred thirty-nine-bb of this chapter shall  first  be
  applied to such repair and reconstruction.


§ 339-dd. Actions. Actions may be brought or proceedings instituted by
  the board of managers in its discretion, on behalf of two or more of the
  unit  owners,  as their respective interests may appear, with respect to
  any cause of action relating to the common elements  or  more  than  one
  unit.  Service  of  process on the unit owners in any action relating to
  the common elements or more than one unit may  be  made  on  the  person
  designated in the declaration to receive service of process.


§ 339-ee. Effect of other laws. 1. All units of a property which shall
  be  submitted  to  the  provisions of this article shall be deemed to be
  cooperative interests in realty within  the  meaning  of  section  three
  hundred  fifty-two-e of the general business law. Article nine-A of this
  chapter shall not apply to the property or any unit. Article  eleven  of
  the  tax  law  shall  not  apply  to declarations or any lien for common
  charges provided for in this article.  Any  provision  of  the  multiple
  dwelling  law,  the  multiple  residence  law,  or  any  state  building
  construction code as to multiple residences pursuant to  the  provisions
  of  article eighteen of the executive law, requiring registration by the
  owner or other person having control of a  multiple  dwelling  shall  be
  deemed  satisfied  in the case of a property submitted to the provisions
  of  this  article  by  registration  of  the  board  of  managers,  such
  registration  to include the name of each unit owner and the designation
  of his or her unit; each unit  owner  shall  be  deemed  the  person  in
  control of the unit owned by him or her, and the board of managers shall
  be  deemed the person in control of the common elements, for purposes of
  enforcement of any such law or code, provided, however, that  all  other
  provisions  of  the  multiple  dwelling  law  or multiple residence law,
  otherwise applicable, shall be in full force and  effect,  and  provided
  further  that in a city with a population of one million or more persons
  registration required by a housing maintenance code of such  city  shall
  be  deemed  satisfied  in  the  case  of  a  property  submitted  to the
  provisions of this article by registration  of  the  board  of  managers
  which  need  not include the name of each unit owner and the designation
  of his or her unit.
    2. In the event the proceeds of a construction mortgage  were  applied
  to  construction  of a unit of a condominium submitted to the provisions
  of this article, or in the event that a unit submitted to the provisions
  of this act was subject  to  a  blanket  mortgage  whose  proceeds  were
  applied  exclusively  to  payment  of  the  construction  mortgage or to
  capital expenditures or expenses for the development or operation of the
  condominium, or to purchase of land or  buildings  for  the  condominium
  provided  that  such  purchase  was  no more than two years prior to the
  recording of the declaration of condominium, and  a  mortgage  recording
  tax was duly paid on such construction or blanket mortgage in accordance
  with  article  eleven  of  the  tax  law,  then,  as  each unit is first
  conveyed, there shall be allowed a credit against the mortgage recording
  taxes (except the special additional mortgage recording tax  imposed  by
  subdivision  one-a  of  section  two hundred fifty-three of the tax law)
  that would otherwise be payable  on  a  purchase  money  mortgage,  said
  credit to be in the amount resulting from the product of the purchaser's
  pro  rata percentage of interest in the common elements and the mortgage
  tax already paid on the construction or blanket  mortgage.    No  credit
  shall  be  allowed  under this subdivision (a) on account of the special
  additional mortgage  recording  tax  imposed  by  subdivision  one-a  of
  section  two  hundred  fifty-three of the tax law or (b) where the first
  condominium unit is sold more than two years after the  construction  or
  blanket mortgage was recorded.
    3.  Unless  specifically  exempted by a provision of this article, all
  property subject to the provisions of this article shall continue to  be
  subject  to all laws, rules and resolutions adopted by any county, city,
  town or village for the health, safety and welfare of its inhabitants or
  for regulation of the use of real property. Every county, city, town and
  village shall continue to have all enforcement powers  created  by  such
  laws,  rules or resolutions or the enabling acts of such laws, rules and
  resolutions and  may  exercise  those  enforcement  powers  against  any
  violation involving property subject to the provisions of this article.
    4. Any estimate of tax liability required by any rule adopted pursuant
  to  this  article  shall  not be binding upon any municipality or public
  official and any document containing such an estimate  shall  contain  a
  notice to that effect.


§  339-ff.  Mortgage investments on units by state agencies, insurers,
  banking organizations and fiduciaries; limitation  to  first  mortgages.
  (a)  The  following  persons:  (1) public officers, bodies of the state,
  municipalities,  and  municipal  subdivisions,  (2)  persons  doing   an
  insurance  business  (as defined by section one thousand one hundred one
  of the insurance law), (3) banking organizations (as defined by  section
  two  of  the  banking law), and (4) executors, administrators, trustees,
  guardians and other fiduciaries, are  authorized  to  invest  in  bonds,
  notes and evidences of indebtedness which are secured by first mortgages
  or  deeds  of  trust  upon  units  and the appurtenant common interests,
  wherever such persons may invest, and subject to all of  the  rules  and
  limitations applicable to such investment, in bonds, notes and evidences
  of  indebtedness  which are secured by first mortgages or deeds of trust
  upon real estate. Where the applicable limitations  are  dependent  upon
  the  type  of  use  of  the  real  estate,  only  the type of use of the
  particular  unit  or  units  which  constitute  the  security  for  such
  investment  shall  be  taken  into consideration for the purpose of such
  limitations. The existence of any prior lien for taxes,  assessments  or
  other  similar  charges  not  yet  delinquent  shall  be  disregarded in
  determining whether a mortgage or deed of trust is a first  mortgage  or
  deed of trust.
    (b) No person enumerated in subdivision (a) of this section may invest
  in  bonds,  notes  or  evidences of indebtedness secured by mortgages or
  deeds of trust upon units and the appurtenant  common  interests,  which
  are   other   than   first   mortgages  or  deeds  of  trust  thereupon,
  notwithstanding any other provision  of  law  (including  section  three
  hundred thirty-nine-g of this chapter).
    (c)  Notwithstanding  subdivisions  (a) and (b), banking organizations
  are authorized, subject to the rules and limitations applicable  thereto
  contained   in   subdivision   four-a  of  section  one  hundred  three,
  subdivision six-a of section two hundred thirty-five, subdivision four-a
  of section three hundred eighty and subdivision eight  of  section  four
  hundred  fifty-six  of the banking law, and the New York job development
  authority is authorized to invest  in  bonds,  notes  and  evidences  of
  indebtedness  which  are secured by mortgages other than first mortgages
  upon units and the appurtenant common interests, provided such mortgages
  are in compliance with title  eight  of  article  eight  of  the  public
  authorities law.
    (d)  Notwithstanding subdivisions (a) and (b) of this section, the New
  York state urban development corporation  is  authorized  to  invest  in
  bonds,  notes  and  evidences  of  indebtedness  which  are  secured  by
  mortgages other than first mortgages  upon  units  and  the  appurtenant
  common  interests,  provided  that (i) such units are owned or are to be
  acquired by a corporation as defined in subparagraph five  of  paragraph
  (a) of section one hundred two of the not-for-profit corporation law and
  are  to  be  used  for  commercial  purposes,  and  such corporation has
  executed a loan authorization agreement with the New  York  state  urban
  development  corporation  on  or before June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
  eighty-eight or (ii) such units are developed as a part of a project  of
  the  New York state urban development corporation that received specific
  authorization in chapter  eight  hundred  thirty-nine  of  the  laws  of
  nineteen   hundred   eighty-seven;   and   further  provided  that  such
  investments and subordinate mortgages are in compliance with chapter one
  hundred seventy-four of the laws of  nineteen  hundred  sixty-eight,  as
  subsequently amended.
    (e)  Notwithstanding subdivisions (a) and (b) of this section, the New
  York city housing development corporation and a city having a population
  of one million or more are authorized to invest  in  bonds,  notes,  and
  evidences  of  indebtedness  which  are  secured by mortgages other than
  first mortgages upon dwelling units and the appurtenant common interests
  provided that such investment is  made  in  connection  with  a  project
  undertaken  pursuant  to  the private housing finance law or the general
  municipal law.
    (f) Notwithstanding subdivisions (a) and  (b)  of  this  section,  the
  division  of  housing  and  community renewal and the housing trust fund
  corporation, their successors and assigns, are authorized to  invest  in
  bonds,  notes,  and  evidences  of  indebtedness  which  are  secured by
  mortgages other  than  first  mortgages  upon  dwelling  units  and  the
  appurtenant  common  interests  provided that such investment is made in
  connection with a project undertaken pursuant  to  the  private  housing
  finance law.


§  339-gg.  Severability.  If  any  provision  of  this article or any
  section, sentence, clause, phrase or word, or the application thereof in
  any circumstance is held invalid, the validity of the remainder  of  the
  article and of the application of any such provision, section, sentence,
  clause,  phrase or word in any other circumstances shall not be affected
  Thereby.


§  339-hh. Reservation of power. The legislature reserves the right to
  alter, amend, suspend or repeal in whole or in part  this  article.  Any
  such  change  in  this  article  shall  be effective notwithstanding any
  provisions of any declaration or by-laws.


§  339-ii.  Construction. This article shall be liberally construed to
  effect the purposes thereof.


§  339-jj. Borrowing by board of managers. 1. To the extent authorized
  by the declaration or the by-laws, the board of managers, on  behalf  of
  the unit owners, may incur debt. In addition, subject to any limitations
  set  forth  in the declaration or the by-laws, the board of managers, on
  behalf of the unit owners, may  incur  debt  for  any  of  the  purposes
  enumerated  in paragraph (b) of subdivision two of section three hundred
  thirty-nine-v of this article, provided that (a) such debt  is  incurred
  no  earlier than the fifth anniversary of the first conveyance of a unit
  and (b) the incurrence of such debt  shall  require  the  consent  of  a
  majority in common interest of the unit owners.
    2. In connection with a debt incurred by it, the board of managers, on
  behalf  of  the unit owners, may (a) assign the rights in and to receive
  future income and common charges, (b) create  a  security  interest  in,
  assign,  pledge,  mortgage  or otherwise encumber funds or other real or
  personal property that it holds, (c) agree that, to the  extent  of  any
  amounts  due  under  any of the provisions of the agreements under which
  the debt was incurred and subject to the provisions of  subdivision  two
  of  section  three  hundred  thirty-nine-l  of  this article, all common
  charges received and to be received by it, and the right to receive such
  funds, shall constitute trust funds for the purpose of paying such  debt
  and  the  same  shall  be expended for such purpose before expending any
  part of the same for any other  purpose,  and  (d)  agree  that  at  the
  lender's  direction  it  will  increase  common  charges  to  the extent
  necessary to pay any amount when due under any of the provisions of  the
  agreements  under  which  the  debt was incurred. The preceding sentence
  shall not be construed to authorize the board of managers  to  create  a
  lien  on  the  common elements. Any such assignment may provide that, in
  the event of a default, the lender shall have the right of the board  of
  managers  to  file liens in the lender's name on units for unpaid common
  charges pursuant to  sections  three  hundred  thirty-nine-z  and  three
  hundred  thirty-nine-aa  of this article and the right to foreclose such
  liens pursuant to section three hundred thirty-nine-aa of this article.
    3. Nothing in this section shall impair rights under any loan or other
  agreement existing prior to the effective date of this section or  limit
  any right or power that a board of managers would otherwise have.


§  339-kk. Rents. (a) For the purposes of this section, "non-occupying
  owner" shall mean a unit owner in a condominium association who does not
  occupy the dwelling unit.
    (b) If a non-occupying owner rents  any  dwelling  unit  to  a  rental
  tenant  and  then  fails  to  make  payments  due  for  common  charges,
  assessments or late  fees  for  such  unit  within  sixty  days  of  the
  expiration  of  any  grace  period  after  they  are due, upon notice in
  accordance with subdivision (c) of this  section,  all  rental  payments
  from   the   tenant   shall  be  directly  payable  to  the  condominium
  association.
    (c) If the common charges, assessments or late fees due for  any  unit
  have  not  been  paid in full, within sixty days after the expiration of
  any grace period of the earliest due date, the board of  managers  shall
  provide  written  notice  to  the  tenant  and  the  non-occupying owner
  providing that, commencing  immediately  and  until  such  time  as  all
  payments  for common charges, assessments or late fees are made current,
  all rental payments due subsequent to the issuance of such notice are to
  be made payable to the condominium association at the address listed  on
  the  notice.  Where a majority of the board of managers has been elected
  by and from among the unit owners who are in occupancy,  the  board  may
  elect  not  to  require  that  rental  payments  be  made payable to the
  condominium association. At such time as payments  for  common  charges,
  assessments  and  late  fees from the non-occupying owner are once again
  current, notice of such fact shall be given within three  business  days
  to  the  rental  tenant  and  non-occupying owner. Thereafter all rental
  payments  shall  be  made  payable  to  the  non-occupying  owner  or  a
  designated  agent.  A non-occupying owner who disputes the association's
  claim to rental payments pursuant to this section shall be  entitled  to
  present  facts  supporting  such  owner's position at the next scheduled
  meeting of the board of managers, which must be held within thirty  days
  of  the  date  that  such board receives notice that such owner seeks to
  dispute such claim.
    (d) Nothing in this section shall limit any rights of unit  owners  or
  of the board of managers existing under any other law or agreement.
    (e)  Payment by a rental tenant to the condominium association made in
  connection with this section shall relieve that rental tenant  from  the
  obligation  to  pay such rent to the non-occupying owner and shall be an
  absolute  defense  in  any  non-payment  proceeding  commenced  by  such
  non-occupying owner against such tenant for such rent.


§  339-ll.  Electric vehicle charging station installation. 1. As used
  in this section:
    (a)  "Reasonable  restrictions"  means  restrictions   that   do   not
  significantly increase the cost of the station or significantly decrease
  its efficiency or specified performance.
    (b)  "Electric vehicle charging station" means a station that delivers
  electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into one  or  more
  electric  vehicles.  An  electric  vehicle  charging station may include
  several  charge  points  simultaneously  connecting   several   electric
  vehicles  to  the station and any related equipment needed to facilitate
  charging plug-in electric vehicles.
    2. (a) Any covenant, restriction, or condition contained in any  deed,
  contract,   security  instrument,  or  other  instrument  affecting  the
  transfer or sale of any interest in the property, and any by-laws,  that
  either  effectively prohibits or unreasonably restricts the installation
  or use of an electric vehicle charging station within an owner's unit or
  in a designated parking space, including, but not limited to,  a  deeded
  parking  space,  a  parking  space  in  an  owner's exclusive use common
  element, or a parking space that is specifically designated for use by a
  particular owner, or is in conflict with the provisions of this  section
  shall be void and unenforceable.
    (b)  This  section  shall  not apply to by-laws that impose reasonable
  restrictions on electric vehicle charging stations. However, it  is  the
  policy  of  the state to promote, encourage, and remove obstacles to the
  use of electric vehicle charging stations.
    (c) An electric vehicle charging station  shall  meet  all  applicable
  health  and  safety  standards  and requirements imposed by law, rule or
  regulation.
    (d) If approval is required for the installation or use of an electric
  vehicle charging station the application for approval shall be processed
  and  approved  by  the  association  in  a  manner  prescribed  by   the
  association  and shall not be willfully avoided or delayed. The approval
  or denial of an application shall be in writing. If  an  application  is
  not  denied in writing within sixty days from the date of receipt of the
  application, the application shall be deemed approved, unless that delay
  is the result of a reasonable request for additional information.
    (e) If the electric vehicle charging station is to be  placed  in  the
  common  elements or in an exclusive use common element, as designated in
  the common interest declaration, the following provisions shall apply:
    (i) The owner first shall obtain  approval  from  the  association  to
  install  the electric vehicle charging station and the association shall
  approve the installation if the owner agrees in writing to do all of the
  following:
    (A) comply with the  association's  architectural  standards  for  the
  installation of the charging station;
    (B) engage a licensed contractor to install the charging station;
    (C)  within  fourteen  days  of  approval,  provide  a  certificate of
  insurance that names the association as an additional insured under  the
  owner's   insurance  policy  pursuant  to  subparagraph  (iii)  of  this
  paragraph; and
    (D) pay for both the costs associated with the installation of and the
  electricity usage associated with the charging station.
    (ii) The owner and each successive owner of the charging station shall
  be responsible for all of the following:
    (A) costs  for  damage  to  the  charging  station,  common  elements,
  exclusive  use  common  elements,  or  separate units resulting from the
  installation,  maintenance,  repair,  removal,  or  replacement  of  the
  charging station;
    (B) costs for the maintenance, repair, and replacement of the charging
  station  until it has been removed and for the restoration of the common
  elements after removal;
    (C) the cost of electricity associated with the charging station; and
    (D)  disclosing  to  prospective  buyers the existence of any charging
  station of the owner and the related responsibilities of the owner under
  this section.
    (iii) The owner of the charging  station,  whether  located  within  a
  separate  unit  or  within  the  common elements or exclusive use common
  elements, shall, at all times, maintain a liability coverage policy. The
  owner that submitted the application to  install  the  charging  station
  shall  provide  the  association  with  the corresponding certificate of
  insurance within fourteen days of  approval  of  the  application.  That
  owner  and  each  successor owner shall provide the association with the
  certificate of insurance annually thereafter.
    (iv) A homeowner shall  not  be  required  to  maintain  a  homeowners
  liability   coverage   policy   for   an  existing  national  electrical
  manufacturers association standard alternating current power plug.
    (f)  Except  as  provided  in  paragraph  (g)  of  this   subdivision,
  installation  of  an electric vehicle charging station for the exclusive
  use of an owner in a common element, that is not an exclusive use common
  element, shall be authorized by the association only if installation  in
  the  owner's  designated  parking  space  is  impossible or unreasonably
  expensive. In such cases, the association shall  enter  into  a  license
  agreement  with the owner for the use of the space in a common area, and
  the owner shall comply with all of the requirements in paragraph (e)  of
  this subdivision.
    (g) The association or owners may install an electric vehicle charging
  station  in  the  common  elements  for  the  use  of all members of the
  association and, in that case, the association shall develop appropriate
  terms of use for the charging station.
    (h) An association may create a new parking space where  one  did  not
  previously  exist  to facilitate the installation of an electric vehicle
  charging station.
    (i) An association that  willfully  violates  this  section  shall  be
  liable to the applicant or other party for actual damages, and shall pay
  a  civil  penalty  to  the  applicant or other party in an amount not to
  exceed one thousand dollars.
    (j) In any action by a unit  owner  requesting  to  have  an  electric
  vehicle  charging  station  installed  and seeking to enforce compliance
  with this section, the unit owner shall be awarded reasonable attorney's
  fees if he or she prevails.


ARTICLE 9-B
                               Condominium Act
  Section 339-d.  Short title.
          339-e.  Definitions.
          339-f.  Application of article.
          339-g.  Status of units.
          339-h.  Ownership of units.
          339-i.  Common elements.
          339-j.  Compliance with by-laws and rules and regulations.
          339-k.  Certain work prohibited.
          339-l.  Liens  against  common  elements;  liens  against units;
                    liens for labor performed or materials furnished.
          339-m.  Common profits and expenses.
          339-n.  Contents of declaration.
          339-o.  Contents of deeds and leases of units.
          339-p.  Copy of floor plans to be filed.
          339-q.  Filing with board.
          339-r.  Blanket mortgages and other blanket  liens  affecting  a
                    unit at time of first conveyance.
          339-s.  Recording.
          339-t.  Withdrawal from provisions of this article.
          339-u.  By-laws.
          339-v.  Contents of by-laws.
          339-w.  Books  of  receipts  and  expenditures; availability for
                    examination.
          339-x.  Waiver of use of common elements; abandonment  of  unit;
                    conveyance to board of managers.
          339-y.  Separate taxation.
          339-z.  Lien   for  common  charges;  priority;  exoneration  of
                    grantor and grantee.
          339-aa. Lien for common charges; duration; foreclosure.
          339-bb. Insurance.
          339-cc. Repair or reconstruction.
          339-dd. Actions.
          339-ee. Effect of other laws.
          339-ff. Mortgage  investments  on  units  by   state   agencies,
                    insurers,   banking   organizations  and  fiduciaries;
                    limitation to first mortgages.
          339-gg. Severability.
          339-hh. Reservation of power.
          339-ii. Construction.
          339-jj. Borrowing by board of managers.
          339-kk. Rents.
          339-ll. Electric vehicle charging station installation.


§  339-d. Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as
  the "condominium act."


§  339-e.  Definitions.  As  used  in this article, unless the context
  otherwise requires:
    1. "Building" means a multi-unit building or buildings, or a group  of
  buildings  whether  or  not attached to each other, comprising a part of
  the property.
    2. "Common charges" means  each  unit's  proportionate  share  of  the
  common expenses in accordance with its common interest.
    3.  "Common  elements,"  unless otherwise provided in the declaration,
  means and includes:
    (a) The land on which the building is located;
    (b) The foundations, columns, girders, beams,  supports,  main  walls,
  roofs,  halls,  corridors, lobbies, stairs, stairways, fire escapes, and
  entrances and exits of the building;
    (c) The basements, cellars, yards, gardens, recreational or  community
  facilities, parking areas and storage spaces;
    (d)  The premises for the lodging or use of janitors and other persons
  employed for the operation of the property;
    (e) Central and appurtenant installations for services such as  power,
  light, gas, hot and cold water, heating, refrigeration, air conditioning
  and incinerating;
    (f)   The   elevators,   escalators,   tanks,   pumps,  motors,  fans,
  compressors, ducts  and  in  general  all  apparatus  and  installations
  existing for common use;
    (g)  Such  facilities  as  may be designated as common elements in the
  declaration; and
    (h) All other parts of the property necessary  or  convenient  to  its
  existence, maintenance and safety, or normally in common use.
    4. "Common expenses" means and includes:
    (a) Expenses of operation of the property, and
    (b)  All  sums  designated  common  expenses  by  or  pursuant  to the
  provisions of this article, the declaration or the by-laws.
    5. "Common interest" means the (i) proportionate,  undivided  interest
  in  fee  simple  absolute,  or  (ii)  proportionate  undivided leasehold
  interest in the common elements appertaining to each unit, as  expressed
  in the declaration.
    6.  "Common  profits"  means  the excess of all receipts of the rents,
  profits and revenues  from  the  common  elements  remaining  after  the
  deduction of the common expenses.
    7.  "Declaration"  means  the  instrument  by  which  the  property is
  submitted to the provisions of this article,  as  hereinafter  provided,
  and  such  instrument  as from time to time amended, consistent with the
  provisions of this article and of the by-laws.
    8. "Majority" of unit owners means either (i) more than fifty per cent
  in common interest in the aggregate, or (ii) more than fifty per cent in
  number of units in the aggregate, or (iii) more than fifty per  cent  in
  the  aggregate in both common interest and in number of units, as may be
  specified herein or in the declaration or the by-laws  with  respect  to
  any matter or matters. Any specified percentage of unit owners means (i)
  such  percentage  in  common  interest  in  the  aggregate, or (ii) such
  percentage in number of units in the aggregate, or (iii) such percentage
  in common interest and such percentage in number of  units,  as  may  be
  specified  herein  or  in the declaration or the by-laws with respect to
  any matter or matters, provided, however, that different percentages  in
  interest and in number of units may be so specified.
    9.  "Operation  of the property" means and includes the administration
  and  operation  of  the  property  and  the  maintenance,   repair   and
  replacement of, and the making of any additions and improvements to, the
  common elements.
    10.   "Person"  means  a  natural  person,  corporation,  partnership,
  association, trustee or other legal entity.
    11. "Property" means and includes the land, the building and all other
  improvements  thereon,  (i) owned in fee simple absolute, or (ii) in the
  case of a condominium devoted exclusively to  non-residential  purposes,
  held  under  a  lease or sublease, or separate unit leases or subleases,
  the unexpired term or terms of which on the date  of  recording  of  the
  declaration shall not be less than thirty years, or (iii) in the case of
  a  qualified  leasehold  condominium, held under a lease or sublease, or
  separate unit leases or subleases, the unexpired term or terms of  which
  on the date of recording of the declaration shall not be less than fifty
  years,  and  all  easements, rights and appurtenances belonging thereto,
  and  all  other  property,  personal  or  mixed,  intended  for  use  in
  connection therewith, which have been or are intended to be submitted to
  the provisions of this article.
    12.  "Qualified leasehold condominium" means any leasehold interest in
  real property intended to  be  used  for  either  residential  purposes,
  commercial  purposes,  industrial  purposes  or  any combination of such
  purposes, together with any fee simple absolute or leasehold interest in
  the buildings and all other improvements which have been or at any  time
  hereafter  may  be erected upon such real property, which has been or is
  intended to be submitted to the provisions  of  this  article,  provided
  that,  on  the date of the recording of the declaration: (i) the battery
  park city authority or the Roosevelt Island operating corporation is the
  holder of the tenant's interest in such leasehold interest or  (ii)  the
  Queens  West  development  corporation  is  the holder of the landlord's
  interest in such leasehold interest or (iii) the  Brooklyn  bridge  park
  development corporation is the holder of the landlord's interest in such
  leasehold  interest,  or (iv) the New York city educational construction
  fund is the holder of the landlord's interest in such leasehold interest
  for property located in the borough of Manhattan, in  the  city  of  New
  York, bounded on the east by Second Ave, on the west by Third Avenue, to
  the  north  by  East  Fifty-seventh  Street,  and  to  the south by East
  Fifty-sixth Street.
    13. "Recording officer" and "recording" or "recorded" shall  have  the
  meanings stated in section two hundred ninety of this chapter.
    14.  "Unit"  means a part of the property intended for any type of use
  or uses, and with an exit to a public street or highway or to  a  common
  element  or  elements  leading  to  a  public street or highway, and may
  include such appurtenances as garage and other  parking  space,  storage
  room, balcony, terrace and patio, but in no event may utility facilities
  such as those for water or sewerage treatment or power generation appear
  as single units.
    15. "Unit designation" means the number, letter or combination thereof
  or other official designations conforming to the tax lot number, if any,
  designating the unit in the declaration and on the floor plans.
    16.  "Unit  owner"  means  the  person or persons owning a unit in fee
  simple absolute or, in the case either  (i)  of  a  condominium  devoted
  exclusively  to  non-residential purposes, or (ii) a qualified leasehold
  condominium, owning a unit held under a lease or sublease.


§  339-f.  Application of article. 1. This article shall be applicable
  only to property the sole owner or all the owners of  which  submit  the
  same  to  the  provisions  hereof  by  duly  executing  and  recording a
  declaration as hereinafter provided.
    2. Such property shall be submitted and subject to  the  authority  of
  and  review  by  the  county planning agency as set forth in section two
  hundred thirty-nine-n of article twelve-B of the general municipal  law,
  irrespective  of  and  notwithstanding  the  distance requirement of the
  second unnumbered paragraph of such section, and as though the  property
  were  a subdivision plat subject to such section. This subdivision shall
  not be applicable to:
    (i) property which has received local planning board approval prior to
  December twenty-first, nineteen hundred seventy-eight; or
    (ii) property submitted to the provisions of this article on which any
  building or buildings or any portion thereof  has  been  rented  to  any
  tenant or tenants.


§  339-g.  Status  of  units.  Each  unit,  together  with  its common
  interest, shall for all purposes constitute real property.


§  339-h. Ownership of units. Each unit owner shall be entitled to the
  exclusive ownership and possession of his unit.


§  339-i. Common elements. 1. Each unit shall have appurtenant thereto
  a common interest as expressed in the declaration. Such  interest  shall
  be  (i) in the approximate proportion that the fair value of the unit at
  the date of the declaration bears to the then aggregate  fair  value  of
  all  the units or (ii) in the approximate proportion that the floor area
  of the unit at the date of the declaration bears to the  then  aggregate
  floor  area  of  all  the  units,  but such proportion shall reflect the
  substantially exclusive advantages enjoyed by one or more  but  not  all
  units in a part or parts of the common elements or (iii) the interest of
  each of the units shall be in equal percentages, one for each unit as of
  the  date  of  filing  the  declaration,  or in equal percentages within
  separate  classifications  of  units  as  of  the  date  of  filing  the
  declaration,  or  (iv) upon floor space, subject to the location of such
  space and the additional factors of relative value to other space in the
  condominium, the uniqueness of the  unit,  the  availability  of  common
  elements  for exclusive or shared use, and the overall dimensions of the
  particular unit.
    2. The common interest appurtenant to each unit as  expressed  in  the
  declaration  shall  have  a permanent character and shall not be altered
  without the consent of all unit owners affected, expressed in an amended
  declaration. However, the declaration may contain provisions relating to
  the appropriation,  taking  or  condemnation  by  eminent  domain  by  a
  federal,   state   or  local  government,  or  instrumentality  thereof,
  including, but not limited to, reapportionment or other  change  of  the
  common  interest appurtenant to each unit, or portion thereof, remaining
  after a  partial  appropriation,  taking  or  condemnation.  The  common
  interest  shall  not  be separated from the unit to which it appertains.
  Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit  the  division  of  any
  unit  and  common interest appurtenant thereto in a non-residential unit
  in the manner permitted by the declaration and bylaws, including changes
  in the number of rooms; in no case may such division result in a greater
  percentage of common interest for  the  total  of  the  new  units  than
  existed  for  the original unit before division. Where authorized by the
  declaration and bylaws, an appropriate amendment to the declaration  may
  be  filed  by  the  new unit owners under the same file number and under
  procedure set forth in section three hundred thirty-nine-p  hereof,  and
  the  local  tax  authorities shall provide and certify upon the proposed
  amendment a conforming tax lot number upon completion of the new units.
    3. The common elements shall remain undivided and no right shall exist
  to partition or divide any thereof, except as otherwise provided in this
  article. Any provision to the contrary shall be null and void.   Nothing
  in  this  subdivision  shall be deemed to prevent ownership of a unit by
  the entirety, jointly or in common.
    4. Each unit owner may use the common elements in accordance with  the
  purpose  for  which they are intended, without hindering the exercise of
  or encroaching upon the rights  of  the  other  unit  owners,  but  this
  subsection  shall  not  be  deemed  to  prevent  some unit or units from
  enjoying substantially exclusive advantages in a part or  parts  of  the
  common elements as expressed in the declaration or by-laws.
    5.  The  unit owners shall have the irrevocable right, to be exercised
  by the board of managers, to have access to each unit from time to  time
  during reasonable hours to the extent necessary for the operation of the
  property,  or  for making emergency repairs therein necessary to prevent
  damage to the common elements or to  another  unit  or  units,  and  the
  by-laws   may   contain   reasonable   rules  and  regulations  for  the
  administration of this provision as the privacy of  the  units  and  the
  protection  of  them  and their contents from burglary, theft or larceny
  Requires.


§  339-j. Compliance with by-laws and rules and regulations. Each unit
  owner  shall  comply  strictly  with  the  by-laws   and   with   rules,
  regulations,   resolutions   and  decisions  adopted  pursuant  thereto.
  Failure to comply with any of the same shall be ground for an action  to
  recover  sums due, for damages or injunctive relief or both maintainable
  by the board of managers on behalf of the unit owners or,  in  a  proper
  case,  by  an  aggrieved unit owner. In any case of flagrant or repeated
  violation by a unit owner, he may be required by the board  of  managers
  to give sufficient surety or sureties for his future compliance with the
  by-laws, rules, regulations, resolutions and decisions.  Notwithstanding
  the  foregoing  provisions  of this section, no action or proceeding for
  any relief may be maintained due to the display of a flag of the  United
  States measuring not more than four feet by six feet.


§  339-k.  Certain  work  prohibited.  No unit owner shall do any work
  which would jeopardize the soundness or safety of the  property,  reduce
  the  value  thereof  or impair any easement or hereditament, nor may any
  unit owner  add  any  material  structure  or  excavate  any  additional
  basement  or  cellar,  without in every such case the consent of all the
  unit owners affected being first obtained.


§ 339-l. Liens against common elements; liens against units; liens for
  labor  performed  or materials furnished. 1. Subsequent to recording the
  declaration and while the property remains subject to this  article,  no
  lien  of  any  nature  shall  thereafter arise or be created against the
  common elements except with the unanimous consent of  the  unit  owners.
  During  such  period,  liens  may  arise  or be created only against the
  several units and their respective common interests.
    2. Labor performed on or materials furnished to a unit  shall  not  be
  the  basis  for the filing of a lien pursuant to article two of the lien
  law against the unit of any unit owner not expressly  consenting  to  or
  requesting  the  same, except in the case of emergency repairs. No labor
  performed on or materials furnished to the common elements shall be  the
  basis  for  a  lien  thereon,  but all common charges received and to be
  received by the board of managers, and the right to receive such  funds,
  shall  constitute trust funds for the purpose of paying the cost of such
  labor or materials performed or furnished at the express request or with
  the consent of the manager, managing agent or board of managers, and the
  same shall be expended first for such purpose before expending any  part
  of the same for any other purpose.


§  339-m.  Common  profits  and  expenses.  The  common profits of the
  property shall be distributed among, and the common  expenses  shall  be
  charged  to,  the  unit  owners  according  to  their  respective common
  interests, provided however, that expenses of insurance may  be  charged
  as provided in section three hundred thirty-nine-bb. Notwithstanding any
  provision  of  this  article,  profits  and  expenses  may  be specially
  allocated and apportioned by the board of managers in a manner different
  from common profits and expenses, to one or more  non-residential  units
  where  so authorized by the declaration and bylaws. In the case of units
  in any  building,  residential  or  non-residential,  or  a  combination
  thereof, profits and expenses may be specially allocated and apportioned
  based  on  special or exclusive use or availability or exclusive control
  of particular units or common areas by particular  unit  owners,  if  so
  authorized  by  the  declaration  and bylaws, in a manner different from
  common profits and  expenses.  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  this
  article,  common expenses may be charged to the owners of units that are
  subject  to  a  regulatory  agreement  with  a  governmental  entity  or
  instrumentality  limiting  the household income of the residents of such
  units upon initial occupancy that are  less  than  the  common  expenses
  charged to owners of other units where such lesser charges are necessary
  to  ensure that the combined common expenses, mortgage and other housing
  costs paid by owners of units subject to such regulatory  agreements  do
  not  exceed  thirty  percent  of the household income limit specified in
  such regulatory agreements. Where so authorized by the  declaration  and
  bylaws,  common  expenses  may  be charged to owners of units subject to
  such regulatory agreements in a manner that (i) is not  proportional  to
  the  respective  common interests of such owners, (ii) limits the amount
  charged to such owners, or (iii) limits the rate  at  which  the  amount
  charged  to  such  owners  may  increase.  The existence of such special
  allocation of common expenses and its financial impact  upon  all  units
  shall be disclosed as a special risk in any offering plan.


§  339-n.  Contents  of declaration. The declaration shall contain the
  following particulars:
    1. A statement of intention to submit the property to  the  provisions
  of this article.
    2.  Description of the land on which the building and improvements are
  or are to be located.
    3. Description of the building, including the location of the building
  by reference to fixed monuments or tax  map  parcel  data,  stating  the
  number  of  stories,  basements and cellars, the number of units and the
  principal materials of which it is or is to be constructed.
    4. The unit designation of each unit, and a statement of its location,
  approximate area, number of  rooms  in  residential  areas,  and  common
  element  to  which it has immediate access, and any other data necessary
  for its proper identification.
    5. Description of the common elements and a statement  of  the  common
  interest of each unit owner.
    6.  Statement of the uses for which the building and each of the units
  are intended.
    7. A designation of the secretary of state as agent of the corporation
  or board of managers upon whom process against it may be served and  the
  post  office address within or without this state to which the secretary
  of state shall mail a copy of any process against it served upon him  or
  her. The designation may include an email address to which the secretary
  of  state  shall  email a notice of the fact that process against it has
  been electronically served upon him or her. Service of  process  on  the
  secretary  of  state  as  agent of such corporation or board of managers
  shall be made in the manner provided by paragraph (a)  or  (b)  of  this
  subdivision.  Either  option  of  service  authorized  pursuant  to this
  subdivision shall be available at no extra cost  to  the  consumer.  (a)
  Personally  delivering  to  and  leaving  with  him or her or his or her
  deputy, or with any person authorized  by  the  secretary  of  state  to
  receive  such  service,  at the office of the department of state in the
  city of Albany, duplicate copies  of  such  process  together  with  the
  statutory fee, which shall be a taxable disbursement. Service of process
  on  such  corporation  or  board  of managers shall be complete when the
  secretary of state is so served. The secretary of state  shall  promptly
  send  one of such copies by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
  such corporation or board of managers, at the post  office  address,  on
  file  in  the  department  of  state,  specified  for  such purpose. (b)
  Electronically submitting a copy of the process  to  the  department  of
  state  together  with  the  statutory  fee, which fee shall be a taxable
  disbursement, through an electronic system operated by the department of
  state, provided the corporation  or  board  of  managers  has  an  email
  address  on  file  in  the department of state to which the secretary of
  state shall email  a  notice  of  the  fact  that  process  against  the
  corporation  or  board of managers has been served electronically on the
  secretary of state. Service of process on such corporation or  board  of
  managers  shall be complete when the secretary of state has reviewed and
  accepted service of such process. The secretary of state shall  promptly
  send  notice  of the fact that process has been served electronically on
  the secretary of state to such corporation or board of managers  at  the
  email  address  on  file  in  the department of state, specified for the
  purpose and  shall  make  a  copy  of  the  process  available  to  such
  corporation  or  board  of  managers.  Nothing in this subdivision shall
  affect the right to serve process in any other manner permitted by  law.
  The  corporation or board of managers shall also file with the secretary
  of state the name and post office address within or without  this  state
  to which the secretary of state shall mail a copy of any process against
  it  served  upon  the  secretary of state and shall update the filing as
  necessary.
    8.  Any  further  details  in  connection  with the property which the
  person or persons executing the declaration may deem  desirable  to  set
  forth.
    9. The method by which the declaration may be amended, consistent with
  the provisions of this article.


§  339-o.  Contents  of deeds and leases of units. Deeds and leases of
  units shall include the following particulars:
    1. Description of the land as provided in subsection  two  of  section
  three hundred thirty-nine-n and the liber, page and date of recording of
  the  declaration  or  solely by naming the city, village or town and the
  county in which the unit is located and referring to the liber, page and
  date of recording of the declaration.
    2. The unit designation of the unit in the declaration and  any  other
  data necessary for its proper identification.
    3. Statement of the use for which the unit is intended.
    4. The common interest appertaining to the unit.
    5.  Any  further  details  which  the  grantor  and  grantee  may deem
  desirable to set forth.


§  339-p.  Copy  of  floor  plans to be filed. Simultaneously with the
  recording of the declaration there shall be filed in the office  of  the
  recording  officer  a set of the floor plans of the building showing the
  layout, locations, and approximate dimensions of the units, stating  the
  declarants'  names,  and  bearing the verified statement of a registered
  architect or licensed professional engineer certifying  that  it  is  an
  accurate copy of portions of the plans of the building as filed with and
  approved  by  the  municipal  or  other  governmental subdivision having
  jurisdiction over the  issuance  of  permits  for  the  construction  of
  buildings.  If  such  floor  plans  do  not  contain  unit  designations
  certified by the appropriate local tax authorities as conforming to  the
  official  tax  lot  number,  there  shall  be filed in the office of the
  recording officer prior to the first conveyance of a unit a  floor  plan
  containing  a  unit  designation  certified by the appropriate local tax
  authority as conforming to the official tax lot number. It shall be  the
  duty  of  the appropriate local tax authority to provide such number for
  each unit upon completion of such unit. If such plans do not  include  a
  verified  statement  by such architect or engineer that such plans fully
  and  fairly  depict  the  layout,  location,   unit   designations   and
  approximate  dimensions  of any particular unit or units as built, there
  shall be recorded prior to each first conveyance of such particular unit
  or units an amendment to the declaration to which shall  be  attached  a
  verified  statement  of  a registered architect or licensed professional
  engineer certifying that the plans theretofore  filed,  or  being  filed
  simultaneously  with such amendment, fully and fairly depict the layout,
  location, unit designations and approximate dimensions of the particular
  unit or units as built. Such plans shall  be  designated  "condominium",
  assigned  a file number and kept on file by the recording officer.  Such
  plans shall be indexed under the names of  the  declarants  and  in  the
  block  index  if  any.  The  record  of  the declaration shall contain a
  reference to the file number of the floor plans of the building affected
  Thereby.


§  339-q.  Filing  with  board.  True  copies  of the floor plans, the
  declaration, the by-laws and any rules and regulations shall be kept  on
  file  in  the office of the board of managers and shall be available for
  inspection  at  convenient  hours  of  weekdays  by  persons  having  an
  Interest.


§ 339-r. Blanket mortgages and other blanket liens affecting a unit at
  time  of  first  conveyance. At the time of the first conveyance of each
  unit, every mortgage and other lien affecting such unit  and  any  other
  unit  shall  be paid and satisfied of record, or the unit being conveyed
  and its common interest shall be released therefrom by  partial  release
  duly recorded.


§  339-s.  Recording. 1.  The declaration, any amendment or amendments
  thereof, and  every  instrument  affecting  the  property  or  any  unit
  included  within  the meaning of "conveyance" as used in article nine of
  this chapter, shall be entitled to be indexed and recorded  pursuant  to
  and with the same effect as provided in said article nine. The recording
  officer  shall  not accept such an instrument constituting a condominium
  map unless it has endorsed thereon or attached thereto a certificate  of
  the  county  director  of  real  property  tax  services  that  the  fee
  authorized by section five hundred three of the real property  tax  law,
  if any, has been paid. Neither the declaration nor any amendment thereof
  shall be valid unless duly recorded.
    2.  Each  such  declaration,  and  any amendment or amendments thereof
  shall be filed with the department of state.


§  339-t. Withdrawal from provisions of this article. If withdrawal of
  the property from this article is authorized by at least eighty per cent
  in number and in common interest of the  units,  or  by  at  least  such
  larger  percentage  either  in  number or in common interest, or in both
  number and common interest, as may be specified in the by-laws, then the
  property shall be subject to an action for partition by any  unit  owner
  or lienor as if owned in common, in which event the net proceeds of sale
  shall  be  divided  among  all  the  unit  owners in proportion to their
  respective common interests, provided, however, that no payment shall be
  made to a unit owner until there has first been  paid  off  out  of  his
  share  of  such  net proceeds all liens on his unit.  Such withdrawal of
  the property from this article shall not bar its  subsequent  submission
  to  the  provisions of this article in accordance with the terms of this
  Article.


§  339-u.  By-laws. The operation of the property shall be governed by
  by-laws, a true copy of which shall be annexed to  the  declaration.  No
  modification  of  or  amendment to the by-laws shall be valid unless set
  forth in an amendment to the declaration  and  such  amendment  is  duly
  Recorded.


§  339-v.  Contents  of  by-laws.  1. The by-laws shall provide for at
  least the following:
    (a) The nomination and election of a board of managers, the number  of
  persons  constituting the same, and that the terms of at least one-third
  of the members of such board  shall  expire  annually;  the  powers  and
  duties  of  the  board;  the compensation, if any, of the members of the
  board; the method of removal from office of members of  the  board;  and
  whether  or  not  the  board  may  engage  the  services of a manager or
  managing agent or both, and specifying which of the  powers  and  duties
  granted  to  the  board by this article or otherwise may be delegated by
  the board to either or both of them. Nothing contained herein shall  bar
  the  incorporation of the board of managers under applicable statutes of
  this state;  such  incorporation  must  be  consistent  with  the  other
  provisions of this article and the nature of the condominium purpose.
    (b) Methods of calling meetings of the unit owners; what percentage of
  the  unit  owners,  if other than a majority, shall constitute a quorum;
  and what percentage  shall,  consistent  with  the  provisions  of  this
  section,  be  necessary  to  adopt decisions binding on all unit owners.
  Meetings of unit owners may be held at such physical  place  as  may  be
  fixed  by or under the by-laws, or if not so fixed, as determined by the
  board of managers. Provided, however, that the board of managers may, in
  its sole discretion, determine  that  the  meeting  be  held  solely  or
  partially  by means of electronic communication, the platform/service of
  which shall be the place of the meeting for purposes  of  this  article.
  Nothing  contained  in this paragraph shall prohibit a board of managers
  from holding a meeting at a physical place and allowing unit owners  the
  option  of  attending  such  meeting either at such physical place or by
  means of electronic communication.
    (c) Election of a president from among the board of managers who shall
  preside over the meetings of such board and of the unit owners.
    (d) Election of a secretary who shall keep a record wherein actions of
  such board and of meetings of the unit owners shall be recorded.
    (e) Election of a treasurer who shall keep the financial  records  and
  books of account.
    (f)  Operation  of  the  property,  payment of the common expenses and
  determination and collection of the common charges.
    (g) The manner of designation and removal of persons employed for  the
  operation of the property.
    (h)  Method  of  adopting  and  of  amending  administrative rules and
  regulations governing the details of the operation and use of the common
  elements.
    (i) Such restrictions on  and  requirements  respecting  the  use  and
  maintenance  of  the  units  and the use of the common elements, not set
  forth in the  declaration,  as  are  designed  to  prevent  unreasonable
  interference  with  the  use of their respective units and of the common
  elements by the several unit owners.
    (j) The percentage of the unit owners, but not less than sixty-six and
  two-thirds per cent in number and common interest  except  in  the  case
  where  all  units  are  non-residential, which may at any time modify or
  amend the by-laws.
    2. The by-laws may also provide for the following:
    (a) Provisions governing the alienation,  conveyance,  sale,  leasing,
  purchase,  ownership and occupancy of units, provided, however, that the
  by-laws  shall  contain  no  provision   restricting   the   alienation,
  conveyance,  sale,  leasing,  purchase, ownership and occupancy of units
  because of race, creed, color or national origin.
    (b) Provisions governing the payment, collection and  disbursement  of
  funds,  including  reserves, to provide for major and minor maintenance,
  repairs, additions, improvements,  replacements,  working  capital,  bad
  debts and unpaid common expenses, depreciation, obsolescence and similar
  purposes.
    (c)  The  form by which the board of managers, acting on behalf of the
  unit owners, where authorized by this statute or  the  declaration,  may
  acquire and hold any unit and lease, mortgage and convey the same.
    (d) Any other provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this
  article, relating to the operation of the property.


§   339-w.  Books  of  receipts  and  expenditures;  availability  for
  examination. The manager or board of managers, as the case may be, shall
  keep detailed, accurate records, in chronological order, of the receipts
  and expenditures arising  from  the  operation  of  the  property.  Such
  records and the vouchers authorizing the payments shall be available for
  examination  by  the  unit  owners  at  convenient  hours of weekdays. A
  written report summarizing  such  receipts  and  expenditures  shall  be
  rendered  by  the  board  of  managers  to all unit owners at least once
  Annually.


  §  339-x.  Waiver  of  use  of  common  elements; abandonment of unit;
  conveyance to board of managers. No unit owner may exempt  himself  from
  liability  for  his  common charges by waiver of the use or enjoyment of
  any of the common elements or by abandonment of  his  unit.  Subject  to
  such  terms  and conditions as may be specified in the by-laws, any unit
  owner may, by conveying his unit and his common interest to the board of
  managers on behalf of all other unit owners, exempt himself from  common
  charges thereafter accruing.


§  339-y.  Separate  taxation.  1.  (a)  With  respect to all property
  submitted to the provisions of this article other than property which is
  the subject of a qualified leasehold  condominium,  each  unit  and  its
  common interest, not including any personal property, shall be deemed to
  be  a parcel and shall be subject to separate assessment and taxation by
  each assessing unit, school district, special district, county or  other
  taxing  unit, for all types of taxes authorized by law including but not
  limited to special ad valorem levies  and  special  assessments,  except
  that  the  foregoing  shall  not  apply  to  a  unit held under lease or
  sublease unless the declaration requires the unit owner to pay all taxes
  attributable to his unit. Neither the building, the property nor any  of
  the common elements shall be deemed to be a parcel.
    (b)  In  no  event  shall the aggregate of the assessment of the units
  plus their common interests exceed the total valuation of  the  property
  were the property assessed as a parcel.
    (c) For the purposes of this and the next succeeding section the terms
  "assessing  unit",  "assessment",  "parcel",  "special ad valorem levy",
  "special assessment", "special district", "taxation" and  "taxes"  shall
  have  the  meanings  specified  in  section  one hundred two of the real
  property tax law.
    (d) The provisions of paragraph (b)  of  this  subdivision  shall  not
  apply to such real property classified within:
    (i) on and after January first, nineteen hundred eighty-six, class one
  of  section one thousand eight hundred two of the real property tax law;
  or
    (ii) on and after January first,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-four,  the
  homestead  class  of  an  approved  assessing unit which has adopted the
  provisions of section one  thousand  nine  hundred  three  of  the  real
  property  tax  law,  or  the  homestead  class of the portion outside an
  approved assessing unit of an eligible split school district  which  has
  adopted  the  provisions of section nineteen hundred three-a of the real
  property tax law; provided, however, that, in an approved assessing unit
  which adopted the provisions of section one thousand nine hundred  three
  of  the  real  property  tax  law  prior  to  the effective date of this
  subdivision, paragraph (b) of this subdivision shall apply to  all  such
  real  property  (i)  which  is  classified  within  the  homestead class
  pursuant to paragraph one of subdivision (e)  of  section  one  thousand
  nine hundred one of the real property tax law and (ii) which, regardless
  of  classification,  was  on  the assessment roll prior to the effective
  date of this subdivision unless the  governing  body  of  such  approved
  assessing  unit  provides  by  local law adopted after a public hearing,
  prior to the taxable status date of such assessing unit  next  occurring
  after  December  thirty-first,  nineteen hundred eighty-three, that such
  paragraph (b) shall not apply to such real property to which this clause
  applies.  Provided  further,  however,  real  property  subject  to  the
  provisions   of   this   subparagraph  shall  be  assessed  pursuant  to
  subdivision two of section five hundred eighty-one of the real  property
  tax law.
    (e)  On  the  first  assessment  roll with a taxable status date on or
  after the effective date of  a  declaration  filed  with  the  recording
  officer  and  on  every  assessment  roll thereafter, the assessor shall
  enter each unit as a parcel,  as  provided  in  paragraph  (a)  of  this
  subdivision, based upon the condition and ownership of each such unit on
  the  appropriate  valuation  and  taxable status dates. Units owned by a
  developer may be entered as a single parcel with  a  parcel  description
  corresponding  to  the entire development, including the land under such
  development, and excluding those units appearing  separately.  Upon  the
  first  assessment  roll  where each unit is separately assessed, only an
  individual unit and its common interest shall constitute a parcel.
    (f)  The  provisions  of  paragraph  (b) of this subdivision shall not
  apply to a converted condominium unit in a municipal  corporation  other
  than  a  special assessing unit, which has adopted, prior to the taxable
  status date of the assessment roll upon which its taxes will be  levied,
  a  local  law or, for a school district, a resolution providing that the
  provisions of paragraph (b) of this subdivision shall  not  apply  to  a
  converted   condominium   unit  within  that  municipal  corporation.  A
  converted condominium unit for purposes of this paragraph shall  mean  a
  dwelling  unit held in condominium form of ownership that has previously
  been on an assessment roll as a dwelling unit in other than  condominium
  form of ownership, and has not been previously subject to the provisions
  of paragraph (b) of this subdivision.
    (g)  The  provisions  of  paragraph  (b) of this subdivision shall not
  apply to real property owned or leased by a cooperative  corporation  or
  on a condominium basis in the Town of Greenburgh, in Westchester County,
  which  has  adopted,  prior to the taxable status date of the assessment
  roll upon which its taxes will be levied, a local law providing that the
  provisions of paragraph (b) of this subdivision shall not apply to  such
  real  property  within  such  town; provided, however, the provisions of
  this paragraph shall not apply to real property owned  or  leased  by  a
  cooperative  corporation  or  on  a  condominium  basis  that  had  been
  previously  subject  to  the  provisions  of  paragraph  (b)   of   this
  subdivision  prior to January first, two thousand twenty-three; provided
  further, however, the provisions of this paragraph shall  not  apply  to
  real  property  owned  or  leased  by  a cooperative corporation or on a
  condominium basis that is participating in  an  affordable  housing  tax
  credit  program  or has a regulatory agreement with a federal, state, or
  local agency related to affordable housing requirements.
    2. With respect only to qualified leasehold condominiums:
    (a) Each  unit,  its  common  interest,  not  including  any  personal
  property,  and  the  proportionate  undivided  part of the real property
  which is the  subject  of  a  qualified  leasehold  condominium  and  is
  allocated  to  such  unit  (as  expressed  in the declaration), shall be
  deemed to be a parcel, shall be subject to separate  assessment  to  the
  unit  owner  and  shall  be  subject to taxation by each assessing unit,
  school district, special district, county or other taxing unit  for  all
  types  of taxes authorized by law including, but not limited to, special
  ad valorem levies and special assessments.  Neither  the  real  property
  which is the subject of a qualified leasehold condominium, the building,
  the  property  nor  any  of  the common elements shall be deemed to be a
  parcel. In no event shall the aggregate of the assessment of  the  units
  plus their common interests plus their proportionate undivided parts (as
  expressed  in  the  declaration)  of said real property exceed the total
  valuation of the property and said real property assessed  as  a  single
  parcel  owned  in fee. No provision of this paragraph shall be deemed to
  subject to taxation any  parcel  or  part  thereof  which,  pursuant  to
  applicable  law, is either exempt from taxation or with respect to which
  no taxes are payable.
    (b) For the purposes of section five hundred two of the real  property
  tax law, both the unit owner and the owner of the real property which is
  the  subject  of a qualified leasehold condominium shall be deemed to be
  the owner of the parcel  in  which  such  unit  is  included;  provided,
  however, that for the purposes of section nine hundred twenty-six of the
  real  property tax law, only the unit owner shall be deemed the owner of
  the parcel in which such unit is included and only the unit owner  shall
  be  personally liable for the payment of any taxes assessed against such
  parcel. Only the fee owner of  the  land  which  is  the  subject  of  a
  qualified  leasehold  condominium,  however,  shall  be deemed to be the
  owner of the parcel in which a unit is  included  for  the  purposes  of
  determining whether such parcel is subject to or exempt from taxation or
  whether no taxes are payable with respect thereto.
    (c)  The taxes assessed against each unit, its common interest and the
  proportionate undivided part of the real property which is  the  subject
  of  a  qualified  leasehold  condominium  allocated  to  such  unit  (as
  expressed in the declaration), shall constitute a lien  solely  on  that
  unit,  its  common interest and the proportionate undivided part of said
  real property allocated to such unit (as expressed in the  declaration),
  and  such  taxes  shall  not  constitute a lien on any other unit or the
  common interest of any other unit or the proportionate undivided part of
  said real property allocated to any other  unit  (as  expressed  in  the
  declaration).
    (d)  At  such  time  as  the  real  property which is the subject of a
  qualified leasehold condominium is submitted to the provisions  of  this
  article,  the  assessing  unit  shall  make  provision  so that the real
  property  which  (i)  is  not  the  subject  of  a  qualified  leasehold
  condominium  and  (ii) immediately prior to such submission was included
  in a parcel in which there also was included all or any part of the real
  property which  is  (immediately  subsequent  to  such  submission)  the
  subject of a qualified leasehold condominium, is established as a single
  parcel  on  the  assessment  roll  and  tax  map of such assessing unit,
  separate and apart from any real property which  is  the  subject  of  a
  qualified leasehold condominium.
    3.  All  provisions  of  a  declaration relating to a unit, its common
  interest and the proportionate undivided part of the real property which
  is the subject of a qualified leasehold condominium  allocated  to  such
  unit  (as  expressed  in the declaration), which has been sold for taxes
  shall survive and shall be enforceable after the issuance of a tax  deed
  for  such  unit  to  the  same  extent  that  such  provisions  would be
  enforceable against a voluntary grantee of such unit  immediately  prior
  to the delivery of such tax deed.
    4.  The  board  of managers may act as an agent of each unit owner who
  has given his written authorization to seek administrative and  judicial
  review  of an assessment made in accordance with subdivision one of this
  section, pursuant to title one-A  of  article  five  and  title  one  of
  article  seven  of  the real property tax law. The board of managers may
  retain legal counsel on behalf of all unit owners for which it is acting
  as agent and to charge  all  such  unit  owners  a  pro  rata  share  of
  expenses,  disbursements  and  legal fees for which charges the board of
  managers  shall  have  a  lien  pursuant  to   section   three   hundred
  thirty-nine-z.
    5. Notwithstanding the provisions of any general, special or local law
  to  the  contrary, in a city having a population of one million or more,
  the board of managers shall be authorized to act as the  sole  agent  on
  behalf of all unit owners, without authorization of each unit owner, for
  the limited purpose of determining whether or not to waive prospectively
  the  benefit  of  real  property  tax  abatement  and  exemption for the
  property in order to qualify for a partial abatement  of  real  property
  taxes  pursuant  to  section  four  hundred  sixty-seven-a  of  the real
  property tax law.


§ 339-z. Lien for common charges; priority; exoneration of grantor and
  grantee. The board of managers, on behalf of the unit owners, shall have
  a lien on each unit for the unpaid common charges thereof, together with
  interest  thereon,  prior  to  all other liens except only (i) liens for
  taxes on the unit in favor  of  any  assessing  unit,  school  district,
  special district, county or other taxing unit, (ii) all sums unpaid on a
  first  mortgage  of  record,  and (iii) all sums unpaid on a subordinate
  mortgage of record held by the New York job development  authority,  the
  New  York  state  urban development corporation, the division of housing
  and community renewal, the housing trust fund corporation, the New  York
  city  housing  development corporation, or in a city having a population
  of one million or more, the  department  of  housing,  preservation  and
  development.  Upon  the sale or conveyance of a unit, such unpaid common
  charges shall be paid out of the sale proceeds or by  the  grantee.  Any
  grantor  or  grantee of a unit shall be entitled to a statement from the
  manager or board of managers, setting forth the  amount  of  the  unpaid
  common  charges  accrued  against the unit, and neither such grantor nor
  grantee shall be liable for, nor shall the unit conveyed be subject to a
  lien for, any unpaid common charges against such unit accrued  prior  to
  such   conveyance   in   excess   of   the  amount  therein  set  forth.
  Notwithstanding   the   above,   the   declaration   of   an   exclusive
  non-residential condominium may provide that the lien for common charges
  will be superior to any mortgage liens of record.


§  339-aa.  Lien  for  common charges; duration; foreclosure. The lien
  provided for in the immediately preceding  section  shall  be  effective
  from  and  after  the  filing  in the office of the recording officer in
  which the declaration is filed a verified notice  of  lien  stating  the
  name  (if any) and address of the property, the liber and page of record
  of the declaration, the name of the record owner of the unit,  the  unit
  designation,  the  amount  and  purpose for which due, and the date when
  due; and shall continue in effect until all sums secured  thereby,  with
  the interest thereon, shall have been fully paid or until expiration six
  years  from  the  date  of filing, whichever occurs sooner. In the event
  that unpaid common charges are due, any member of the board of  managers
  may  file  a notice of lien as described herein if no notice of lien has
  been filed within sixty days after the unpaid charges are due. Upon such
  payment the unit owner shall be entitled to an instrument duly  executed
  and  acknowledged  certifying  to  the fact of payment. Such lien may be
  foreclosed by suit authorized by and brought in the name of the board of
  managers, acting on behalf of the unit  owners,  in  like  manner  as  a
  mortgage  of real property, without the necessity, however, of naming as
  a party defendant any person solely by reason of  his  owning  a  common
  interest  with respect to the property. In any such foreclosure the unit
  owner shall be required to pay a reasonable rental for the unit for  any
  period prior to sale pursuant to judgment of foreclosure and sale, if so
  provided  in the by-laws, and the plaintiff in such foreclosure shall be
  entitled to the appointment of a receiver to collect the same. The board
  of managers, acting on behalf of the  unit  owners,  shall  have  power,
  unless  prohibited  by  the  by-laws,  to bid in the unit at foreclosure
  sale, and to acquire and hold, lease, mortgage and convey the same. Suit
  to  recover  a  money  judgment  for  unpaid  common  charges  shall  be
  maintainable  without foreclosing or waiving the lien securing the same,
  and foreclosure shall be maintainable notwithstanding  the  pendency  of
  suit to recover a money judgment.
    Notwithstanding  any  other  provision of this article, if a municipal
  corporation acquires title to a unit as  a  result  of  tax  enforcement
  proceedings,  such  municipal  corporation  shall  not be liable for and
  shall not be  subject  to  suit  for  recovery  of  the  common  charges
  applicable  to  such  unit during the period while title to such unit is
  held by the municipal corporation or for the payment of any  rental  for
  the  unit  under the provisions of this section, except to the extent of
  any rent arising from such unit received by such  municipal  corporation
  during such period.
    Except as herein specifically provided, nothing contained herein shall
  affect  or  impair  or  release  the  unit from the lien for such common
  charges or impair or diminish the rights of the manager or the board  of
  managers  on  behalf  of  the unit owners under this section and section
  three hundred thirty-nine-z.


§  339-bb.  Insurance. The board of managers shall, if required by the
  declaration, the by-laws or by a majority of the unit owners, insure the
  building against loss or damage by fire and such other hazards as  shall
  be  required, and shall give written notice of such insurance and of any
  change therein or termination thereof to each unit owner. In the case of
  a qualified leasehold condominium, such insurance shall be  required  in
  any  event,  and shall be in an amount equal to full replacement cost of
  the building. The policy or policies of such insurance shall be  updated
  annually to maintain such insurance in such amount. Nothing herein shall
  prejudice  the  right  of each unit owner to insure his own unit for his
  own benefit. The premiums for such insurance on the  building  shall  be
  deemed  common expenses, provided, however, that in charging the same to
  the unit owners consideration may be given to the higher  premium  rates
  on some units than on others.


§ 339-cc. Repair or reconstruction. 1. Except as hereinafter provided,
  damage  to or destruction of the building shall be promptly repaired and
  reconstructed by the board of managers, using the proceeds of insurance,
  if any, on the building for  that  purpose,  and  any  deficiency  shall
  constitute  common expenses; provided, however, that if three-fourths or
  more  of  the  building  is  destroyed  or  substantially  damaged   and
  seventy-five  per  cent  or  more  of  the  unit  owners do not duly and
  promptly resolve to proceed with repair or restoration, then and in that
  event the property or so much thereof as shall remain, shall be  subject
  to an action for partition at the suit of any unit owner or lienor as if
  owned  in common, in which event the net proceeds of sale, together with
  the net proceeds of insurance policies, if any, shall be  considered  as
  one fund and shall be divided among all the unit owners in proportion to
  their  respective  common  interests, provided, however, that no payment
  shall be made to a unit owner until there has first been paid off out of
  his share of such fund all liens on his unit.
    2. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one  hereof,  in  the
  case  of a qualified leasehold condominium, any damage to or destruction
  of the building shall be promptly  repaired  and  reconstructed  by  the
  board  of managers, and the proceeds of the insurance policy or policies
  required for qualified leasehold condominiums pursuant to the provisions
  of section three hundred thirty-nine-bb of this chapter shall  first  be
  applied to such repair and reconstruction.


§ 339-dd. Actions. Actions may be brought or proceedings instituted by
  the board of managers in its discretion, on behalf of two or more of the
  unit  owners,  as their respective interests may appear, with respect to
  any cause of action relating to the common elements  or  more  than  one
  unit.  Service  of  process on the unit owners in any action relating to
  the common elements or more than one unit may  be  made  on  the  person
  designated in the declaration to receive service of process.


§ 339-ee. Effect of other laws. 1. All units of a property which shall
  be  submitted  to  the  provisions of this article shall be deemed to be
  cooperative interests in realty within  the  meaning  of  section  three
  hundred  fifty-two-e of the general business law. Article nine-A of this
  chapter shall not apply to the property or any unit. Article  eleven  of
  the  tax  law  shall  not  apply  to declarations or any lien for common
  charges provided for in this article.  Any  provision  of  the  multiple
  dwelling  law,  the  multiple  residence  law,  or  any  state  building
  construction code as to multiple residences pursuant to  the  provisions
  of  article eighteen of the executive law, requiring registration by the
  owner or other person having control of a  multiple  dwelling  shall  be
  deemed  satisfied  in the case of a property submitted to the provisions
  of  this  article  by  registration  of  the  board  of  managers,  such
  registration  to include the name of each unit owner and the designation
  of his or her unit; each unit  owner  shall  be  deemed  the  person  in
  control of the unit owned by him or her, and the board of managers shall
  be  deemed the person in control of the common elements, for purposes of
  enforcement of any such law or code, provided, however, that  all  other
  provisions  of  the  multiple  dwelling  law  or multiple residence law,
  otherwise applicable, shall be in full force and  effect,  and  provided
  further  that in a city with a population of one million or more persons
  registration required by a housing maintenance code of such  city  shall
  be  deemed  satisfied  in  the  case  of  a  property  submitted  to the
  provisions of this article by registration  of  the  board  of  managers
  which  need  not include the name of each unit owner and the designation
  of his or her unit.
    2. In the event the proceeds of a construction mortgage  were  applied
  to  construction  of a unit of a condominium submitted to the provisions
  of this article, or in the event that a unit submitted to the provisions
  of this act was subject  to  a  blanket  mortgage  whose  proceeds  were
  applied  exclusively  to  payment  of  the  construction  mortgage or to
  capital expenditures or expenses for the development or operation of the
  condominium, or to purchase of land or  buildings  for  the  condominium
  provided  that  such  purchase  was  no more than two years prior to the
  recording of the declaration of condominium, and  a  mortgage  recording
  tax was duly paid on such construction or blanket mortgage in accordance
  with  article  eleven  of  the  tax  law,  then,  as  each unit is first
  conveyed, there shall be allowed a credit against the mortgage recording
  taxes (except the special additional mortgage recording tax  imposed  by
  subdivision  one-a  of  section  two hundred fifty-three of the tax law)
  that would otherwise be payable  on  a  purchase  money  mortgage,  said
  credit to be in the amount resulting from the product of the purchaser's
  pro  rata percentage of interest in the common elements and the mortgage
  tax already paid on the construction or blanket  mortgage.    No  credit
  shall  be  allowed  under this subdivision (a) on account of the special
  additional mortgage  recording  tax  imposed  by  subdivision  one-a  of
  section  two  hundred  fifty-three of the tax law or (b) where the first
  condominium unit is sold more than two years after the  construction  or
  blanket mortgage was recorded.
    3.  Unless  specifically  exempted by a provision of this article, all
  property subject to the provisions of this article shall continue to  be
  subject  to all laws, rules and resolutions adopted by any county, city,
  town or village for the health, safety and welfare of its inhabitants or
  for regulation of the use of real property. Every county, city, town and
  village shall continue to have all enforcement powers  created  by  such
  laws,  rules or resolutions or the enabling acts of such laws, rules and
  resolutions and  may  exercise  those  enforcement  powers  against  any
  violation involving property subject to the provisions of this article.
    4. Any estimate of tax liability required by any rule adopted pursuant
  to  this  article  shall  not be binding upon any municipality or public
  official and any document containing such an estimate  shall  contain  a
  notice to that effect.


§  339-ff.  Mortgage investments on units by state agencies, insurers,
  banking organizations and fiduciaries; limitation  to  first  mortgages.
  (a)  The  following  persons:  (1) public officers, bodies of the state,
  municipalities,  and  municipal  subdivisions,  (2)  persons  doing   an
  insurance  business  (as defined by section one thousand one hundred one
  of the insurance law), (3) banking organizations (as defined by  section
  two  of  the  banking law), and (4) executors, administrators, trustees,
  guardians and other fiduciaries, are  authorized  to  invest  in  bonds,
  notes and evidences of indebtedness which are secured by first mortgages
  or  deeds  of  trust  upon  units  and the appurtenant common interests,
  wherever such persons may invest, and subject to all of  the  rules  and
  limitations applicable to such investment, in bonds, notes and evidences
  of  indebtedness  which are secured by first mortgages or deeds of trust
  upon real estate. Where the applicable limitations  are  dependent  upon
  the  type  of  use  of  the  real  estate,  only  the type of use of the
  particular  unit  or  units  which  constitute  the  security  for  such
  investment  shall  be  taken  into consideration for the purpose of such
  limitations. The existence of any prior lien for taxes,  assessments  or
  other  similar  charges  not  yet  delinquent  shall  be  disregarded in
  determining whether a mortgage or deed of trust is a first  mortgage  or
  deed of trust.
    (b) No person enumerated in subdivision (a) of this section may invest
  in  bonds,  notes  or  evidences of indebtedness secured by mortgages or
  deeds of trust upon units and the appurtenant  common  interests,  which
  are   other   than   first   mortgages  or  deeds  of  trust  thereupon,
  notwithstanding any other provision  of  law  (including  section  three
  hundred thirty-nine-g of this chapter).
    (c)  Notwithstanding  subdivisions  (a) and (b), banking organizations
  are authorized, subject to the rules and limitations applicable  thereto
  contained   in   subdivision   four-a  of  section  one  hundred  three,
  subdivision six-a of section two hundred thirty-five, subdivision four-a
  of section three hundred eighty and subdivision eight  of  section  four
  hundred  fifty-six  of the banking law, and the New York job development
  authority is authorized to invest  in  bonds,  notes  and  evidences  of
  indebtedness  which  are secured by mortgages other than first mortgages
  upon units and the appurtenant common interests, provided such mortgages
  are in compliance with title  eight  of  article  eight  of  the  public
  authorities law.
    (d)  Notwithstanding subdivisions (a) and (b) of this section, the New
  York state urban development corporation  is  authorized  to  invest  in
  bonds,  notes  and  evidences  of  indebtedness  which  are  secured  by
  mortgages other than first mortgages  upon  units  and  the  appurtenant
  common  interests,  provided  that (i) such units are owned or are to be
  acquired by a corporation as defined in subparagraph five  of  paragraph
  (a) of section one hundred two of the not-for-profit corporation law and
  are  to  be  used  for  commercial  purposes,  and  such corporation has
  executed a loan authorization agreement with the New  York  state  urban
  development  corporation  on  or before June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
  eighty-eight or (ii) such units are developed as a part of a project  of
  the  New York state urban development corporation that received specific
  authorization in chapter  eight  hundred  thirty-nine  of  the  laws  of
  nineteen   hundred   eighty-seven;   and   further  provided  that  such
  investments and subordinate mortgages are in compliance with chapter one
  hundred seventy-four of the laws of  nineteen  hundred  sixty-eight,  as
  subsequently amended.
    (e)  Notwithstanding subdivisions (a) and (b) of this section, the New
  York city housing development corporation and a city having a population
  of one million or more are authorized to invest  in  bonds,  notes,  and
  evidences  of  indebtedness  which  are  secured by mortgages other than
  first mortgages upon dwelling units and the appurtenant common interests
  provided that such investment is  made  in  connection  with  a  project
  undertaken  pursuant  to  the private housing finance law or the general
  municipal law.
    (f) Notwithstanding subdivisions (a) and  (b)  of  this  section,  the
  division  of  housing  and  community renewal and the housing trust fund
  corporation, their successors and assigns, are authorized to  invest  in
  bonds,  notes,  and  evidences  of  indebtedness  which  are  secured by
  mortgages other  than  first  mortgages  upon  dwelling  units  and  the
  appurtenant  common  interests  provided that such investment is made in
  connection with a project undertaken pursuant  to  the  private  housing
  finance law.


§  339-ff.  Mortgage investments on units by state agencies, insurers,
  banking organizations and fiduciaries; limitation  to  first  mortgages.
  (a)  The  following  persons:  (1) public officers, bodies of the state,
  municipalities,  and  municipal  subdivisions,  (2)  persons  doing   an
  insurance  business  (as defined by section one thousand one hundred one
  of the insurance law), (3) banking organizations (as defined by  section
  two  of  the  banking law), and (4) executors, administrators, trustees,
  guardians and other fiduciaries, are  authorized  to  invest  in  bonds,
  notes and evidences of indebtedness which are secured by first mortgages
  or  deeds  of  trust  upon  units  and the appurtenant common interests,
  wherever such persons may invest, and subject to all of  the  rules  and
  limitations applicable to such investment, in bonds, notes and evidences
  of  indebtedness  which are secured by first mortgages or deeds of trust
  upon real estate. Where the applicable limitations  are  dependent  upon
  the  type  of  use  of  the  real  estate,  only  the type of use of the
  particular  unit  or  units  which  constitute  the  security  for  such
  investment  shall  be  taken  into consideration for the purpose of such
  limitations. The existence of any prior lien for taxes,  assessments  or
  other  similar  charges  not  yet  delinquent  shall  be  disregarded in
  determining whether a mortgage or deed of trust is a first  mortgage  or
  deed of trust.
    (b) No person enumerated in subdivision (a) of this section may invest
  in  bonds,  notes  or  evidences of indebtedness secured by mortgages or
  deeds of trust upon units and the appurtenant  common  interests,  which
  are   other   than   first   mortgages  or  deeds  of  trust  thereupon,
  notwithstanding any other provision  of  law  (including  section  three
  hundred thirty-nine-g of this chapter).
    (c)  Notwithstanding  subdivisions  (a) and (b), banking organizations
  are authorized, subject to the rules and limitations applicable  thereto
  contained   in   subdivision   four-a  of  section  one  hundred  three,
  subdivision six-a of section two hundred thirty-five, subdivision four-a
  of section three hundred eighty and subdivision eight  of  section  four
  hundred  fifty-six  of the banking law, and the New York job development
  authority is authorized to invest  in  bonds,  notes  and  evidences  of
  indebtedness  which  are secured by mortgages other than first mortgages
  upon units and the appurtenant common interests, provided such mortgages
  are in compliance with title  eight  of  article  eight  of  the  public
  authorities law.
    (d)  Notwithstanding subdivisions (a) and (b) of this section, the New
  York state urban development corporation  is  authorized  to  invest  in
  bonds,  notes  and  evidences  of  indebtedness  which  are  secured  by
  mortgages other than first mortgages  upon  units  and  the  appurtenant
  common  interests,  provided  that (i) such units are owned or are to be
  acquired by a corporation as defined in subparagraph five  of  paragraph
  (a) of section one hundred two of the not-for-profit corporation law and
  are  to  be  used  for  commercial  purposes,  and  such corporation has
  executed a loan authorization agreement with the New  York  state  urban
  development  corporation  on  or before June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
  eighty-eight or (ii) such units are developed as a part of a project  of
  the  New York state urban development corporation that received specific
  authorization in chapter  eight  hundred  thirty-nine  of  the  laws  of
  nineteen   hundred   eighty-seven;   and   further  provided  that  such
  investments and subordinate mortgages are in compliance with chapter one
  hundred seventy-four of the laws of  nineteen  hundred  sixty-eight,  as
  subsequently amended.
    (e)  Notwithstanding subdivisions (a) and (b) of this section, the New
  York city housing development corporation and a city having a population
  of one million or more are authorized to invest  in  bonds,  notes,  and
  evidences  of  indebtedness  which  are  secured by mortgages other than
  first mortgages upon dwelling units and the appurtenant common interests
  provided that such investment is  made  in  connection  with  a  project
  undertaken  pursuant  to  the private housing finance law or the general
  municipal law.
    (f) Notwithstanding subdivisions (a) and  (b)  of  this  section,  the
  division  of  housing  and  community renewal and the housing trust fund
  corporation, their successors and assigns, are authorized to  invest  in
  bonds,  notes,  and  evidences  of  indebtedness  which  are  secured by
  mortgages other  than  first  mortgages  upon  dwelling  units  and  the
  appurtenant  common  interests  provided that such investment is made in
  connection with a project undertaken pursuant  to  the  private  housing
  finance law.


§  339-gg.  Severability.  If  any  provision  of  this article or any
  section, sentence, clause, phrase or word, or the application thereof in
  any circumstance is held invalid, the validity of the remainder  of  the
  article and of the application of any such provision, section, sentence,
  clause,  phrase or word in any other circumstances shall not be affected
  Thereby.


§  339-hh. Reservation of power. The legislature reserves the right to
  alter, amend, suspend or repeal in whole or in part  this  article.  Any
  such  change  in  this  article  shall  be effective notwithstanding any
  provisions of any declaration or by-laws.


§  339-ii.  Construction. This article shall be liberally construed to
  effect the purposes thereof.


§  339-jj. Borrowing by board of managers. 1. To the extent authorized
  by the declaration or the by-laws, the board of managers, on  behalf  of
  the unit owners, may incur debt. In addition, subject to any limitations
  set  forth  in the declaration or the by-laws, the board of managers, on
  behalf of the unit owners, may  incur  debt  for  any  of  the  purposes
  enumerated  in paragraph (b) of subdivision two of section three hundred
  thirty-nine-v of this article, provided that (a) such debt  is  incurred
  no  earlier than the fifth anniversary of the first conveyance of a unit
  and (b) the incurrence of such debt  shall  require  the  consent  of  a
  majority in common interest of the unit owners.
    2. In connection with a debt incurred by it, the board of managers, on
  behalf  of  the unit owners, may (a) assign the rights in and to receive
  future income and common charges, (b) create  a  security  interest  in,
  assign,  pledge,  mortgage  or otherwise encumber funds or other real or
  personal property that it holds, (c) agree that, to the  extent  of  any
  amounts  due  under  any of the provisions of the agreements under which
  the debt was incurred and subject to the provisions of  subdivision  two
  of  section  three  hundred  thirty-nine-l  of  this article, all common
  charges received and to be received by it, and the right to receive such
  funds, shall constitute trust funds for the purpose of paying such  debt
  and  the  same  shall  be expended for such purpose before expending any
  part of the same for any other  purpose,  and  (d)  agree  that  at  the
  lender's  direction  it  will  increase  common  charges  to  the extent
  necessary to pay any amount when due under any of the provisions of  the
  agreements  under  which  the  debt was incurred. The preceding sentence
  shall not be construed to authorize the board of managers  to  create  a
  lien  on  the  common elements. Any such assignment may provide that, in
  the event of a default, the lender shall have the right of the board  of
  managers  to  file liens in the lender's name on units for unpaid common
  charges pursuant to  sections  three  hundred  thirty-nine-z  and  three
  hundred  thirty-nine-aa  of this article and the right to foreclose such
  liens pursuant to section three hundred thirty-nine-aa of this article.
    3. Nothing in this section shall impair rights under any loan or other
  agreement existing prior to the effective date of this section or  limit
  any right or power that a board of managers would otherwise have.


§  339-kk. Rents. (a) For the purposes of this section, "non-occupying
  owner" shall mean a unit owner in a condominium association who does not
  occupy the dwelling unit.
    (b) If a non-occupying owner rents  any  dwelling  unit  to  a  rental
  tenant  and  then  fails  to  make  payments  due  for  common  charges,
  assessments or late  fees  for  such  unit  within  sixty  days  of  the
  expiration  of  any  grace  period  after  they  are due, upon notice in
  accordance with subdivision (c) of this  section,  all  rental  payments
  from   the   tenant   shall  be  directly  payable  to  the  condominium
  association.
    (c) If the common charges, assessments or late fees due for  any  unit
  have  not  been  paid in full, within sixty days after the expiration of
  any grace period of the earliest due date, the board of  managers  shall
  provide  written  notice  to  the  tenant  and  the  non-occupying owner
  providing that, commencing  immediately  and  until  such  time  as  all
  payments  for common charges, assessments or late fees are made current,
  all rental payments due subsequent to the issuance of such notice are to
  be made payable to the condominium association at the address listed  on
  the  notice.  Where a majority of the board of managers has been elected
  by and from among the unit owners who are in occupancy,  the  board  may
  elect  not  to  require  that  rental  payments  be  made payable to the
  condominium association. At such time as payments  for  common  charges,
  assessments  and  late  fees from the non-occupying owner are once again
  current, notice of such fact shall be given within three  business  days
  to  the  rental  tenant  and  non-occupying owner. Thereafter all rental
  payments  shall  be  made  payable  to  the  non-occupying  owner  or  a
  designated  agent.  A non-occupying owner who disputes the association's
  claim to rental payments pursuant to this section shall be  entitled  to
  present  facts  supporting  such  owner's position at the next scheduled
  meeting of the board of managers, which must be held within thirty  days
  of  the  date  that  such board receives notice that such owner seeks to
  dispute such claim.
    (d) Nothing in this section shall limit any rights of unit  owners  or
  of the board of managers existing under any other law or agreement.
    (e)  Payment by a rental tenant to the condominium association made in
  connection with this section shall relieve that rental tenant  from  the
  obligation  to  pay such rent to the non-occupying owner and shall be an
  absolute  defense  in  any  non-payment  proceeding  commenced  by  such
  non-occupying owner against such tenant for such rent.


§  339-ll.  Electric vehicle charging station installation. 1. As used
  in this section:
    (a)  "Reasonable  restrictions"  means  restrictions   that   do   not
  significantly increase the cost of the station or significantly decrease
  its efficiency or specified performance.
    (b)  "Electric vehicle charging station" means a station that delivers
  electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into one  or  more
  electric  vehicles.  An  electric  vehicle  charging station may include
  several  charge  points  simultaneously  connecting   several   electric
  vehicles  to  the station and any related equipment needed to facilitate
  charging plug-in electric vehicles.
    2. (a) Any covenant, restriction, or condition contained in any  deed,
  contract,   security  instrument,  or  other  instrument  affecting  the
  transfer or sale of any interest in the property, and any by-laws,  that
  either  effectively prohibits or unreasonably restricts the installation
  or use of an electric vehicle charging station within an owner's unit or
  in a designated parking space, including, but not limited to,  a  deeded
  parking  space,  a  parking  space  in  an  owner's exclusive use common
  element, or a parking space that is specifically designated for use by a
  particular owner, or is in conflict with the provisions of this  section
  shall be void and unenforceable.
    (b)  This  section  shall  not apply to by-laws that impose reasonable
  restrictions on electric vehicle charging stations. However, it  is  the
  policy  of  the state to promote, encourage, and remove obstacles to the
  use of electric vehicle charging stations.
    (c) An electric vehicle charging station  shall  meet  all  applicable
  health  and  safety  standards  and requirements imposed by law, rule or
  regulation.
    (d) If approval is required for the installation or use of an electric
  vehicle charging station the application for approval shall be processed
  and  approved  by  the  association  in  a  manner  prescribed  by   the
  association  and shall not be willfully avoided or delayed. The approval
  or denial of an application shall be in writing. If  an  application  is
  not  denied in writing within sixty days from the date of receipt of the
  application, the application shall be deemed approved, unless that delay
  is the result of a reasonable request for additional information.
    (e) If the electric vehicle charging station is to be  placed  in  the
  common  elements or in an exclusive use common element, as designated in
  the common interest declaration, the following provisions shall apply:
    (i) The owner first shall obtain  approval  from  the  association  to
  install  the electric vehicle charging station and the association shall
  approve the installation if the owner agrees in writing to do all of the
  following:
    (A) comply with the  association's  architectural  standards  for  the
  installation of the charging station;
    (B) engage a licensed contractor to install the charging station;
    (C)  within  fourteen  days  of  approval,  provide  a  certificate of
  insurance that names the association as an additional insured under  the
  owner's   insurance  policy  pursuant  to  subparagraph  (iii)  of  this
  paragraph; and
    (D) pay for both the costs associated with the installation of and the
  electricity usage associated with the charging station.
    (ii) The owner and each successive owner of the charging station shall
  be responsible for all of the following:
    (A) costs  for  damage  to  the  charging  station,  common  elements,
  exclusive  use  common  elements,  or  separate units resulting from the
  installation,  maintenance,  repair,  removal,  or  replacement  of  the
  charging station;
    (B) costs for the maintenance, repair, and replacement of the charging
  station  until it has been removed and for the restoration of the common
  elements after removal;
    (C) the cost of electricity associated with the charging station; and
    (D)  disclosing  to  prospective  buyers the existence of any charging
  station of the owner and the related responsibilities of the owner under
  this section.
    (iii) The owner of the charging  station,  whether  located  within  a
  separate  unit  or  within  the  common elements or exclusive use common
  elements, shall, at all times, maintain a liability coverage policy. The
  owner that submitted the application to  install  the  charging  station
  shall  provide  the  association  with  the corresponding certificate of
  insurance within fourteen days of  approval  of  the  application.  That
  owner  and  each  successor owner shall provide the association with the
  certificate of insurance annually thereafter.
    (iv) A homeowner shall  not  be  required  to  maintain  a  homeowners
  liability   coverage   policy   for   an  existing  national  electrical
  manufacturers association standard alternating current power plug.
    (f)  Except  as  provided  in  paragraph  (g)  of  this   subdivision,
  installation  of  an electric vehicle charging station for the exclusive
  use of an owner in a common element, that is not an exclusive use common
  element, shall be authorized by the association only if installation  in
  the  owner's  designated  parking  space  is  impossible or unreasonably
  expensive. In such cases, the association shall  enter  into  a  license
  agreement  with the owner for the use of the space in a common area, and
  the owner shall comply with all of the requirements in paragraph (e)  of
  this subdivision.
    (g) The association or owners may install an electric vehicle charging
  station  in  the  common  elements  for  the  use  of all members of the
  association and, in that case, the association shall develop appropriate
  terms of use for the charging station.
    (h) An association may create a new parking space where  one  did  not
  previously  exist  to facilitate the installation of an electric vehicle
  charging station.
    (i) An association that  willfully  violates  this  section  shall  be
  liable to the applicant or other party for actual damages, and shall pay
  a  civil  penalty  to  the  applicant or other party in an amount not to
  exceed one thousand dollars.
    (j) In any action by a unit  owner  requesting  to  have  an  electric
  vehicle  charging  station  installed  and seeking to enforce compliance
  with this section, the unit owner shall be awarded reasonable attorney's
  fees if he or she prevails.


ARTICLE 9-C
                              SOLAR RIGHTS ACT
  Section 342. Certain   covenants,   conditions,   and   restrictions  of
                 homeowners' associations prohibited.


§  342. Certain covenants, conditions, and restrictions of homeowners'
  associations prohibited.  1.  Definitions.  For  the  purposes  of  this
  section:


    (a) "restriction on use" means any covenant, restriction, or condition
  contained in:
    (i) a deed;
    (ii) a contract;
    (iii) the by-laws of a homeowners' association;
    (iv) any rules or regulations adopted by a homeowners' association;
    (v) a security agreement; or
    (vi)  any  other  instrument affecting the transfer or sale of, or any
  interest in, real property.
    (b) "solar power system" means a photovoltaic  system,  comprising  of
  solar  electric  generating  equipment,  installed  on a rooftop, with a
  rated capacity of not more than twenty-five kilowatts.
    2. A homeowners' association may not adopt or  enforce  any  rules  or
  regulations  that  would  effectively  prohibit,  or impose unreasonable
  limitations on, the installation or use  of  a  solar  power  system.  A
  restriction  on  use which effectively prohibits the installation or use
  of a solar power system is unenforceable and shall be void  as  contrary
  to  public policy. For the purposes of this subdivision, an unreasonable
  limitation includes, but is not limited to, any restriction on use that:
    (a) inhibits the solar power system from functioning at  its  intended
  maximum efficiency; or
    (b)  increases  the  solar  power system's installation or maintenance
  costs by an amount which is estimated to be greater than ten percent  of
  the  total  cost  of the initial installation of the solar power system,
  including the costs of labor and equipment.
    3. Notwithstanding subdivision two  of  this  section,  a  homeowners'
  association  may  adopt  or enforce a restriction on use to prohibit the
  installation of a solar power system that is located on  property  owned
  by  the  homeowners' association or that is located on property owned in
  common by the members of the homeowners' association.
    4. Any denial of a homeowner's installation of a solar power system by
  a homeowners' association must include a  detailed  description  of  the
  exact  basis  for  rejection  in  writing  with specific examples of the
  homeowners' association's concerns, if applicable.
    5. A solar power system must meet the requirements established by  any
  local,  state  or  federal  law, rule or regulation on health and safety
  standards and those requirements imposed by state and  local  permitting
  Authorities.


ARTICLE 9-D
                         ELECTRIC VEHICLE RIGHTS ACT
  Section 343. Certain   covenants,   conditions,   and   restrictions  of
                 homeowners' associations prohibited.


ARTICLE 10
                       DISCHARGE OF ANCIENT MORTGAGES
  Section 345. Recording  of  declaration of intention to preserve certain
                 restrictions on the use of land.


§  345.  Recording  of  declaration  of  intention to preserve certain
  restrictions on the use of land. 1. Except as  provided  in  subdivision
  eight  of  this  section,  a  condition subsequent or special limitation
  restricting the use of land and the right of  entry  or  possibility  of
  reverter created thereby shall be extinguished and become unenforceable,
  either  at law or in equity, and if the condition has been broken or the
  reverter  has  occurred  the  right  of  entry  therefor  shall   become
  unenforceable and the possessory estate resulting from the occurrence of
  the  reverter shall be extinguished, unless within the time specified in
  this section a declaration of intention to preserve it  is  recorded  as
  provided  in  this  section,  and  notwithstanding the recording of such
  declaration, unless thereafter,  within  the  times  specified  in  this
  section,  renewal declarations are recorded as provided in this section.
  Such extinguishment shall occur at the end of the period  in  which  the
  declaration or renewal declaration may be recorded.
    2.  A person or persons having a right of entry in the event of breach
  of a condition subsequent restricting the use of land or  a  possibility
  of reverter created by a special limitation restricting the use of land,
  or   having  after  breach  of  such  condition  subsequent  or  special
  limitation a right of entry therefor or a  possessory  estate  resulting
  from  occurrence of the reverter, or any one of such persons, may record
  a declaration of intention to preserve, either in whole or in part,  and
  against  one  or  more  owners  of  interests in the land subject to the
  restriction, the right of entry and the  condition  subsequent  creating
  it,  or  the possibility of reverter and special limitation creating it,
  or the possessory estate resulting from occurrence of the reverter.
    An agent having actual authority, expressed in a writing signed by the
  principal, may execute and record such a declaration on  behalf  of  his
  principal.  A  parent  of an infant or a general guardian or guardian of
  the property of an infant, or if he has no parent, general  guardian  or
  guardian  of  his  property,  the  person  with  whom he resides, or the
  committee of the property of an incompetent may execute and record  such
  a  declaration  on  behalf  of  the  infant or incompetent without prior
  authorization of the court.
    3. Such declaration shall be entitled  "Declaration  of  Intention  to
  Preserve  Restrictions  on  the  Use  of  Land,"  preceded  by  the word
  "Renewal" if the declaration is a renewal  declaration,  and  shall  set
  forth
    (a)  the names of the owners of interests in the land against whom and
  the successors of whom the restriction is intended to be  preserved  or,
  if  the  names  of  any  such persons are not known, a statement to that
  effect and in the case of each such person whose name is not known,  the
  name  of  the  last known previous owner from or through whom he derived
  his interest;
    (b) the names and residence addresses  of  the  persons  intending  to
  preserve the restriction;
    (c)  a  description of the land against which the restriction is to be
  preserved, with  such  information  as  to  its  location  and  specific
  identification  as would be required to be set forth in or endorsed upon
  a deed transferring the land to be recorded  in  the  county  where  the
  declaration is to be recorded;
    (d) the terms of the restriction;
    (e) a reference to the instrument creating the condition subsequent or
  special limitation by which the restriction is imposed and to the place,
  if  any, where such instrument is recorded or filed, or if the condition
  subsequent or special limitation was created otherwise than  by  written
  instrument,  a  reference  to  the  transaction by which it was created,
  together  with  the  names  of  the  parties  to  such   instrument   or
  transaction,  date  of  execution and in the case of a will, the date it
  took effect and the court in which it was probated, or other information
  sufficient to show the origin of the  condition  subsequent  or  special
  limitation  and  the  location  of  public  records, if any, showing its
  origin;
    (f) references to any  conveyances,  transactions  or  events  through
  which  the  person  by  or  on  whose behalf the declaration is executed
  acquired the right of  entry,  possibility  of  reverter  or  possessory
  estate  resulting  from  occurrence of the reverter, and the location of
  public records,  if  any,  of  such  instruments  or  relating  to  such
  transactions  or  events to the extent that the existence of such public
  records and their  location  are  known  to  the  person  recording  the
  declaration;
    (g)  the  date on which the condition subsequent or special limitation
  was created;
    (h) that the person by or on whose behalf the declaration is  executed
  claims  that the right of entry has arisen or the reverter has occurred,
  if such claim is made;
    (i) if the declaration is executed by one person on behalf of another,
  the source of his authority or his  relation  to  the  person  on  whose
  behalf he executed it;
    (j)  if  the  declaration  is a renewal declaration, the date when the
  original declaration was recorded and the date  on  which  any  previous
  renewal declaration was recorded.
    Every  such declaration shall be signed by or on behalf of each person
  named therein  as  intending  to  preserve  the  restriction.  A  person
  executing  a  declaration  on  behalf  of  another  shall  append to his
  signature a statement of his address and the name of the person on whose
  behalf he acted.
    The declaration shall be acknowledged or proved and certified  in  the
  manner required to entitle a conveyance of real property to be recorded,
  and shall have annexed thereto the affidavit or affidavits of the person
  or  persons  who  executed it attesting that the statements set forth in
  the declaration are true or that the  person  making  the  affidavit  is
  informed  and  believes that they are true, setting forth the sources of
  his information and the grounds of his belief, and such affidavit  shall
  be recorded with the declaration.
    4.  An  initial  declaration  may be recorded in the office in which a
  conveyance of the land described in the declaration would be  recordable
  or  registrable,  not  less than twenty-seven years nor more than thirty
  years after the condition subsequent  or  special  limitation  described
  therein  was  created;  provided,  however,  that  if the date when such
  condition subsequent or special limitation  was  created  was  prior  to
  September  first,  nineteen  hundred  thirty-one, the declaration may be
  recorded on or before September first, nineteen hundred sixty-one.
    A renewal declaration may be recorded after  the  expiration  of  nine
  years  and  before  the  expiration  of ten years from the date when the
  declaration was recorded or the recording of the next  previous  renewal
  declaration  became  effective.  The  recording of a renewal declaration
  shall become effective on  the  anniversary  of  the  recording  of  the
  original declaration following the recording of the renewal declaration.
    5.  A  declaration or renewal declaration executed as provided in this
  section shall, on tender of lawful fees, be recorded and indexed  as  if
  it  were  a conveyance executed by the persons named in such declaration
  or renewal declaration  as  persons  against  whom  the  restriction  is
  intended  to  be  preserved,  except that if title to the land described
  therein is registered the declaration or renewal  declaration  shall  be
  recorded  as  provided  in  section  four hundred eight of this chapter,
  noted on the original certificate of title  of  such  land  and  indexed
  against  the  names  of  the persons named in the declaration or renewal
  declaration as persons against whom the restriction is to be preserved.
    For  the  purposes  of  any  provision  of  law  relating  to fees for
  recording, entering or indexing of conveyances, or relating to searches,
  furnishing of certified copies, reproduction by photographic  method  or
  otherwise,  or  destruction,  or  to  any other matter pertaining to the
  powers and duties of recording officers  with  respect  to  conveyances,
  except  matters expressly provided for in this section, a declaration or
  renewal declaration shall be deemed a conveyance.
    6. Recording of a declaration or of a  renewal  declaration  shall  be
  effective to preserve the condition subsequent or special limitation and
  the  right  of  entry,  possibility  of  reverter  or  possessory estate
  resulting  from  occurrence  of  the  reverter  from  extinguishment  as
  provided  in  this  section, (a) in favor of those persons only by or on
  whose behalf it was executed and persons succeeding to  their  interests
  and  (b)  against  such  persons only as are named in the declaration or
  renewal declaration and persons deriving their interest,  either  before
  or  after  the recording of the declaration or renewal declaration, from
  or through persons so named.  It  shall  not  be  effective  to  prevent
  extinguishment  or modification, under any other statute or rule of law,
  of the condition subsequent or special limitation or the restriction  on
  the use of land resulting therefrom or the right of entry or possibility
  of  reverter  created  thereby  or  the possessory estate resulting from
  occurrence of the  reverter,  nor  to  continue  the  existence  of  the
  restriction  beyond  such  duration,  as may have been prescribed for it
  when it was created, nor to extend the time allowed for commencement  of
  any action.
    7.  This  section  shall  apply  without  regard  to  (a) the infancy,
  incompetency or other disability of any  person  entitled  to  record  a
  declaration  of intention to preserve a restriction or a renewal of such
  a declaration, (b) knowledge of the existence of the restriction by  the
  owner  of  an  interest in the land burdened by it, (c) the pendency, at
  the time recording of  the  declaration  or  a  renewal  declaration  is
  required  by  this  section,  of  any action or proceeding to declare or
  determine rights or interests dependent on the restriction or its breach
  or to recover possession of the land or to assert in any manner a  right
  of  entry  accruing by reason of breach of the restriction, or ownership
  of a possessory estate resulting from occurrence of the reverter, or (d)
  a judicial determination of the existence or continued validity  of  the
  restriction, other than a judgment for the recovery of possession of the
  land  or  of  proceeds of a sale thereof or of compensation for a taking
  thereof, by  persons  entitled  thereto  by  reason  of  breach  of  the
  condition  or  by  reason  of  a  reverter  occurring upon breach of the
  restriction.
    8. This section shall not apply  where  the  condition  subsequent  or
  special  limitation  was  created in favor of (a) the United States, the
  state of New York, or any governmental  subdivision  or  agency  of  the
  United  States  or  of  the  state  of  New  York; or (b) the owner of a
  reversion following an estate for life; or (c) the owner of a  reversion
  following  an  estate for years where the number of years for which such
  estate was created will expire less than seventy years  after  the  time
  recording  of  an  initial declaration would otherwise be required under
  this  section;  or  (d)  the  owner  of  a  reversion  on  a  lease   of
  communication,  transportation or transmission lines; or (e) a mortgagee
  or contractor-vendor of  land  or  the  holder  of  any  other  security
  interest in land.
    If  prior  to  the  time specified in this section for recording of an
  initial declaration or renewal declaration a person entitled  to  record
  such  declaration  or  renewal  declaration  shall  have  made valid and
  effective entry into possession of the land,  pursuant  to  a  right  of
  entry  or  upon  a  possessory  estate  resulting  from  occurrence of a
  reverter, or  shall  have  obtained  a  judgment  for  the  recovery  of
  possession  of  the  land  or  of  proceeds  of  a  sale  thereof  or of
  compensation for a taking thereof this section shall not  apply  to  bar
  enforcement of his rights so established.
    9.  The  extinguishment  by  this section of a condition subsequent or
  special limitation restricting the use of land and of the right of entry
  or  possibility  of  reverter  created  thereby  or  possessory   estate
  resulting from occurrence of the reverter shall not affect
    (a)  the  power  of  any  person,  including the owner of the right of
  entry, possibility of reverter or possessory estate, to enforce the same
  restriction by action for damages or for an  injunction  to  the  extent
  that it is also imposed by covenant, promise or negative easement;
    (b)  a  condition  subsequent  or  special limitation, or the right of
  entry or possibility of reverter created thereby  or  possessory  estate
  resulting  from occurrence of the reverter, to the extent that the right
  of entry or possibility of reverter is conditioned upon some event other
  than breach of a restriction on the use of land.


ARTICLE 12
                     REGISTERING TITLE TO REAL PROPERTY
  Section 370.   Petition to register title to real property.
          371.   Petitions  and  proceedings to be in supreme court; title
                   part of special term.
          372.   County clerks and registers to be registrars of title.
          373.   Registrar's bond.
          374.   Deputy registrars' powers and duties.
          375.   Compensation  of  registrars   and   deputy   registrars,
                   official examiners of title, and registration clerks.
          376.   Disposition of fees received by registrar.
          377.   Official examiners of title.
          378.   What owners may apply; what titles may be registered.
          379.   Contents of petition for registration; other papers to be
                   filed.
          380.   Official  examiner's  report of title; other evidences of
                   title.
          381.   Survey, map or plan to be filed.
          382.   Notice of petition and of pendency of proceeding.
          385.   Proceedings upon the petition; notice of hearing.
          386.   Form of notice to parties.
          388.   Guardian ad litem.
          389.   Any person interested may appear and defend.
          390.   Title in lands vested; clouds thereon removed.
          391.   Final orders conclusive; to be entered and docketed as  a
                   judgment.
          392.   Fraud; action to set aside or appeal from the final order
                   or judgment of registration or to recover the property.
          393.   Registration of title.
          394.   Certificate of title.
          395.   Title book.
          396.   Duplicate certificate of title.
          398.   Certificate to include dealings pending registration.
          399.   Certificate of title as evidence.
          400.   Rights  of  owners  of  registered  property; exceptions;
                   incumbrances and transfers to be filed.
          401.   Registered  property  not  affected  by  prescription  or
                   adverse possession.
          402.   Fraud; notice only by registration.
          403.   Memorial to be carried forward.
          404.   Registered property to remain registered.
          404-a. Withdrawal from registration in certain instances.
          405.   Registered property subject to same rights and burdens as
                   unregistered property.
          406.   Transfers of registered property.
          407.   Certificate  as  to  part  of  property  remaining  after
                   transfer.
          409.   Filing, entering and indexing  papers  pursuant  to  this
                   act; tickler certificate.
          409-a. Entries in other indexes.
          410.   Notice of filed papers.
          411.   Addresses of interested parties; notice.
          412.   When a transfer is deemed to be registered.
          413.   New certificates of title.
          414.   Loss of duplicate certificate.
          415.   Mortgages,  leases  and  other  liens and charges; may be
                   registered.
          416.   Proceedings to register mortgage, lease or other lien  or
                   charge.
          417.   Judgments,  decrees,  attachments  and  other liens to be
                   noted on certificate.
          418.   Assignment of mortgage, lease, or other lien or charge.
          419.   Release, discharge or surrender of charge or incumbrance.
          420.   Enforcement   of   mortgages,    charges,    liens    and
                   incumbrances.
          421.   Powers of attorney to be filed and registered.
          422.   Reference of doubtful matters to the court.
          423.   Death  of  owner  of  registered  property;  transfer  of
                   property.
          423-a. Form for transfer of property  upon  death  of  owner  of
                   registered property.
          426.   Assurance fund.
          427.   Compensation from assurance fund.
          428.   Action against assurance fund.
          429.   Restrictions on claims against assurance fund.
          430.   Penalties for fraudulent acts or false certificates.
          431.   Forgery and fraudulent stamping; penalty.
          432.   Fees to be charged.
          433.   Construction of article.
          434.   Form for official examiner's report of title.
          435.   Form for certificate of title.
          436. Termination of title registration procedures.


§  370. Petition to register title to real property. Real property, or
  any estate, interest, or right therein, the title  to  which  is  hereby
  authorized  to be registered, may be brought under the operation of this
  article by the filing of a verified petition praying  for  registration,
  with the clerk of the county in which the land, or some portion thereof,
  is  situated.  The  petition  may  be  so made in person by the owner or
  owners of such property, estate, interest, or right, or,  where  special
  circumstances  are  shown  making it impracticable for the owner to make
  such petition in person, by an agent acting under a  power  of  attorney
  acknowledged in the same manner as a deed to be recorded.  A corporation
  may  also  apply  by its duly authorized officer or agent.  An infant or
  other person  under  disability  may  apply  by  his  legally  appointed
  guardian,  trustee,  committee  or  conservator.  The  natural person or
  corporation, in whose behalf the petition is filed may be known, and  is
  treated  in  this  article,  as  the  petitioner. Any other party to the
  proceeding may be known as a defendant.


§ 371. Petitions and proceedings to be in supreme court; title part of
  special term.
    The petition for registration must be made to the supreme court; or to
  a  justice  thereof,  sitting  at  a special term in any of the counties
  within the judicial department where the property is situated,  and  for
  that  purpose said court shall be always open; and its orders, judgments
  and decrees in cases coming under this article may be made  and  entered
  as well in vacation as in term time. The proceedings upon such petitions
  shall  have  the  effect of proceedings in rem against the land, and the
  final orders shall have the effect of final judgments in an  action  and
  shall operate directly on the land and vest and establish title thereto.
  An  issue raised in such a case shall be tried at a special term of said
  court, in the county in which the  petition  is  filed,  by  the  court,
  except  that  an  issue  of  fact  may be tried by a jury, in the manner
  prescribed by the civil practice law and rules. When in any  county  the
  amount  of business under this article makes it necessary or proper that
  such business should be attended to by one  or  more  justices  of  said
  court  assigned for that purpose, the appellate division of the judicial
  department in which such county is  situated  shall  designate  as  many
  justices  as  may be deemed necessary, to constitute the "title part" of
  the special term in  that  court;  and  said  appellate  division  shall
  provide by rules of practice for the conduct, in said title part, of the
  business  coming  under  this  article  in  such  county. Said appellate
  division may assign one or more additional justices to said "title part"
  of the special term, or withdraw one or more justices therefrom, as  the
  business  coming  under this article may require and the availability of
  the supreme court justices make proper.  One of the justices so assigned
  to the "title  part"  of  the  special  term  in  any  county  shall  be
  designated  by  said  appellate division to have general supervision and
  control of the business coming under this article in that county; and so
  far as is reasonably possible, such designation shall remain  unchanged,
  and  such  justice  shall be retained continuously in such term and part
  during his term of  office  unless  in  the  opinion  of  the  appellate
  division  a  change is required for the better enforcement or working of
  this law. One and the same justice may be assigned so as  to  have  such
  general  supervision and control in two or more counties of the judicial
  district for which he is elected. Other duties may be assigned  by  such
  appellate  division to such justice, provided that they do not interfere
  with his work in supervising and controlling the business  coming  under
  this  article. The justice assigned, as herein provided, to have general
  supervision and control of the business coming under the article in  any
  county,  shall  also  have  general  supervision  and control of all the
  official examiners within such county  and  it  shall  be  his  duty  to
  observe  and  supervise their work as such official examiners, to advise
  them when necessary and to make any suggestions  or  recommendations  to
  the appellate division with respect to discipline, suspension or removal
  of  any  of them as to him may seem necessary or proper in the interests
  of the successful operation of this law.
§  372. County clerks and registers to be registrars of title.  County
  clerks in the several counties of the state, except  the  counties  that
  may  have  registers,  and  in the latter counties the registers of said
  counties shall be "registrars" of titles in their  respective  counties.
  All  laws  relative to registers, county clerks and their deputies shall
  extend to registrars and their deputies, so  far  as  the  same  may  be
  applicable,  except as in this article otherwise provided. Registrars of
  titles shall be county officers, within the meaning of the laws of  this
  State.


§  373.  Registrar's  bond.  Every registrar, before entering upon his
  duties as registrar, shall give a bond with sufficient security,  to  be
  approved by a justice of the supreme court, payable to the people of the
  state  of  New  York,  in  a  penal sum the same as that for his bond as
  register or county clerk or in a sum which may be fixed  by  the  county
  board  of  supervisors,  conditioned  for  the faithful discharge of his
  duties, and to deliver up all papers, books, records and other  property
  belonging  to  the  county or appertaining to his office as registrar of
  titles, whole, safe and undefaced, when  lawfully  required  so  to  do,
  which bond shall be filed in the office of the secretary of state.


§  374.  Deputy registrars' powers and duties. In any county where the
  business under this article so warrants, the  registrar  may  appoint  a
  chief deputy and as many other deputies as are needed. But no one unless
  he  is  also a deputy register or an assistant deputy register appointed
  under statutory authority, or a deputy county clerk, shall be  appointed
  as such deputy registrar unless he has qualified as an official examiner
  of  title  as  described  and  required  by  section  three  hundred and
  seventy-seven of this chapter.
    Deputies may perform any and all duties of the registrar in  the  name
  of  the registrar, and the acts of such deputies shall be held to be the
  acts of the registrar, and in case of the death of the registrar, or his
  removal from office, the chief deputy shall thereupon become the  acting
  registrar  until  such  vacancy shall be filled according to law, and he
  shall file a like bond and be vested with the same powers and subject to
  the same responsibilities and entitled to the same  compensation  as  in
  the case of the registrar.


§  375.  Compensation  of  registrars  and deputy registrars, official
  examiners of title, and registration clerks.  Where  county  clerks  and
  registers   are   salaried  officials,  the  local  authorities  (county
  officials who provide for county expense, in the city of New  York,  the
  mayor)  shall  fix their additional compensation as registrars, also the
  compensation of deputy registrars,  official  examiners  of  title,  the
  clerks, et cetera, needed to carry on the work under this article. Where
  a county clerk or a register is compensated directly by the fees paid to
  himself,  his deputies and assistants, the fees paid to him as registrar
  shall take the usual course and be used to compensate deputies, official
  examiners of title, clerks, et cetera, at such rates  as  the  registrar
  may fix, the remainder to belong to him.


§ 376. Disposition of fees received by registrar. All fees received by
  the  registrar, for the performance of the duties devolving upon him and
  upon the official examiners of title pursuant to this article, shall  be
  disposed  of  in  the  same manner as are fees paid to county clerks and
  registers, except as otherwise provided for in this article. It shall be
  the duty of the local authorities who provide for  county  expenses,  to
  provide  such  accommodations,  help, safes, books, papers, and for such
  other expenses as may properly be  required  by  the  registrar  in  the
  conduct of his office.


§  377.  Official  examiners  of title. The registrar in any county is
  authorized to appoint one or more official examiners of title who  shall
  be  qualified in accordance with the provisions of law and such rules as
  may be adopted by the court of appeals.   The  court  of  appeals  shall
  prescribe  such rules as it deems expedient with respect to ascertaining
  the  fitness  and  qualifications  of  individuals  for  appointment  as
  official  examiners  of title. Such rules may provide that the length of
  time during which candidates have practiced law and the experience  they
  have  had  in  the examination of titles to real property shall be taken
  into consideration in determining their qualifications.  Every  official
  examiner  of  title  must  be  an  attorney and counselor-at-law of this
  state. Subject to rules hereafter  adopted  by  the  court  of  appeals,
  attorneys  and  counselors-at-law  heretofore  duly licensed as official
  examiners of  title  shall  be  eligible  for  appointment  as  official
  examiners  of  title.  In  case  the  registrar shall fail to appoint an
  official examiner of title in any county, the  justice  of  the  supreme
  court  to  which petition is made to register any land in such county or
  to which petition is  made  to  withdraw  from  registration  under  the
  provisions  of  section  four  hundred  and  four-a of this chapter, may
  appoint a competent attorney to act as such official examiner  of  title
  upon  that petition. Any official examiner of title shall have the power
  to  administer  any  oath  or  affidavit,  and  to  hold  hearings   and
  investigations  necessary  to determine questions of fact arising in the
  course of  his  examination  of  any  title,  may  summon  and  subpoena
  witnesses  and  examine  them under oath with regard thereto, and may at
  any time apply to the supreme court  for  directions,  and  receive  its
  assistance,  in  regard  to  any  investigations  conducted  by him. The
  appellate division of the supreme court shall have the  jurisdiction  to
  control and regulate the conduct and work of official examiners of title
  and  may admonish, discipline, suspend or remove from office or position
  any official examiner of title, because of any dishonesty, incompetency,
  neglect of duty or any other improper conduct or omission, either on its
  own motion, or on the suggestion or recommendation of the justice of the
  supreme court having general supervision and  control  of  the  business
  coming  under  this law in the county in which such official examiner of
  title is appointed; and it shall be the duty of said appellate  division
  to  co-operate  with  such  justice in endeavoring to retain the highest
  possible standard of ability, efficiency  and  honest  service  for  all
  official  examiners  of  title acting under and pursuant to this law. No
  person who is the attorney or  counsel  or  otherwise  interested  in  a
  proceeding  to  register  title  to  real property shall act as official
  examiner of title in such proceeding.


§ 378. What owners may apply; what titles may be registered.  Petition
  for registration of title may be made by the following persons:
    First. The person or persons who claim, singly or collectively, to own
  in  fee  simple  the  legal  estate in land, or in some right in or over
  land, and who hold and possess such land or such right.
    Second. The person or persons who claim, singly  or  collectively,  to
  own  a  contract  for  the purchase in fee simple of the legal estate in
  land, or in some  right  in  or  over  land,  from  the  owner  thereof.
  Registration  in  the  name  of  the holder of the contract shall not be
  made, except on the production of a proper transfer of title  under  and
  pursuant to the contract from a transferor in possession, or the consent
  in  writing, duly acknowledged, of the proposed vendor in possession and
  named in the contract and his wife, if he be married. Such  transfer  or
  consent   may  be  made  after  the  commencement  of  the  registration
  proceeding.
    Third. The person or persons who claim singly or collectively, to have
  the power of appointing or disposing in fee simple of the  legal  estate
  in land, or in some right in or over land.
    No  title to a mortgage, lien, trust, charge or estate less than a fee
  simple shall be registered, unless the title to the legal estate in  fee
  simple in the same property is first registered.
    When  the petition is made by the holder of a contract to purchase, it
  shall refer to the ownership of the proposed vendor, and to the contract
  of purchase and sale.
    It shall not be an objection to  bringing  real  property  under  this
  article  that the estate or interest of the petitioner is subject to any
  outstanding lesser estate, mortgage, trust, charge,  or  other  lien  or
  right.  But  any  such  lesser estate, mortgage, trust, charge, or other
  lien or right shall be duly noted  on  the  certificate  of  title  when
  Issued.


§  379.  Contents  of  petition  for  registration; other papers to be
  filed. The petition for registration  shall  be  verified  in  the  same
  manner  and  form  as  a  pleading  in an action and shall set forth, in
  addition to any other proper allegations:
    (a) The name and place of residence with street number,  if  any,  and
  post-office  address  of  each  of the petitioners, and when made by one
  acting in behalf of another, the name, place  of  residence  and  street
  number,  if  any,  and post-office address and capacity of the person so
  acting.
    (b) That each of the petitioners is of the full age of eighteen  years
  and  free from any disability, or, if he is a minor or under disability,
  his age or the nature of such  disability,  and  the  authority  of  the
  person by whom his petition is made.
    (c)  The names and places of residence with street number, if any, and
  post-office addresses of all persons having or claiming any interest  in
  or  lien  upon  the property, or any part thereof, the title to which is
  sought to be registered, and whether or not any of them are  infants  or
  otherwise  incapacitated;  the  owners  in fee simple of the surrounding
  contiguous properties, and their post-office addresses so  far  as  they
  are  known or can be reasonably ascertained by inquiry on such property;
  the people of the state of New York; and  a  designation  of  all  other
  possible  owners  and claimants of the property or any right or interest
  in or lien upon the property or any part thereof as "all other  persons,
  if  any,  having  any  right  or  interest  in or lien upon the property
  affected by this proceeding, or any part thereof."  The  petition  shall
  state  so  far  as  is  known to the petitioner, what claim, if any, the
  state of New York makes to the property in question or what interest, if
  any, it has therein other than the general governmental interest or such
  as exists as to all land in private ownership.
    (d) An  adequate  description  of  the  land  and  whether  vacant  or
  improved,  and  if  improved,  the  nature  of  the  improvement, and if
  occupied, the names of the occupants and the nature of  their  occupancy
  except as to tenancies under leases for periods not exceeding one year.
    (e)  A  statement  of  the  estate,  interest  or right claimed by the
  petitioner  in  the  property  the  title  to  which  is  sought  to  be
  registered;  the  value  of  the  property  on  the  basis  of  the last
  assessment for local taxation, and any mortgage  or  other  encumbrance,
  lien,  restriction,  easement,  claim  or interest to which the title is
  subject so far as known to the petitioner.
    (f) A prayer that the title be duly registered, as  belonging  to  and
  vested  in  the  petitioner,  or as the facts may require at the time of
  such registration.
    (g) With said petition shall be filed an abstract of title  or  search
  of  the  real  property  described in the petition, either issued in the
  regular course of business by a corporation duly  authorized  under  the
  laws  of  this  state  to  make and certify to searches and abstracts of
  title or to guarantee or insure titles to real property in this state or
  certified by a member of the bar of this state, which  shall  contain  a
  full  chain of title disclosing the base or underlying title and the tax
  sale title, if there be one, such chain or chains of title  to  commence
  with  a  full covenant or warranty deed dated at least forty years prior
  to the commencement of the proceeding, or in the absence thereof, with a
  source of title generally accepted as good in the locality in which  the
  real  property  is situated, and which abstract of title or search shall
  set forth all mortgages, liens, encumbrances, wills,  administration  of
  estates,  and  proceedings  of all kinds and nature relating to the real
  property in question. The abstract of title or search shall be delivered
  by the registrar upon the filing thereof to the attorney-general of this
  state for his use and inspection, and shall be returned to the registrar
  with the  final  order  herein  unless  the  return  of  same  shall  be
  previously  requested  by  said registrar or by the official examiner of
  title.
    The court may require the petition to be amended and reverified as the
  circumstances of the case may demand or make proper.


§  380. Official examiner's report of title; other evidences of title.
  Immediately upon the filing of the petition the  court  shall  enter  an
  order  referring  the  matter  to one of the official examiners of title
  appointed in the  county  as  provided  in  section  three  hundred  and
  seventy-seven of this chapter and directing the registrar to give notice
  of  the  hearing  upon the petition as provided in section three hundred
  and eighty-five of this chapter, to the parties named in  the  petition.
  The  order  shall  also direct the registrar to give such notice to such
  additional persons as the preliminary report of the official examiner of
  title shows should be made parties to  the  proceeding.  In  any  event,
  however,  the determination of the question as to sufficiency of parties
  and as to due service of  notice  shall  be  for  the  court  as  herein
  provided.  As soon as possible after the petition is referred to him the
  official  examiner  of  title  shall  file a preliminary report with the
  registrar as to the sufficiency of the parties named in the petition and
  as to what additional persons, if any, should be  made  parties  to  the
  proceeding.    The official examiner of title shall forthwith proceed to
  examine the title and investigate the facts stated in  the  petition  or
  otherwise  brought  to his notice, and shall make a report in writing to
  the court of the substance of the proof and his  conclusions  therefrom.
  Said  official  examiner's  report  shall  set forth the exact state and
  condition of the title sought to be registered  which  shall  contain  a
  full chain of title disclosing the base, or underlying title and the tax
  sale  title,  if  there  be one, and all mortgages, liens, encumbrances,
  wills, administrations of estates, and  proceedings  of  all  kinds  and
  nature  relating to the real property in question, and the names, places
  of residence with street number, if any, and post  office  addresses  as
  far  as  known or reasonably ascertainable, and the rights or interests,
  or claimed rights or interests, of  the  petitioner  and  of  all  other
  persons having or claiming any rights or interests in or liens upon said
  property  or  any  part  thereof. It shall contain a statement as to the
  appearances of parties and a statement as to whether all proper  parties
  in  interest  have  in  fact  been served with the notice as provided in
  section three hundred and eighty-five of this chapter and if so in  what
  manner,  and  the recommendation of the official examiner of title as to
  whether further notice should be required as to persons residing  within
  or  beyond  the state from whom registered personal return receipt cards
  for the notice of hearing have not been received;  it  shall  contain  a
  proper  reference  to  the  survey,  map or plan provided for in section
  three hundred and eighty-one of this chapter  and  a  statement  of  all
  encroachments,  if  any,  on any surrounding contiguous property and the
  names, places of residence with street number, if any, and  post  office
  addresses  of  the  owners  in fee simple of such surrounding contiguous
  properties, as far as they are known or can be reasonably ascertained by
  inquiry on said properties or otherwise; and, as to actual  or  possible
  owners  or claimants, of the property sought to be registered, not known
  or not found, it shall state fully what search  and  efforts  have  been
  made  to  find  them.  All  possible owners or claimants of the property
  sought to be registered, or of any right or  interest  therein  or  lien
  thereon,  or  in  or  on  any  part  thereof,  who  cannot  be otherwise
  described, shall be designated in  the  report  and  in  the  notice  of
  hearing  on the petition, by the expression, "all other persons, if any,
  having any right or interest in, or lien upon the property  affected  by
  this  proceeding,  or  any  part  thereof."  By  the statements of facts
  contained  in  said  report  of  title,  or  by  separate   accompanying
  affidavits,  or  by  any other additional evidences, if necessary, or by
  any or all of these, sufficient facts must be shown to satisfy the court
  that all owners and claimants of the property sought to  be  registered,
  or  of  any  right,  or  interest  in  or lien upon the same or any part
  thereof,  who  could  be  found  by  diligent  inquiry  are   duly   and
  specifically  named and made parties to the proceeding.  The question of
  the  sufficiency  of  the  proof  that all such owners and claimants who
  could be found by diligent inquiry are duly and specifically  named  and
  made  parties to the proceeding and that they have been duly served with
  the notice of hearing, shall be for the court; its  decision  that  such
  proof  is sufficient shall be shown by its making an order approving the
  official  examiner's  report  of  title  or  the  final  order  for  the
  registration  of  the  title,  and  such  decision  or  order  shall  be
  conclusive as a matter of law after thirty days from  the  time  when  a
  certified  copy  of  the final order and judgment of registration in the
  proceeding is filed in the office of the  registrar  of  the  county  in
  which  the  property is situated. The abstract of title and the searches
  made or used by the official examiner of title in  the  process  of  his
  work  of  examining  the title and all other proper evidences of the due
  examination of the title, shall be filed immediately upon the  entry  of
  the  final  order,  in  the office of the registrar of the county unless
  otherwise directed by the court and  the  same  shall  be  open  to  the
  inspection of any interested person and shall be subject at all times to
  the  direction  of  the  court.  The abstract of title, the searches and
  other evidences of title so filed and also all official records referred
  to therein or in the report of the official examiner of title  shall  be
  deemed  to  be  part  of  the  record  of  the  proceeding. The official
  examiner's report of title shall contain a short form of description  of
  the  property  the title to which is sought to be registered, which form
  is to be used in the notice provided for by section  three  hundred  and
  eighty-six  of  this  chapter.  Said  official  examiner's  report shall
  contain, or be accompanied by, any other or further information that the
  court may prescribe, and shall be in such form as the court may order or
  as the court of  appeals  may  prescribe  in  its  rules.  The  official
  examiner  of  title may receive in evidence and may base his report upon
  any official search or abstract or any search or abstract issued in  the
  regular  course  of business by any corporation duly organized under and
  by virtue of the laws of this state and by said laws duly authorized  to
  make  and  to certify to searches and abstracts of title or to guarantee
  or insure titles to real property in this state. It shall be the duty of
  any public official forthwith to certify the returns of any search  upon
  the  requisition of any official examiner of title and without charge or
  fees for the same.  Where  the  title  to  the  premises  sought  to  be
  registered  is in whole or in part the same as that of another parcel of
  land title to which  has  been  registered,  reference  to  the  earlier
  abstract  on  file  in  the county in which the petition is filed may be
  made by the official examiner of  title  in  place  of  duplicating  the
  matters therein contained. References to official searches duly filed in
  the  county  in  which the petition is filed may be made by the official
  examiner of title in place of duplicating the matters therein contained.
  The papers so referred to shall have the same  effect  as  evidence  and
  proof  in the proceeding as said official examiner's report of title, or
  said searches, as the case may be. Where the petition seeks registration
  of a title subject to restrictive covenants or agreements, it shall  not
  be  necessary to name or serve those persons who have or claim rights to
  enforce such covenants and agreements, but unless such persons are named
  and served the final order and judgment of registration must direct that
  the title be registered subject to such covenants and agreements.


§  381. Survey, map or plan to be filed. There shall be filed with the
  registrar a survey, map or plan of the land the title to which is sought
  to be registered, which shall be made by a competent surveyor and  shall
  be  subject  to  the approval of the court, and which shall clearly show
  the exact boundaries of the land and its connection with adjacent  lands
  and  any adjoining or neighboring streets and avenues, and the distances
  from  such  adjoining  or  neighboring  streets  or  avenues,  and   all
  encroachments,  if  any,  and all other facts which are usually shown by
  accurate surveys. If any adjacent land is already registered, the survey
  must properly connect and harmonize with the survey of  such  previously
  registered  land.  There  shall be attached to such survey, map or plan,
  and filed with it, an affidavit of the surveyor by  whom  it  was  made,
  that  it  was  made by him personally or under his immediate supervision
  and direction; that it  is  a  survey,  map  or  plan  of  the  property
  described  in  the  petition or the official examiner's report of title,
  and that according to the best of his knowledge and belief said property
  is included in the boundaries shown on such survey, map or plan, without
  any encroachments or improper erections, except as  follows:    (stating
  and  describing  any  encroachments  or improper locations of buildings,
  fences or other structures). After  the  original  registration  of  any
  parcel  of  land,  a  new  survey,  map  or  plan  of the same showing a
  subdivision thereof into lots may be  filed  with  the  registrar  after
  compliance  with the provisions of section three hundred thirty-four and
  section three hundred thirty-five of the real property law, as  amended,
  and  chapter  six  hundred  twenty  of  the  laws  of  nineteen  hundred
  twenty-six. The filing of such a new survey, map or plan  shall  outline
  the  registered portion of the property, shall be noted as a memorial on
  the certificate of title to which it relates, and thereafter the land or
  any interest therein shall be transferred or encumbered by reference  to
  it;  in  the event that the old description is used, reference must also
  be made to the new map.


§  382.  Notice of petition and of pendency of proceeding. At the time
  when the petition for registration of  the  title  of  any  property  is
  filed,  the  petitioner shall also cause to be filed a notice thereof in
  the offices of the county clerk and of  the  registrar  of  each  county
  where  the property is situated, which notice shall be made and filed in
  the manner prescribed for a notice of pendency of a  civil  action,  and
  shall  be  indexed  against  the  names  of the petitioner and all known
  adverse parties or claimants except the owners of  abutting  properties,
  and  shall  constitute notice of the pendency of the petition and of the
  proceeding, and shall be governed in all respects by the same rules as a
  notice of pendency of a civil action, except, that, if the  petition  be
  dismissed,  or  the  proceeding  discontinued,  or in any way terminated
  other  than  by  the  registration  of  the  title,  no  order  for  the
  cancellation  of such notice shall be made by the court until it is duly
  and fully proved to the  court  that  the  provisions  of  section  four
  hundred  and  ten  of  this  chapter  have  been fully complied with and
  performed.  The  notice  of  pendency  of  proceeding  filed  with   the
  registrar,  as  provided  in  this  section  shall  also be noted on the
  "tickler certificate book" as  a  petition  and  said  notice  shall  be
  treated  as,  and  take  the place of the petition in all cases in which
  this act requires the registrar to deal with the petition, and shall  be
  given  a  petition  number,  beginning  with  number  one  for the first
  petition filed and so on in numerical order, and also a  serial  number.
  In  any place, however, where there is a block or lot system of indexing
  in use, the said notice shall be indexed according to such system.


§  385.  Proceedings upon the petition; notice of hearing. Immediately
  upon the filing of the petition and of the notice thereof as provided in
  section three hundred eighty-two of this chapter, and upon receiving the
  preliminary  report  of  the  official  examiner  of  title  as  to  the
  sufficiency  of  parties, the registrar shall cause a notice, fixing the
  time and place at which the petition will be heard, to be published in a
  newspaper published in the county in which the  land  is  situated.  The
  return  day  of  said notice shall not be less than twenty days nor more
  than sixty days after the date of publication. The registrar shall also,
  within seven days of the publication of  said  notice  in  a  newspaper,
  cause  a copy of said notice to be sent by certified letter, demanding a
  return personally signed receipt card, to every party to the  proceeding
  whose address is known. The court may also cause other or further notice
  of  the petition to be given. The court shall, so far as it considers it
  possible, require proof of actual notice to all parties  who  appear  to
  have  any  interest  in, or claim to, the land included in the petition.
  Notice to such persons by mail shall be by certified letter, demanding a
  return personally signed receipt card. The registrar  shall  also  cause
  the  notice  of  such  proceeding  and  hearing  to  be posted, at least
  fourteen days before the return day, in  a  conspicuous  place  on  each
  parcel  of  land  affected  by  the  proceeding.  The certificate of the
  registrar that he has served the notice as directed  by  the  court,  by
  publishing  and  mailing,  and that the notice has been duly posted upon
  the land, shall be filed in the case, with affidavits in support of  the
  same,  on  or before the return day, and shall be proof of such service.
  The necessary disbursements of the official examiner  of  title  in  the
  course  of  his  work,  the expense of the publication, the mailing, the
  disbursements for service of the notice, and the posting on the land  of
  the  notices  shall  be  paid by the petitioner. Upon the return day the
  hearing may be adjourned from time to time  by  the  court  on  its  own
  motion  or  on  the  motion of the official examiner of title, or of any
  party. Service of notice upon the people of the state of New York may be
  made by mailing a copy of said notice securely inclosed  in  a  postpaid
  wrapper  and  directed to the attorney general of the state of New York.
  Where the people of the state of New York or  any  municipality  in  the
  state is made a party to the proceeding or appears therein the registrar
  shall  serve  upon  the  state or such municipality on its appearance in
  such proceeding by  the  attorney  general  or  corporation  counsel  or
  officer  discharging similar functions, a copy of the petition, abstract
  of title and survey filed which abstract of title shall contain  a  full
  chain  of title disclosing the base or underlying title and the tax sale
  title if there be one, and all mortgages,  liens,  encumbrances,  wills,
  administrations  of  estates,  and  proceedings of all kinds and nature,
  relating to the real property in question, as required by this  article.
  Unless  the  court  otherwise  directs  no report shall be made upon the
  petition, until the time specified in the notice of the hearing  on  the
  petition,  and,  if any adverse claimant or objector appears, the report
  shall not be confirmed until opportunity is given to contest the  rights
  of  the  petitioner in such manner as shall be allowed by the court. The
  court may refer to the  official  examiner  of  title  any  controverted
  matter or question for hearing and report. Default shall be noted on the
  failure to appear of any of those on whom the notice of hearing has been
  served  and  upon  petition  to  the court a final order and judgment of
  registration may be entered at once on the failure to appear and  object
  of  all  persons  so  served.  The official examiner's report upon being
  presented to the court shall be prima facie and presumptive evidence  of
  the  facts  stated  therein,  and  all statements in the report shall be
  taken and construed as statements of fact,  unless  they  are  expressly
  declared  therein  to  be  conclusions or opinions. In no case shall the
  court be bound by the report of an official examiner of  title  but  may
  require  other  or  further  proof.  If  any  party  to  the  proceeding
  controverts  any  statement contained in the official examiner's report,
  the facts controverting such statement must be specifically pleaded  and
  set forth and must be established affirmatively by the party pleading or
  setting  forth the same. The trial of any issue raised shall be governed
  by and shall proceed according to the laws of this state and  the  rules
  of  the  court  in  so  far  as  the same are not expressly abrogated or
  modified by this article.


§  386.  Form  of  notice to parties. The notice to be served upon the
  parties  to  the  proceeding  required  by  section  three  hundred  and
  eighty-five  shall be issued by the order of court and subscribed by the
  registrar, and shall be in form substantially as follows:
 
                         REGISTRATION OF LAND TITLE.
 
                     Supreme Court ............ County.
 
    In the matter of the petition of (here insert name, place of residence
  with street number if any, and post-office  address  of  petitioner)  to
  register  the  title  to certain lands described as follows (here insert
  description of land).
    To (here insert the names of all other parties to the proceeding).
    To all whom it may concern:
    Pursuant to the order of the Hon. ........ made herein,  take  notice,
  that  at ........ in said county of ............. on the ........ day of
  .........., nineteen hundred and ........., at ........ o'clock  in  the
  forenoon  the  petition  above  mentioned  will  be heard and unless you
  appear at said time and place and show cause why such petition shall not
  be granted, your default will be noted and  a  decree  will  be  entered
  according  to  the prayer of the petition and you will be forever barred
  from contesting said petition or any decree entered thereon.
    Witness Hon. .............., Justice of said  court,  this  ..........
  day  of  ............,  in  the  year nineteen hundred and ............,
  Registrar of the county of ..............


§  386.  Form  of  notice to parties. The notice to be served upon the
  parties  to  the  proceeding  required  by  section  three  hundred  and
  eighty-five  shall be issued by the order of court and subscribed by the
  registrar, and shall be in form substantially as follows:


§  388.  Guardian  ad  litem. In any proceeding to register title, the
  court may make an order appointing a disinterested attorney, other  than
  the  official  examiner  of  title  by  whom  the title was examined and
  reported and certified, to act  as  guardian  ad  litem  for  all  minor
  persons  and  for  all  persons  under other disability appearing by the
  petition or by the official examiner's report of title to have interests
  adverse to those of the petitioner.  The petition for the appointment of
  said guardian ad litem may be made by the petitioner  ex  parte  at  any
  time  during  the pendency of the proceeding. The guardian ad litem thus
  appointed upon the application of the petitioner  may  be  the  attorney
  general  of  the  state of New York, unless it appears to the court that
  the state of New York has or claims some interest adverse to that of the
  person or persons for whom the attorney general would thus be  appointed
  guardian  ad  litem.  The  question  as to the existence of such adverse
  claim or interest shall be for the court; and an  order  appointing  the
  attorney  general  as  such  guardian ad litem shall be sufficient proof
  that no such adverse claim or interest exists. Such an  order  shall  be
  conclusive  as  a  matter  of law after thirty days from the time when a
  certified copy of the final order or judgment  of  registration  in  the
  proceeding  is  filed  in  the  office of the registrar of the county in
  which the property is situated. It shall be the duty of such guardian ad
  litem actively to ascertain and protect as is reasonably  possible,  the
  interest  of  all  minor parties to the proceeding and all other parties
  under disability. The compensation of such guardian shall be one hundred
  dollars, unless the court directs otherwise; but  the  attorney  general
  shall not receive any compensation for acting as such guardian ad litem.
  No  issue  requiring a trial shall be raised by the answer of a guardian
  ad litem of any minor party or party under other  disability  unless  it
  shall  affirmatively  appear  by  the  official  examiner's report or by
  answer of the guardian ad litem that such minor  party  or  party  under
  other disability has an interest adverse to the title or interest sought
  to be registered.


§  388.  Guardian  ad  litem. In any proceeding to register title, the
  court may make an order appointing a disinterested attorney, other  than
  the  official  examiner  of  title  by  whom  the title was examined and
  reported and certified, to act  as  guardian  ad  litem  for  all  minor
  persons  and  for  all  persons  under other disability appearing by the
  petition or by the official examiner's report of title to have interests
  adverse to those of the petitioner.  The petition for the appointment of
  said guardian ad litem may be made by the petitioner  ex  parte  at  any
  time  during  the pendency of the proceeding. The guardian ad litem thus
  appointed upon the application of the petitioner  may  be  the  attorney
  general  of  the  state of New York, unless it appears to the court that
  the state of New York has or claims some interest adverse to that of the
  person or persons for whom the attorney general would thus be  appointed
  guardian  ad  litem.  The  question  as to the existence of such adverse
  claim or interest shall be for the court; and an  order  appointing  the
  attorney  general  as  such  guardian ad litem shall be sufficient proof
  that no such adverse claim or interest exists. Such an  order  shall  be
  conclusive  as  a  matter  of law after thirty days from the time when a
  certified copy of the final order or judgment  of  registration  in  the
  proceeding  is  filed  in  the  office of the registrar of the county in
  which the property is situated. It shall be the duty of such guardian ad
  litem actively to ascertain and protect as is reasonably  possible,  the
  interest  of  all  minor parties to the proceeding and all other parties
  under disability. The compensation of such guardian shall be one hundred
  dollars, unless the court directs otherwise; but  the  attorney  general
  shall not receive any compensation for acting as such guardian ad litem.
  No  issue  requiring a trial shall be raised by the answer of a guardian
  ad litem of any minor party or party under other  disability  unless  it
  shall  affirmatively  appear  by  the  official  examiner's report or by
  answer of the guardian ad litem that such minor  party  or  party  under
  other disability has an interest adverse to the title or interest sought
  to be registered.


§  389.  Any  person  interested  may  appear  and  defend. Any person
  interested in the property, or whose interests may be  affected  by  the
  final  order  or  judgment  of  registration  in the proceeding, whether
  specifically named in the notice or not, may  enter  his  appearance  by
  serving  a  copy of the same on the registrar of the county in which the
  property is located and with the clerk of  the  supreme  court  in  such
  county,  and  filing the original thereof together with proof of service
  with the county clerk on or before the return day or within such further
  time as may be allowed by the court; and may enter  his  objections,  if
  any,  by  likewise  serving  a  copy of the same on the registrar of the
  county in which the property is  located  and  with  the  clerk  of  the
  supreme  court  in such county, and filing the original thereof together
  with proof of service with the county clerk on or before the return  day
  or  within  such  further  time  as may be allowed by the court; and may
  oppose the petition for registration of the property as belonging to the
  petitioner, or set up a cross-demand to have the title registered in his
  own behalf. In any case, he shall state particularly what  his  interest
  is and shall specifically state all objections to the petition.


§  390.  Title  in  lands  vested;  clouds  thereon  removed.  In  any
  proceeding under this article, the court may find and decree in whom the
  title to or any right or interest in the property or any part thereof is
  vested, whether in the petitioner, or  in  any  other  person,  and  may
  remove  clouds from the title, and may determine whether or not the same
  is subject to any lien or incumbrance, estate, right, trust or interest,
  and may declare and fix the  same,  and  may  direct  the  registrar  to
  register such title, right, or interest, and in case the same is subject
  to any lien, incumbrance, estate, trust or interest, may give directions
  as  to  the  manner  and  order  in which the same shall appear upon the
  certificate of title to be issued by the  registrar,  and  generally  in
  such  a  proceeding,  the  court  may  make  any and all such orders and
  directions as shall be according  to  equity  in  the  premises  and  in
  conformity  to  the  principles  of  this article. But no final order or
  judgment of registration of a title shall be made or entered until proof
  is duly made in the proceeding by the report of an official examiner and
  by the certificate or receipt of the officer  entitled  to  collect  the
  taxes,  assessments  or  water  rents,  that  all taxes, water rents and
  assessments that may at that time be a lien on the  property,  right  or
  interest  the  title to which is so registered, have been fully paid and
  discharged, unless the court directs the title to be registered  subject
  to any such tax, water rent or assessment, which said tax, water rent or
  assessment  must  then  be  noted on the certificate of title. Where the
  title  to  be  registered  is  subject  to  restrictive   covenants   or
  agreements,   and  it  shall  appear  to  the  court  either  that  said
  restrictive covenants or agreements have been violated or that by reason
  of the proper parties not  having  been  joined  the  court  should  not
  proceed  to  determine  whether said restrictive covenants or agreements
  have  or  have  not  been  violated,  then  in  either  case  title  may
  nevertheless   be  registered;  but  the  final  order  or  judgment  of
  registration must direct the registration to be "subject to any question
  as to whether covenants (specifying them) have been violated, " and  the
  certificate  of  title  shall so note; and then the rights in respect to
  such covenants of any person interested therein shall not be affected by
  such final order or judgment or registration.  When the land  the  title
  to  which is to be registered abuts upon any street, avenue, road or way
  the final  order  or  judgment  of  registration  may  provide  for  the
  registration  of  the  petitioner's  interests  or rights in and to such
  street, avenue, road or way; but if such final order or judgment fail so
  to provide, then the interests or  rights  of  the  petitioner  in  such
  street, avenue, road or way shall become and be parcel of or appurtenant
  to  the  property registered, and shall be included in any conveyance of
  or incumbrance or lien upon  such  registered  property,  unless  it  is
  expressly  reserved  in or excepted from such conveyance, incumbrance or
  lien. Such express reservation or exception shall be effected only by  a
  clause  directly reserving or excepting such interests or rights in such
  street, avenue, road or way and shall not be implied from  the  language
  used  in  any  description  of the registered property subsequent to the
  initial registration thereof.


§  391.  Final  orders  conclusive;  to  be  entered and docketed as a
  judgment. No final order or judgment  of  registration  shall  be  made,
  unless   the  court  is  satisfied  that  the  title  to  be  registered
  accordingly is free from reasonable doubt. The final order entered  upon
  an application for registration is deemed to be a final judgment and may
  be  entered  and docketed and enforced as a final judgment in an action.
  Before the final order can be docketed,  an  enrollment  must  be  filed
  thereupon  as  the  judgment  roll  in an action, as provided in section
  three hundred and ninety-three of this chapter.  The  judgment  and  any
  order  made  and entered in a proceeding under this act shall, except as
  herein otherwise provided, be forever binding and  conclusive  upon  the
  state  of  New  York and all persons in the world, whether mentioned and
  served with the said notice specifically by name,  or  included  in  the
  description,  "all  other  persons, if any, having any right or interest
  in, or liens upon, the property affected by this proceeding, or any part
  thereof." It shall not be an exception to such conclusiveness  that  any
  such  person is an infant, mentally ill or is under any other disability
  or is not yet in being.


§  392.  Fraud;  action to set aside or appeal from the final order or
  judgment  of  registration  or  to  recover  the  property.  Any   title
  registration  procured by or as the result of fraud may be set aside, in
  the same manner and by the same proceedings as in the  case  of  a  deed
  obtained  by fraud, provided that such proceedings for setting aside the
  registration shall not injuriously affect  the  rights  of  an  innocent
  purchaser  or  incumbrancer of the property after such registration, for
  value and without actual notice of the fraud, and provided further  that
  the  action  or  other  proceeding  to  set  aside  such registration be
  commenced within ten years  from  the  time  when  the  final  order  or
  judgment  of registration was filed in the office of the county clerk of
  the county in which the property is located. No action or proceeding  or
  appeal shall lie or be commenced, except on the ground of fraud as above
  stated,  to  set  aside  or  appeal  from any final order or judgment of
  registration or to modify or affect the same  or  for  the  recovery  of
  registered property or any estate, right or interest in or lien upon the
  same or any part thereof, or to make any entry thereon, adversely to the
  title  or  interest  registered therein, as directed by a final order or
  judgment of registration of the court, unless such action or  proceeding
  or  appeal  is  commenced  or taken within thirty days after a certified
  copy of such final order or judgment of registration  is  filed  in  the
  office of the registrar of the county in which the property is located.


§  393.  Registration  of  title.  Upon  entering  the final order and
  judgment of registration, an enrollment thereof as a judgment roll in an
  action must  be  prepared,  and  filed  in  the  office  of  the  clerk,
  consisting  of  the  petition,  the  notice  with  proof of service, the
  official examiner's report, all orders and all other papers  necessarily
  affecting  the final order of registration.  The clerk upon payment of a
  fee of ten dollars shall cause a copy of said judgment  of  registration
  to  be  certified  and  transferred  to the registrar of his county, who
  shall forthwith file the same in his office.


§  394.  Certificate  of  title. The registrar shall make, in the form
  prescribed by section four hundred and thirty-five of this  chapter,  an
  original  certificate  of  title  of  every  title,  right  or  interest
  registered by him pursuant to this article. Said certificate shall  bear
  the  date  of  its  issue  (the day and year), and be under the hand and
  official seal of the registrar, and be numbered  in  the  order  of  its
  issue.  If  the owner is a minor, it shall state his age; if he is under
  any other disability, it shall state the nature of such disability.  The
  registrar  shall  make proper memorials or notations on the certificate,
  showing in such manner as to set forth and  preserve  their  priorities,
  the  particulars  of  all  the  estates,  mortgages,  trusts,  liens and
  charges, to which such owner's title is subject.  No  such  memorial  or
  notation  shall  be  more than one folio (one hundred words), in length;
  but it may refer to covenants, restrictions, trusts and  forms  recorded
  in  the "book of covenants, restrictions, trusts and forms" provided for
  by this article. The form of the first  certificate  of  title,  as  set
  forth  in section four hundred and thirty-five of this article, shall be
  subject to such changes as may be required in any case.  All  subsequent
  certificates  shall  be  in like form, except that in place of the words
  "first certificate," et cetera, shall be the words "transfer from number
  ........." (the number of the next previous certificate); also the words
  "first registered .........." (date of first registration).  On the back
  or reverse side of every certificate shall be printed, in plain  legible
  type, the whole of section four hundred of this chapter.


§  395.  Title  book.  The  registrar shall keep a book or books to be
  known respectively as the "title book", wherein he shall enter all first
  and subsequent "original" certificates of title by binding or  recording
  them  therein,  with  appropriate  blanks for the entry of memorials and
  notations prescribed by this article. Said book shall be  of  about  the
  size of the conveyance libers, now used in county clerks' and registers'
  offices. Each certificate shall constitute a separate leaf of such book.
  About two inches of each leaf on the binding edge shall be kept blank on
  both sides, to facilitate rebinding. At such times as may be proper, the
  registrar  may  rebind  the  certificates in new volumes or title books,
  containing respectively  cancelled  and  uncancelled  certificates.  All
  memorials and notations, that may be entered in the title book under the
  terms  of  this article, shall be entered upon the leaf constituting the
  last certificate of title of the property to which they relate.  In  the
  county  of  Suffolk,  if a microfilm system for retrieval and display of
  the title certificates is used, libers may be stored in a  location  not
  accessible  to  the  public. Whenever the term "certificate of title" is
  used in this article it shall be deemed as including  all  memorials  or
  notations thereupon noted.


§  396.  Duplicate certificate of title. The registrar shall, upon the
  request by the owner in writing, make out an  exact  duplicate  thereof,
  with  the  memorials  and  notations  thereon  noted,  which will be the
  owner's proof of ownership for the property, and forward the same to the
  owner.    This  duplicate  shall  be  known  as  the  owner's  duplicate
  certificate of title, and shall be plainly stamped across its face. Only
  one  owner's duplicate certificate of title shall be issued. Replacement
  of such document shall be made in the manner  prescribed  under  section
  four  hundred  fourteen  of  this  chapter.  Said  request  for  owner's
  duplicate certificate of title shall be in the form annexed  hereto.  At
  the time of filing, two copies of the deed shall be submitted, a copy of
  the  deed  shall be conformed and returned to the party indicated in the
  return address box.
                                    FORM
 
    The  undersigned,  one  of  the  Registered  owners  of  the  property
  described  in  Certificate number ........ does request the issuance and
  delivery of said Owner's Duplicate Certificate of Title to him/her:
 
  Name:
  Address:
  Signature:


§  398. Certificate to include dealings pending registration. In every
  case of initial registration, the certificate of title shall include all
  dealings with the real property, and all statutory or other liens  filed
  against  the  same,  subsequent to the filing of the application, except
  when they are modified or set aside by a judgment, decree  or  order  of
  the  court.  On and after the filing with the registrar of the notice of
  application for the registration of any real  property,  and  until  the
  same  is  registered,  or  the  application  is  denied,  dismissed,  or
  discontinued, all papers which are required or permitted by this article
  to be filed against  registered  property,  except  the  papers  in  the
  action,  shall  be  filed  with  the  registrar  as if the property were
  Registered.


§ 399. Certificate of title as evidence. The certificate of title, and
  any copy thereof duly certified under the hand and seal of the registrar
  and  the owner's duplicate certificate, until the expiration of the time
  herein limited to bring an action or proceeding to set aside  the  final
  order  or  judgment of registration shall be received as evidence in all
  the courts of the state, and in all courts and  places  shall  be  prima
  facie  evidence  that  the  provisions of law up to the time of issue of
  such certificate or duplicate, or of the  time  of  entry  of  the  last
  memorial  thereon, have been complied with, and that such certificate of
  title has been  issued  in  compliance  with  a  valid  final  order  or
  judgment,  and  that the title to the property is as therein stated; and
  after the expiration of such time limited for bringing said  proceedings
  to  set aside said final order or judgment, such certificate or copy, up
  to the time of its issue, shall be so received as evidence in all courts
  of the state, and shall be conclusive evidence of the same facts.  Every
  memorial  or notation or cancellation thereof made on any certificate or
  duplicate or copy thereof shall be signed by the registrar or his deputy
  or his duly authorized deputy or clerk.


§   400.   Rights   of  owners  of  registered  property;  exceptions;
  incumbrances and  transfers  to  be  filed.  A  person  who  receives  a
  certificate  of  title pursuant to a judgment of registration, except in
  case of fraud to which he is a party, and a purchaser of registered real
  property, who takes a certificate of title for value and in good  faith,
  shall  hold  the same free from all incumbrances, charges, trusts, liens
  and transfers, except those noted on the certificate in the  registrar's
  office, and any of the following which may exist:
    First.  Liens, claims, or rights arising or existing under the laws or
  constitution of the United States, which the statutes of this  state  do
  not require to appear of record;
    Second. Any tax, water rate, or assessment which becomes a lien on the
  property  after  initial  registration and for which a sale has not been
  made;
    Third. Any lease or agreement for  a  lease,  made  after  or  pending
  registration, for a period not exceeding one year, where there is actual
  occupation of the land under the lease or agreement;
    Fourth.  Easements  or  servitudes  which  accrue against the property
  after initial registration in  such  manner  as  not  to  require  their
  registration.
    Except  as  specified  in  the  foregoing  statement of exceptions, no
  incumbrance, charge, trust, lien, or transfer shall take effect upon  or
  over  real  property  the title to which has been registered, unless the
  instrument creating and setting forth such incumbrance,  charge,  trust,
  lien,  or  transfer  has been filed with the registrar and a memorial or
  notation thereof  made  upon  the  certificate  of  title  covering  the
  Property.


§  401.  Registered  property  not affected by prescription or adverse
  possession.  No title to registered real property, in derogation of that
  of the registered owner, shall be acquired by  prescription  or  adverse
  Possession.


§ 402. Fraud; notice only by registration. Except in case of fraud and
  except also as herein otherwise provided, no person taking a transfer of
  any  registered  real  property  or of any estate or interest therein or
  lien or charge thereon from the registered owner shall  be  required  to
  inquire  into  the  circumstances  under which, or the consideration for
  which such owner or  any  previously  registered  owner  had  the  title
  registered, nor shall such transferee be affected with notice, actual or
  constructive, of any unregistered trust, lien, claim, demand or interest
  whatever;  and  the  knowledge  that an unregistered trust, lien, claim,
  demand or interest is in existence shall not of  itself  be  imputed  or
  treated as fraud.


§  403. Memorial to be carried forward. (a) Unless written application
  is made by a mortgagee, who acquires fee title to the premises,  not  to
  merge  said  mortgage with the fee title, the registrar shall delete the
  mortgage from the memorial on the certificate of title.
    (b) Whenever a memorial or notation has been entered as  permitted  by
  this  article,  the  registrar  shall  carry  the  same forward upon all
  certificates of title  until  the  same  is  cancelled  in  some  manner
  authorized by this article.


§  404.  Registered  property  to  remain  registered. The bringing of
  property under this article shall imply an agreement, running  with  the
  land  and  binding upon the applicant and all his successors in interest
  or title, that the property shall  be  subject  to  the  terms  of  this
  article,  and  all  amendments and alterations thereof, and all dealings
  with the property so  registered,  or  any  estate,  right  or  interest
  therein,  after  the  same  has been brought under this article, and all
  liens,  incumbrances  and  charges  upon  the  same  after   the   first
  registration thereof shall be subject to the terms of this article.


§   404-a.   Withdrawal   from   registration  in  certain  instances.
  Notwithstanding the provisions of section  four  hundred  four  of  this
  chapter,  a  title  to  real  property which has been duly registered as
  provided  by  article  twelve  thereof  may  be  withdrawn   from   such
  registration  upon  application to the supreme court by the owner of the
  fee title to the property.  An  application  for  such  withdrawal  from
  registration  may be filed with the registrar of the county in which the
  title is then registered and shall be entitled "in  the  matter  of  the
  application  of  (stating  the  name  of  the  registered owner) for the
  withdrawal from registration  of  the  title  to  certain  lands."  Such
  application,  in  such form as may be approved by the registrar, must be
  made by the registered owner of the fee of the real property.  It  shall
  set  forth  and  recite in detail the name and postoffice address of the
  registered owner, the number of the certificate of  title  last  issued,
  the  date  of  the  last registration of the title, a description of the
  real property as stated in the certificate  of  title  together  with  a
  reference  to  the  proper  section,  block  and  lot  numbers if any, a
  complete recital of all memorials entered on the certificate  of  title,
  the  names  and addresses of all persons owning any incumbrance, charge,
  trust or lien  on  the  premises,  a  statement  of  all  unpaid  taxes,
  assessments  and  water  rates  due  and  payable,  a  statement  of the
  circumstances existing which render continued registration of the  title
  impracticable  and  inexpedient,  and  a  prayer for the withdrawal from
  registration. The application shall be duly  verified  and  executed  in
  duplicate. The registrar shall file one copy as a document in his office
  and enter the same as a memorial on the certificate of title to which it
  relates.  The  other  copy shall be delivered to an official examiner of
  title who shall forthwith proceed to examine the title since the date of
  the first or initial registration thereof and investigate the facts  set
  forth  in  the application. Thereafter he shall make a report in writing
  to the supreme court of his findings and  a  recommendation  as  to  the
  proper  disposition  of  the application. The registrar shall set down a
  date for hearing on the application in the "title  part"  of  a  special
  term of the supreme court, which date shall be not less than twenty days
  after  the  filing  of the application; and he shall notify by certified
  mail demanding a personally signed return receipt card  all  persons  or
  parties  who  appear  by the report of the official examiner of title to
  have any interest in or incumbrance, charge, trust,  or  lien  upon  the
  said  real  property.  At the hearing any of the parties in interest may
  appear and consent or object to  the  granting  of  the  prayer  of  the
  application. Whether granted or denied, the supreme court shall enter an
  order  disposing  of  the application and after such order is filed with
  the clerk of the county a transcript or certified copy of the same shall
  be filed with the registrar and by him entered  as  a  memorial  on  the
  certificate  of  title.  When  the  order  of the supreme court grants a
  withdrawal from registration of a  title  to  real  property  as  herein
  provided,  the  registered  owner thereof shall forthwith deliver to the
  registrar and surrender his owner's duplicate certificate of  title,  or
  if  the  same  has  been  lost  or  destroyed  a  new  owner's duplicate
  certificate of title  obtained  as  provided  in  section  four  hundred
  fourteen  of  this  chapter.  The registrar shall then cause the owner's
  duplicate certificate of title to be  recorded  in  the  office  of  the
  recording  officer  of the county in which the real property is located,
  and thereafter permanently filed in his own office. A certified copy  of
  the  record  shall  be  delivered  to the registered owner as his future
  evidence of title.
    The recording of the owner's duplicate certificate of title  shall  be
  notice  of the recitals and matters therein contained, and shall also be
  notice of the fact that the title to the real property therein described
  is no longer registered nor subject to the provisions of article  twelve
  of this chapter. From the time of such recording and until any future or
  further  registration  of  the title thereof, said property shall be and
  become as to all matters  subsequent  to  the  time  of  such  recording
  subject  to all provisions of law relating to real property the title to
  which has not at any time been registered.
    The final order and judgment of registration by the court pursuant  to
  which  the  aforesaid  title  to real property was originally registered
  shall continue to be binding and conclusive as a decree or  judgment  of
  the  supreme  court  in the same manner and to the same extent and be of
  the same force and effect as if the said title had  not  been  withdrawn
  from registration in accordance with the provisions of this section.
    The  fee  of the registrar for all services rendered by him and by the
  official examiner of title pursuant to this section shall be the sum  of
  one hundred dollars payable at the time of filing of the application for
  withdrawal  from  registration,  and  one-half  of the said fee shall be
  transferred by the registrar to  the  assurance  fund  provided  for  by
  section four hundred and twenty-six of this chapter. In addition thereto
  the  applicant  shall  pay to the registrar and the official examiner of
  title, their necessary expenses and disbursements incurred in connection
  with the withdrawal of the title from registration.


§  405.  Registered  property  subject  to  same rights and burdens as
  unregistered property. Registered real property and every estate,  right
  and  interest  therein  shall  be  in  all  respects subject to the same
  rights, burdens and incidents as unregistered real property,  except  as
  otherwise expressly provided in this article or any amendment thereof.


§  406.  Transfers  of registered property. A registered owner of real
  property, in order to transfer his whole estate or interest therein,  or
  any  part  or  parcel  thereof, or any undivided interest therein, shall
  execute to the intended transferee a deed or instrument of conveyance in
  any form authorized by law. Such deed or instrument of conveyance  shall
  have  recited  therein a statement or reference setting forth the source
  of the title of the grantor or the circumstances under which  the  title
  was  acquired  by  him. Upon filing such deed or other instrument in the
  registrar's office and  surrendering  to  the  registrar  the  duplicate
  certificate  of  title,  he  shall  then make out and register as herein
  provided a new certificate and also an owner's duplicate certificate  of
  title  certifying  the  title  to the estate or interest in the property
  conveyed to the  transferee  and  shall  enter  upon  the  original  and
  duplicate  certificate  the  date  of  the  transfer,  the  name  of the
  transferee and the number of the new certificate, and shall stamp across
  the  original  and   surrendered   duplicate   certificates   the   word
  "cancelled."  Title  to  such  property  shall not pass by such transfer
  until the transfer is registered as prescribed by this section.


§  407.  Certificate  as to part of property remaining after transfer.
  When only  a  part  of  the  property  described  in  a  certificate  is
  transferred,  and  the description of the property is other than full or
  specified parts of lots on a map duly filed in the office of the  county
  clerk, the transfer must be accompanied by a survey from a licensed land
  surveyor  under seal of the said parcel.  Said transfer and survey shall
  be filed as a document and memorialized against the certificate.


 §  409.  Filing,  entering  and  indexing papers pursuant to this act;
  tickler certificate. Every paper filed with the registrar shall be given
  a serial number in the order of its filing, and then shall be entered by
  the registrar in an "entry book" under columns showing:
    First. The serial number;
    Second. Day of filing;
    Third.  Filing  number  of  petition  to  which  it  relates  if   the
  registration proceedings are still pending;
    Fourth.  Certificate number, if registration proceedings are completed
  and certificate has been issued;
    Fifth. Kind of paper filed;
    Sixth. Name of the person in whose interest the paper is filed.
    Every paper filed with the  registrar  affecting  property  for  which
  registration proceedings are pending shall in addition to its own serial
  number receive the petition number and be kept by the registrar with the
  petition  to  which it relates or affects. The registrar shall provide a
  book to be known as "the tickler certificate book" wherein he shall note
  all filed papers affecting property for which  registration  proceedings
  are  pending. Each page shall constitute a separate tickler certificate,
  and on said certificate he shall enter the character of the  paper,  the
  date of filing and the filing or serial number. The tickler certificate,
  subject  to  such change as the case may require, shall be substantially
  as follows:
    Petition number ....................
    This certifies that the following papers have been filed in the office
  of the registrar of ............ county affecting, or in connection with
  an action or proceeding to register the title to the following described
  real property, to wit:
                                  (The description to appear here)
  ________________________________________________________________________
                           |                   |
     Character of paper.   |    When filed.    |      Filing number.
  ________________________________________________________________________
                           |                   |
                           |                   |
                           |                   |
                           |                   |
                           |                   |
                           |                   |
    A memorial of every paper filed with the registrar affecting title  to
  registered  property  shall  be  entered  at once upon the last original
  certificate to which it relates. Every paper filed  with  the  registrar
  affecting  title  to  property  shall  be  indexed  from its contents as
  follows: In an index showing in alphabetical order in one column or in a
  set of columns the names, places of residence with  street  numbers,  if
  any,  and  post  office  addresses  of  all  persons  in whose interests
  petitions for registration of title are  filed;  the  names,  places  of
  residence  with street numbers, if any, and post office addresses of all
  persons to whom any interest, right or power in real property is granted
  or released; and the names, places of residence with street numbers,  if
  any,  and  post  office addresses of all persons claiming an interest in
  real property; also, in separate columns the kinds of papers filed,  the
  numbers  of the filed papers, the dates of filing, the filing numbers of
  petition to which they relate (if petition is pending) and  the  numbers
  of  the  last original certificate to which they relate (if the title to
  the property is registered). Whenever a judgment or an  order  of  court
  directs  that  the  title  to real property be registered, it shall also
  direct the registrar to transfer all proper liens and incumbrances filed
  against the property pending registration to the certificate of title so
  to be issued. In those counties which have block indexes, an index shall
  be kept by blocks of all registered property described by  lot,  diagram
  or  other  appropriate  designation,  and  the  owners  thereof  with  a
  reference to  the  certificate  numbers  in  which  the  properties  are
  registered; if any system of indexing by lot numbers is in use the index
  lot numbers shall be shown. There shall also be kept in those counties a
  block index of conveyances and a block index of mortgages for registered
  lands  in substantially the same form with necessary changes as provided
  in the respective block index laws of those counties. In counties  which
  have  no  block  indexes  the  registrar shall also keep an index of all
  properties registered under  this  article,  in  which  such  registered
  properties shall be indexed according to a brief description thereof.


§  409-a.  Entries  in  other  indexes. Upon the filing of a notice of
  petition and pendency of proceeding in the office of the registrar,  the
  recording  officer  of the county or counties in which the land title to
  which is sought to be registered is located shall make an entry  of  the
  petition   to   register   such  title  in  the  alphabetical  index  of
  conveyances, and in counties having a block index system, in  the  block
  index of conveyances, showing the date of such filing and in the grantor
  column  the  name of the petitioner, and the name of the owner where the
  petitioner is the  holder  of  a  contract  to  purchase  the  premises,
  together with a reference to the serial or document number given to such
  notice  by  the  registrar  and the number of the proceeding to which it
  relates.
    Recording officers are authorized and directed to index in like manner
  in the alphabetical index of conveyances, and in counties having a block
  index system, in the block index of  conveyances,  all  applications  or
  petitions  to  register titles to land heretofore filed in the office of
  the registrar of the county.


§  410. Notice of filed papers. All papers filed by the registrar, and
  indexed and entered by him pursuant to this article, shall be  of  equal
  effect  as  to  notice,  in  the order of their filing as shown by their
  filing numbers, as are similar papers when recorded by county  clerk  or
  registers under the recording acts. Should an action for registration be
  discontinued  or  otherwise terminated without registration, an order of
  court to that effect shall be filed with the  registrar,  who  shall  at
  once  cause  all  the  papers  relating  to  the  title  to the property
  affected, filed with him, except the  notice  of  application  and  said
  order,  to  be  recorded  or  filed, and indexed, by the county clerk or
  register (as the case requires) in the order of their filing, on payment
  of the statutory fees.


§  411.  Addresses  of  interested  parties; notice. On every paper or
  instrument filed with the registrar there shall be  indorsed  the  name,
  place  of  residence with street number, if any, and post-office address
  of the person in whose behalf it is filed. The address  may  be  changed
  from  time  to  time, by such person filing with the registrar a written
  notice of such change.


§  412.  When a transfer is deemed to be registered. Every transfer of
  registered property shall be deemed to be registered under this  article
  when  such  document  has  been  filed  of  record, in the office of the
  registrar of the county where the  property  is  located  and  a  serial
  number  and  certificate  number  assigned  to the instrument; all other
  dealings shall be considered as registered when the  document  has  been
  filed  of  record in the office of the registrar of the county where the
  property is located and a serial number and certificate number has  been
  assigned the instrument.


§ 413. New certificates of title. Upon the application of any owner of
  registered  property  held  under  one or more certificates of title and
  delivering up of such certificate or certificates, the  registrar  shall
  issue  to  such  owner, at his option, separate certificates, each for a
  portion of such property in accordance with such application;  and  upon
  issuing  any  such certificate of title, said registrar shall indorse on
  the last previous  certificate  of  such  property  so  delivered  up  a
  memorial  setting  forth  the  occasion  of the cancellation thereof and
  referring to the number or numbers of the new certificates of  title  so
  Issued.


§  414. Loss of duplicate certificate. If any duplicate certificate of
  title is lost or destroyed, the owner of the  property  or  the  current
  grantee  with  proper  certified  deeds  may  file  with the registrar a
  verified petition. Such petition  shall  conform  to  the  form  annexed
  hereto,  which  may  be  made available by the registrar. Upon filing of
  such petition, the registrar shall issue a  new  duplicate  certificate,
  which  shall contain a memorandum of the fact that it is issued in place
  and stead of the lost or  destroyed  certificate,  and  which  shall  be
  entitled to like faith and credit as the original duplicate certificate.
  Any  previously  issued  owner's  duplicate certificate of title becomes
  void and invalid.
 
                                    FORM
 
  Article 12 Section 414 R.P.L.
 
  Petition may only be submitted by the owner, or the current grantee with
  proper certified deeds submitted simultaneously.
 
  ANY FALSE STATEMENT MADE HEREUNDER IS A VIOLATION OF STATE LAW  AND  MAY
  SUBJECT THE PERSON TO CIVIL AND CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
 
                             --  * * * * * *  --
 
           PETITION TO REPLACE LOST OR DESTROYED OWNER'S DUPLICATE
                            CERTIFICATE OF TITLE
 
  STATE OF NEW YORK}
  COUNTY OF        }  ss.:
 
  __________  owner's name(s)  _____________________________________ being
  duly sworn, deposes and says that he-she-they is/are the
  Petitioner(s) and reside at
  ____________________________________________________________  and is/are
  of  legal  age;  that  he-she-they  is/are the owner(s) of the following
  described property
                          ((property description))
 
  under Certificate of Title  Number  __________________  under  the  Land
  Title Registration Law.
  A  thorough  and complete search has been made for the Owner's Duplicate
  Certificate of Title  number  _______________.  Said  Owner's  Duplicate
  Certificate  of Title can not be located. This petition is being made to
  direct the Registrar of __________________ County, to issue in place and
  stead, a new Owner's Duplicate Certificate of Title number __________ in
  the name(s) of ______________________________________________  with  all
  memorials placed thereon.
  Upon  the  filing  of this affidavit, I/we realize any previously issued
  Owner's Duplicate Certificate of Title becomes void and invalid.
 
                                    _____________________________ LS
                                    Petitioner
                                VERIFICATION
  STATE OF NEW YORK}
  COUNTY OF        }  ss.:
 
  I/we _________________ name(s) _______________ being sworn, say(s): I/we
  am/are the Petitioner(s) in  the  within  action:  I/we  have  read  the
  foregoing Petition and know the contents thereof: the same is true to my
  own  knowledge,  except as to the matters herein stated to be alleged on
  information and belief, and as to those matters I/we believe to be true,
  and   have   furnished   the   following   proof   of    identification:
  _____________________________.
                                    __________________________    LS
                                    petitioner)
  Sworn to before me this _________
  day of _______________ 19 ____.
  __________________________
  Notary Public


§  415.  Mortgages,  leases  and  other  liens  and  charges;  may  be
  registered. Any mortgage, lease for a term of over one year, contract to
  sell or other instrument intended to create a lien,  incumbrance,  trust
  or  charge  on registered property or any right or interest therein, may
  be registered as herein provided.


§  416.  Proceedings  to  register  mortgage,  lease  or other lien or
  charge.  On the filing of the instrument creating such  mortgage,  lease
  or  other lien or charge in the registrar's office and the production of
  the duplicate certificate of title, he shall enter upon the  certificate
  of  title  and upon the duplicate certificate a memorial thereof and the
  date of filing the instrument with a reference to its file number, which
  memorial shall be signed by the  registrar  who  shall  deliver  to  the
  person filing such instrument a certified copy of such instrument, if it
  is  a mortgage, certified to be the "registration copy of mortgage." The
  registrar shall also note upon the instrument filed the  number  of  the
  certificate  on  which  the memorial is entered. Any mortgage registered
  pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions  of  article
  eleven  of  the tax law (being chapter sixty-two of the laws of nineteen
  hundred nine), and amendments thereof in the  same  manner  as  if  said
  mortgage  were  recorded, as provided by section two hundred fifty-three
  of said tax law.


§  417. Judgments, decrees, attachments and other liens to be noted on
  certificate.   No judgment, decree,  attachment,  execution,  mechanic's
  lien,  or  other lien or charge, which may affect or be a lien or charge
  upon real property in this state, shall be or become a lien or charge on
  real property, or any right or interest therein, the title to which  has
  been  registered,  unless a transcript, or certified copy, or other duly
  made or certified document, which is by law proper evidence in  a  court
  of  record,  of  such  judgment, decree, attachment, mechanic's lien, or
  other lien or charge, shall be duly filed  with  the  registrar,  and  a
  proper memorial thereof made by him upon the certificate of title in the
  title  book.  Such  transcript, or certified copy, or other duly made or
  certified document so  filed  shall  have  plainly  written  or  stamped
  thereon  the  number  of the certificate of registration of the title to
  the property to be affected and bound thereby by virtue of such memorial
  on such certificate, and it shall be the duty of the registrar  to  make
  such   memorial  immediately  on  receipt  of  the  same.  A  discharge,
  cancellation, or  modification  of  any  judgment,  decree,  attachment,
  mechanic's  lien,  or other lien or charge, so noted on the certificate,
  shall not affect or be binding upon the registered property,  right,  or
  interest,  unless  on  like evidence a memorial thereof shall be made by
  the registrar on such certificate.


§  418.  Assignment  of  mortgage, lease, or other lien or charge. The
  holder of any mortgage, lease, or other lien  or  charge  on  registered
  property,  in  order  to  transfer  the  same or any part thereof, shall
  execute an assignment of the whole or any part thereof;  and  upon  such
  assignment  being  filed  in  the office of the registrar, the registrar
  shall enter in the title  book  a  memorial  of  such  transfer  with  a
  reference  to the assignment by its file number; he shall also note upon
  the instrument on file in his office intended  to  be  transferred,  and
  upon   the  registration  copy  thereof  produced,  the  number  of  the
  certificate on which the memorial is  entered,  with  the  date  of  the
  Entry.


§  419.  Release,  discharge  or surrender of charge or incumbrance. A
  release, discharge or surrender of a charge or incumbrance, or any  part
  thereof,  or  of  any part of the property charged or incumbered, may be
  effected by the production of a release, discharge or satisfaction, duly
  executed and acknowledged, made in any form authorized by law, except as
  herein provided. Any tax, water rent or assessment, subject to which the
  title has been registered and which has been noted on the certificate of
  title as provided in section three hundred ninety of this  chapter,  may
  be released and discharged in the same way upon a receipt therefor being
  issued  and  duly  certified  by  the  receiver of taxes or collector of
  assessments and arrears or other duly authorized officer,  as  the  case
  may require, and delivered to the registrar and filed in his office. The
  receiver  of taxes or collector of assessments and arrears or such other
  duly authorized officer, as the case may require,  upon  demand  of  any
  owner of registered property, shall execute, certify and deliver to such
  owner  such receipt when any such tax, water rent or assessment has been
  paid upon such registered property.


§  420. Enforcement of mortgages, charges, liens and incumbrances. All
  charges, liens and  incumbrances  on  registered  property,  or  on  any
  estate,  right  or  interest  in the same, and all rights therein may be
  enforced as now allowed by law; and  all  laws  with  reference  to  the
  foreclosure,  release  or  satisfaction  of  mortgages  shall  apply  to
  mortgages on registered property or on any  estate,  right  or  interest
  therein,  except  as  herein  otherwise  provided, and except that until
  notice of the pendency of any suit to  enforce  such  mortgage,  charge,
  lien  or  incumbrance  is filed in the registrar's office and a memorial
  thereof entered on the certificate in the title book,  the  pendency  of
  such  suit shall not be notice to the registrar or to any person dealing
  with the property or any right or interest therein. Upon the sale  under
  foreclosure  or  other  action  or proceeding directing the sale of real
  property, the title to which is then a registered title, it shall be the
  duty of the officer making the sale to report such sale to  the  justice
  assigned  to  the  "title part" of the special term, who shall thereupon
  designate an official examiner of title to examine into  the  action  or
  proceeding  or  any other fact or circumstance affecting the title since
  the last registration thereof. The examiner of title shall  prepare  his
  report  immediately  and  shall file one copy with the court designating
  him and one copy with the officer making the sale.  The  officer  making
  the  sale  shall  not  deliver  a  deed  of  the property sold until the
  examiner's report is filed with him showing the regularity of  the  acts
  and  proceedings  subsequent  to  the  last  registration  of title. The
  justice of the "title part" shall upon the production of the  deed  from
  the  officer making the sale and upon the report of the examiner approve
  said deed and make an order directing  the  registrar  to  register  the
  title  accordingly.  The  fees for the services of the official examiner
  under this section shall not exceed the sum of five  dollars  unless  an
  additional allowance is directed by the justice of the "title part."


§  421.  Powers  of  attorney  to  be filed and registered. Before any
  person  can  convey,  charge,  incumber  or  otherwise  deal  with   any
  registered  property,  or  any  estate,  right  or  interest therein, as
  attorney in fact for another, the deed or instrument empowering  him  so
  to act shall be filed with the registrar and a memorial thereof shall be
  entered upon the certificate in the title book, in like manner as in the
  case  of a charge or incumbrance. A revocation of such power of attorney
  may be  registered  in  like  manner  as  such  power  of  attorney  was
  Registered.


§  422. Reference of doubtful matters to the court. When the registrar
  is in doubt, and the parties in interest fail to agree as to the  proper
  memorial  to  be  made  in the title book of any deed, mortgage or other
  voluntary instrument presented for registration, the questions shall  be
  referred  to  the  court  for decision, either on the certificate of the
  registrar stating the question, or upon the suggestion in writing of any
  party or parties in interest; and the court, after  due  notice  to  all
  parties  in interest, and a hearing, if necessary or proper, shall enter
  an order prescribing the  form  of  the  memorial  to  be  made  by  the
  registrar,  who  shall  make  the  memorial accordingly. In any judicial
  proceeding affecting property, the title to which is then  a  registered
  title, the court upon the application in writing of any party or parties
  in  interest  after  due  notice  to all other parties in interest and a
  hearing, if necessary or proper, shall enter an  order  prescribing  the
  form  of  any memorial that should be made by the registrar in the title
  book because or as the result of such  proceeding;  and  the  registrar,
  upon  the  production  of a certified copy of such order, shall make the
  proper memorial in accordance  with  such  order.    After  making  such
  memorial  in  the  title  book  the  registrar shall also make all other
  memorials  on  existing  certificates  or  make  and  deliver  any   new
  certificates  according  to the circumstances and in the manner required
  Herein.


§  423.  Death  of owner of registered property; transfer of property.
  Upon the death of an owner of registered  real  property,  it  shall  be
  incumbent  upon  the  surviving spouse or the joint tenant with right of
  survivorship to present to the registrar a petition on the annexed form,
  for the transfer of the  title  into  the  name  of  the  survivor.  The
  registrar  shall  upon  payment  of  the required fees, memorialize said
  petition showing the  change  of  ownership,  delete  the  name  of  the
  deceased,  and  recertify  title  to  the  new  owner  on  the  existing
  certificate of title. Upon the death of  an  owner  of  registered  real
  property,  it  shall  be incumbent upon the executor or administrator of
  the estate of the deceased, to present to the registrar  a  petition  on
  the  annexed  form,  for  the  transfer  of  title  into the name of the
  executor or administrator, or upon filing of a deed executed by the said
  executor or administrator, in the  name  of  the  grantee  therein.  The
  registrar  shall  upon  payment  of  the required fees, memorialize said
  petition showing the change of ownership, and issue a new certificate of
  title to the executor or administrator. Upon the death of  an  owner  of
  registered  real  property, having died intestate, it shall be incumbent
  upon the heirs-at-law to obtain a verified petition and order, consented
  to by the registrar, the state attorney general and signed by a  justice
  of  the  supreme  court.    Sufficient and conclusive evidence as to the
  heirs-at-law must be made part of the proceeding. Upon  filing  of  said
  completed  proceeding with the registrar, together with filing fees, the
  registrar shall issue a certificate of title as directed by the order.
    Upon the coming to age, or freedom from disability of a  person  whose
  guardian,  committee  or  conservator  is  a  registered  owner as above
  described, or upon a transfer of the powers and duties of  an  executor,
  trustee or other person acting in a representative capacity, or upon any
  other transfer of registered ownership or nominal change of ownership by
  death  or  process  of law or otherwise in a case not otherwise provided
  for by this article, a petition may be made to the court  for  an  order
  directing  the registrar as to the persons in whose name or names and in
  what manner the title shall be registered and a new certificate  issued;
  and  the court, on such petition and on due notice to the persons who in
  the opinion of the court shall  be  parties  in  interest  and  after  a
  hearing, if deemed necessary or proper, shall enter an order prescribing
  the name or names and the manner in which the title shall be registered.
    Any  petition  permitted  under this section shall, in addition to any
  other proper allegations, set  forth  the  names  and  known  places  of
  residence  of  the  petitioner  and  the  persons having or claiming any
  interest in the registered premises under a certificate of title,  or  a
  registered  instrument,  or  by  operation of law; and the people of the
  state of New York, with  reference  to  which  latter  party  a  further
  allegation  shall  be  made in substantial conformity with the statement
  pertaining to the state of New York provided for under  subdivision  (d)
  of  section  three  hundred  seventy-nine of this article. Such petition
  shall be filed with the clerk  of  the  county  in  which  the  original
  registration  was  had,  and  a  copy  thereof  shall  be filed with the
  registrar of such county, who shall memorialize said  copy  of  petition
  upon  the  last original certificate to which it relates, which memorial
  shall also have the same effect as a notice of  pendency  of  an  action
  under  the  civil  practice  act.  Immediately  upon  the filing of such
  petition and a copy thereof as aforesaid, the court  shall  provide  for
  due  notice to be given to the parties in interest by entering an order,
  either directing the registrar to give notice of the  hearing  upon  the
  petition  to  the  parties  named therein, and to any additional parties
  named in the order who in the opinion of the court shall be  parties  in
  interest,  by  publishing  and mailing such notice at the expense of the
  petitioner,  in  the  manner  prescribed  in   section   three   hundred
  eighty-five  of  this  article  for  the  publication and mailing of the
  notice of hearing in an original  registration  proceeding;  or  in  the
  alternative,  directing that service of the notice be made personally in
  the manner provided for the personal service of a summons under  article
  twenty-five of the civil practice act, respecting which latter procedure
  involving  personal  service  the  court,  in its proper discretion, may
  provide that the notice be made returnable at any  time  not  less  than
  eight days after completion of service thereof and may fix the time when
  service  thereof  will  be  deemed  complete.  The form of the notice of
  hearing contemplated herein shall be  substantially  the  same  as  that
  provided  for  under  section  three hundred eighty-six of this article,
  except that it may be entitled "Transfer of Registration of Land Title,"
  and that the object of the proceeding may be stated  therein  to  be  to
  obtain  registration  of title in, and the issuance of a new certificate
  of title to,  the  petitioner  or  any  persons  entitled  thereto,  any
  appropriate  language  being sufficient. The notice may be subscribed by
  either the registrar, or the attorney for the petitioner,  as  the  case
  may  require.  The  certificate  of the registrar that he has served the
  notice as directed by the court, by publishing  and  mailing,  shall  be
  filed in the case, with any necessary affidavits in support of the same,
  on  or  before  the  return day, and shall be proof of such service. The
  court in a proper case may dispense with the mailing of  the  notice  of
  hearing,  in substantial conformity with the practice prescribed in rule
  fifty of the rules of civil  practice,  and  may  also  cause  other  or
  further notice of the petition to be given.


§  423-a.  Form  for  transfer  of  property  upon  death  of owner of
  registered property. The registrar may make available the form  for  the
  transfer  of  property  upon  the  death  of the owner of the registered
  property, which form in any event shall be as follows:
 
                                    FORM
 
  Article 12, Section 423 (a) R.P.L.
 
  ANY FALSE STATEMENT MADE HEREUNDER IS A VIOLATION OF THE STATE  LAW  AND
  MAY SUBJECT THE PERSON TO CIVIL AND CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
 
                              -- * * * * * * --
 
   PETITION FOR REISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF TITLE FOR SURVIVING SPOUSE OR
                   JOINT TENANT WITH RIGHT OF SURVIVORSHIP
 
  STATE OF NEW YORK}
  COUNTY OF        }  ss.:
 
  ____________ deponent ________________________ being duly sworn, deposes
  and says that he/she is the Petitioner herein residing at ______________
  address ________________ and of legal age, and
  that  he/she  is  the  surviving  spouse of ____________ name _________
  deceased. At the time of death, deponent was married  to  the  deceased,
  that  the  marriage had not been annulled or dissolved and that no legal
  separation had been obtained. OR that  he/she  is  the  surviving  joint
  tenant with right of survivorship.
  That  _________  deponent _____________ and ____________ spouse/deceased
  joint tenant ____________ were the registered owners as tenants  by  the
  entirety/joint  tenant  with right of survivorship of the property under
  Certificate of Title number __________.
  The deceased _______________ name  _______________  died  ______________
  date ________ as evidenced by a death certificate attached hereto.
  This  petition  is  being made pursuant to Section 423 R.P.L., to direct
  the Registrar of _____________ County to reissue  Certificate  of  Title
  number  ____________ to ____________ deponent ______________ residing at
  ______________ address ___________ for the following described property:
 
                          ((property description))
 
  (For JOINT TENANT petition only) Property is  subject  to  Estate  Taxes
  against  the estate of ______________ Joint Tenant __________, deceased,
  if any.
  The original Owner's  Duplicate  Certificate  of  Title  is  surrendered
  herewith  ((or))  The  production  of  the  original  Owner's  Duplicate
  Certificate  of  Title  is  hereby  dispensed   with,   by   reason   of
  _____________ lost/stolen ________________.
                                      __________________________  LS
                                      Petitioner(s)
                                VERIFICATION
  STATE OF NEW YORK}
  COUNTY OF        } ss.:
 
  I/we ___________________________ being sworn, say(s):
  I/we  am/are  the Petitioner(s) in the within action; I/we have read the
  foregoing Petition and know the contents thereof; the same is true to my
  own knowledge, except as to the matters herein stated to be  alleged  on
  information and belief, and as to those matters I/we believe to be true,
  and have furnished the following proof of identification.
 
                                      ____________________________LS
                                      Petitioner(s)
  Sworn to before me this ____________
  day of _______________ 19______.
  ____________________
  Notary Public
 
                                    FORM
 
  Article 12, Section 423 (b) R.P.L.
 
  ANY  FALSE  STATEMENT MADE HEREUNDER IS A VIOLATION OF THE STATE LAW AND
  MAY SUBJECT THE PERSON TO CIVIL AND CRIMINAL PENALTIES.
 
                               -- * * * * * --
 
                PETITION FOR ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF TITLE
                        FOR ADMINISTRATOR OR EXECUTOR
 
  STATE OF NEW YORK}
  COUNTY OF        } ss.:
 
  ___________ deponent _______________________________ being  duly  sworn,
  deposes  and  says  that  he/she is the Petitioner herein and resides at
  ____________________ address _____________________ and of legal age;
  That  he/she  is   the   Administrator/Executor   of   the   estate   of
  _____________, deceased.
  That ____________________ name ______________________ was the registered
  owner    of   the   property   under   Certificate   of   Title   number
  ________________.
  The deceased, ________________ name ______________ died  _______________
  date _____________ as evidenced by a death certificate attached hereto.
  ___________________    name    _______________,   has   been   appointed
  Administrator/Executor  of   the   estate   of   ____________   deceased
  ___________    as    evidenced    by    the    original    Letters    of
  Administration/Testamentary and certified  copy  of  the  will  attached
  hereto.
  1. That a Release of Estate Tax is attached hereto
  2. That the Gross Estate does not exceed $600,000
  3.  Subject to the Estate Taxes against the estate of _________________,
  deceased, if any.
  This petition is being made to direct the Registrar of _________________
  County, to issue a new  Certificate  of  Title  to  ______________  name
  __________________,   as   Administrator/Executor   of   the  Estate  of
  __________________, deceased, residing at _____________________  address
  __________________ for the following described property.
  OR
 
  This   petition   is   being   made   to   direct   the   Registrar   of
  __________________ County to issue a new Certificate of Title  upon  the
  filing  of an Administrator/Executor's deed to ______________ grantee in
  the  deed  _________________,  residing  at  _________________   address
  __________________ for the following described property:
 
                          ((property description))
 
  The  original  Owner's  Duplicate  Certificate  of  Title is surrendered
  herewith  ((or))  The  production  of  the  original  Owner's  Duplicate
  Certificate   of   Title   is   hereby  dispensed  with,  by  reason  of
  _____________ lost/stolen _________________.
 
                                      ___________________________ LS
                                      PETITIONER
 
                                VERIFICATION
 
  State of New York}
  County of        } ss.:
 
  I ____________________________being sworn, say: I am the  Petitioner  in
  the  within  action;  I  have  read  the foregoing Petition and know the
  contents thereof: the same is true to my own knowledge, except as to the
  matters herein stated to be alleged on information and belief, and as to
  those matters I believe to be true, and  have  furnished  the  following
  proof of identification: ____________________________________________.
 
                                      __________________________  LS
                                      PETITIONER
  Sworn to before me this __________
  day of ____________ 19_____.
  ___________________________
  NOTARY PUBLIC


§  426.  Assurance  fund.  1.  Upon  the original registration of real
  property, there shall be paid to the  registrar  one-tenth  of  one  per
  centum  of  the  value  thereof  on the basis of the last assessment for
  local taxation, as an assurance fund for land registered in his  county.
  Subsequent to the original registration, there shall also be paid to the
  registrar,  and  by  him  transferred  to  the  said  fund, the parts or
  portions of the fees so designated by section four  hundred  four-a  and
  section four hundred thirty-two of this article.  All moneys so received
  by  the  registrar under the provisions of this section shall be paid to
  the treasurer of the county (in New York city  to  the  commissioner  of
  finance),  and  shall be invested by him in the same manner as are other
  trust funds.  All such moneys  as  have  been  so  transferred  by  the
  registrar  to  the treasurer of the county (in New York city to the city
  chamberlain)  prior  to  the  first  day  of  July,   nineteen   hundred
  twenty-nine,  and  have been disposed of as provided by the law prior to
  said date, shall be returned to such treasurer of  the  county  (in  New
  York  city  to  the  commissioner of finance) and shall become a part of
  such trust fund.  The proper local county or city authorities are hereby
  authorized and directed to make such appropriations of funds as  may  be
  necessary for this purpose.  Said treasurer (or commissioner of finance)
  shall  keep  a  separate account of such trust funds and report annually
  thereon as required by law in reference to  other  trust  funds  in  his
  hands.
    2.  All  assurance funds held by the treasurer of the county or in New
  York city by the commissioner of finance, pursuant to this  section  for
  more  than  six  years shall be deemed surplus. All monies in said fund,
  which have been deemed surplus, or so much thereof as may be  necessary,
  shall be made available on January first, nineteen hundred ninety-seven,
  and  shall  be  used  to  cover  the costs incurred while performing the
  transfers required by section four hundred thirty-six of  this  article.
  Provided  there  are no claims filed against said fund that would affect
  release, such remaining surplus funds may be released by such  treasurer
  or  commissioner of finance and paid into the general fund of the county
  or city.   If a claim is filed against  such  fund  subsequent  to  such
  release,  the general fund of such county shall repay the assurance fund
  such released funds with interest thereon at the prevailing rate  up  to
  the  amount of released funds sufficient to cover payments made pursuant
  to such claim.
    3. All such assurance funds created by any county  or  city  shall  be
  terminated  on January first, two thousand six, and all remaining monies
  are to be transferred to the general fund of the county or city.


§  427.  Compensation  from  assurance  fund.  Any person who, without
  negligence on his part, sustains loss or damage or is deprived  of  real
  property,  or  of  any  estate, right or interest therein because of the
  registration of another person as owner of  such  property,  or  of  any
  estate,  right, or interest therein, through fraud, or in consequence of
  any error, omission, mistake or misdescription  in  any  certificate  of
  title  or  in  any  entry of or memorial in the title book, shall have a
  cause of action against the county  treasurer  (in  New  York  city  the
  commissioner  of  finance)  to  recover  compensation  for  such loss or
  Damage.


§  428.    Action  against  assurance  fund.    Any  allowed claim for
  indemnity shall be paid in the same manner as other claims  against  the
  county.    In  the  city  of  New  York a claim shall be passed upon and
  approved by the city register and by the corporation counsel of the city
  before payment is allowed.   The rejection of  a  claim  by  the  proper
  county  officials  (or  in the city of New York by the city register and
  corporation counsel) shall not preclude the claimant  from  bringing  an
  action  to  recover  such  claim.    No claim or judgment on a claim for
  indemnity shall be binding on the county or on the county treasurer  (in
  New  York  city the commissioner of finance) for an amount exceeding the
  amount credited to the assurance fund.  If the amount  credited  to  the
  assurance fund is insufficient to pay the claim or judgment in full, the
  unpaid  balance  shall bear interest at the legal rate and shall be paid
  out of the first moneys coming into said assurance fund or the county or
  city general fund after the assurance fund has been terminated  pursuant
  to  section  four  hundred  twenty-six  of this article. If any right of
  action against any person for damages for negligence or other cause,  or
  under  any  covenant  or  contract of warranty or guaranty or otherwise,
  exists in favor of the person to whom  indemnity  is  paid,  the  county
  treasurer (in New York city the commissioner of finance) shall be deemed
  to  be  subrogated  to  such  right  and  may bring an action to recover
  thereunder.  Any amounts recovered by the county treasurer (in New  York
  city the commissioner of finance) under such an action shall be credited
  to the account of the assurance fund.  Until the assurance fund provided
  as  aforesaid  shall have been exhausted, payment for any such losses or
  damages shall be made out of such fund.


§  429.    Restrictions  on claims against assurance fund.   No person
  shall recover from the assurance fund, or the  county  or  city  general
  fund  after  the  assurance fund has been terminated pursuant to section
  four hundred twenty-six of this article, any greater sum than  the  fair
  market  value of the property at the time the right to bring such action
  first accrued. Any action or proceeding to recover damages  out  of  the
  assurance  fund  shall  be commenced within six years from the time when
  the right to begin the same accrued, and not afterward,  and  such  time
  shall not be extended because of any disability.


§  430.  Penalties  for fraudulent acts or false certificates. Whoever
  fraudulently procures  or  assists  in  fraudulently  procuring,  or  is
  intentionally  privy to the fraudulent procurement of any certificate of
  title or other instrument, or of any entry in the registration or  other
  book  kept in the registrar's office, or of any erasure or alteration in
  any entry in said book, or in any instrument authorized by this act,  or
  knowingly  defrauds,  or is intentionally privy to defrauding any person
  by means of a false or fraudulent instrument, certificate, statement  or
  affidavit, affecting registered land, shall be guilty of a felony.


§  431.  Forgery  and fraudulent stamping; penalty. Whoever forges, or
  procures to be forged, or assists in forging, the seal of the registrar,
  or the name, signature, handwriting of any officer  of  the  registrar's
  office;  or fraudulently stamps or procures to be stamped, or assists in
  stamping, any document with any forged seal of said registrar, or forges
  or procures to be forged, or assists in forging, the name, signature  or
  handwriting  of  any  person  whomsoever,  to  any  instrument  which is
  expressly or impliedly authorized to be signed by such person,  or  uses
  any  document upon which any impression or part of the impression of any
  seal of said registrar has been forged, knowing the same  to  have  been
  forged,  or any document the signature to which has been forged, knowing
  the same to have been forged, or swears falsely concerning any matter or
  proceeding made or done in pursuance of this article, shall be guilty of
  a felony.


§  432.  Fees  to  be  charged. The following fees shall be charged by
  registrars for the various services performed pursuant to this article:
    (a) Filing the notice of petition, including entering it in the  entry
  book,  indexing  it  in  all  indexes,  and  entering  it in the tickler
  certificate book, twenty-five dollars.
    (b) Filing the survey, map or plan  of  the  land  to  be  registered,
  twenty dollars.
    (c)  Filing  any  survey,  map  or plan of registered land showing any
  subdivision or partition thereof, ten dollars.
    (d) Filing, entering and indexing in all indexes any  deed,  lease  or
  muniment of title, ten dollars.
    (e)  Filing,  entering  and  indexing  in all indexes any deed for the
  transfer of registered land, or of any interest therein,  including  the
  issuance of the transfer certificate of title, eighteen dollars.
    (f)  Filing,  entering  and  indexing  in  all indexes any mortgage of
  registered land or of any part  thereof,  certifying  and  delivering  a
  registration copy thereof, eighteen dollars.
    (g)  In  addition  to  the fee provided for in subdivision (f) of this
  section, there shall be charged the fees now fixed by law for  preparing
  and certifying certified copies of documents or records.
    (h)  Filing,  entering  and  indexing  in  all indexes any assignment,
  modification, subordination, extension or satisfaction of a mortgage  of
  registered land, twelve dollars.
    (i)  Filing,  entering  and  indexing  in  all indexes any other lien,
  incumbrance or charge pending registration or subsequent thereto, twelve
  dollars.
    (j) Filing, entering  and  indexing  in  all  indexes  any  instrument
  cancelling  any  lien,  incumbrance or charge on a certificate of title,
  twelve dollars.
    (k) In addition to the charges provided for under subdivisions (i) and
  (j) of this section, there shall be charged a fee of fifty  dollars  for
  each  additional certificate of title upon which any instrument creating
  or discharging any  lien,  encumbrance  or  charge  is  required  to  be
  entered.
    (l) Filing, entering and indexing in all indexes the certified copy of
  the final order and judgment of registration and issuing the certificate
  of title in accordance therewith, twenty dollars.
    (m) In addition to the fee provided for in subdivisions (e) and (l) of
  this  section,  there  shall  be  charged a fee of five dollars for each
  additional parcel where two or more separate parcels are  combined  into
  one certificate.
    (n)  Filing  and  entering  an application for a new owner's duplicate
  certificate of title where the same has  been  lost  or  destroyed,  and
  issuance of such new certificate, fifteen dollars.
    (o)  Preparing  and  issuing any new certificate of title where two or
  more adjoining parcels of registered land are combined into  one  parcel
  by  the same owner; or where one parcel of registered land is subdivided
  into two or more  parcels  by  the  owner,  for  each  new  certificate,
  eighteen dollars.
    (p)  Services  of the official examiner of title, one-tenth of one per
  centum of the value of the property on the basis of the last  assessment
  for local taxation, and twenty dollars in addition thereto.
    (q)  Furnishing  printed  forms or for any services for which fees are
  not herein specified such reasonable charges as  may  be  fixed  by  the
  registrar subject to the revision of the court.
    One-half of the fees received by the registrar under subdivisions (e),
  (f),  (h),  (i),  (j)  and  (o)  of  this  section  shall be paid to the
  treasurer of the county  (in  New  York  city  to  the  commissioner  of
  finance),  to be credited to the assurance fund provided by section four
  hundred twenty-six of this article.


§  433.  Construction  of  article.  This  article  shall be construed
  liberally, so far as may be necessary for the purpose of  effecting  its
  general intent.


§  434.  Form  for official examiner's report of title. The examiner's
  report of title shall be in appropriate form to set  forth  the  matters
  required  by  this article. The registrar of any county is authorized to
  have forms prepared and printed for the examiner's report of  title  and
  for any other papers required by this article and shall furnish the same
  to  applicants  without  charge  or for such reasonable charge as may be
  fixed by the registrar. Such forms and the charge to  be  made  therefor
  shall be subject to the revision of the court.


§  435.  Form  for  certificate  of title. The registrar's certificate
  title shall be in the following form:
  No. .......                                 First registered ...........
                            CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
    (First Certificate) or (Transfer from No. ............) ..............
  ........................................................................
  State of New York,}
                    }ss.:
  County ..........,}
  ........................................................................
  of (residence, and if a minor give his age; if under  other  disability,
  state  the  nature  of the disability); is the owner of an estate in fee
  simple (or as the case may be) in the following land (here describe  the
  premises)  subject  to  the estates, easements, incumbrances and charges
  hereunder noted. (In case of trust, condition  or  limitation,  say  "in
  trust" or "upon condition" or "with limitation," as the case may be.)
    Witness my hand and official seal this (date).
      (Seal)                                        ......................,
                                                                Registrar.
                                  MEMORIALS
  of  estates,  easements  and  charges on the land described in the above
  certificate of title.
  ________________________________________________________________________
  ________________________________________________________________________
  Document |       | Running in |      |   Date of    |  Signature
   number  | Kind  |  favor of  | Terms| registration | of registrar
  _________|_______|____________|______|______________|___________________
           |       |            |      |              |
           |       |            |      |              |
           |       |            |      |              |
           |       |            |      |              |
  _________|_______|____________|______|______________|___________________
  ________________________________________________________________________


§  436.    Termination of title registration procedures. 1. As used in
  this section:
    a. "Adverse instrument" means any document, instrument or  paper  that
  adversely  affects,  but  does  not  convey, the fee title to registered
  land, and the validity of which is not  dependent  upon  consent  by  an
  owner  of  the  registered  land  or some person claiming by, through or
  under that owner. Adverse instruments include, but are not  limited  to,
  mechanics'  lien  claims,  judgments,  and lis pendens notices.  Adverse
  instruments do not include sheriff's deeds,  marshall's  deeds,  or  tax
  deeds.
    b. "Voluntary instrument" means any document, instrument or paper that
  either  conveys  the  fee  title  to registered land or affects title to
  registered land and the validity of which is dependant upon  consent  by
  an  owner of the registered land or by some person claiming by, through,
  or under that owner. Voluntary instruments include, but are not  limited
  to,  deeds,  including  tax deeds, sheriff's deeds and marshall's deeds,
  mortgages, assignments of mortgage, leases and  grants  of  easement  or
  license.
    c.  "Registered  land"  means  real  property  and  interests  in real
  property, which have been registered under this article.
    d. "Registrar's certificate of title" means a document issued pursuant
  to section three hundred ninety-four of this article.
    2. On and after the effective date of this section, no title  to  land
  may  be  registered  under this article.   Provided, however, that every
  certificate of title or instrument affecting title filed  prior  to  the
  effective  date  of  this  section  shall  be registered pursuant to the
  provisions of this article.
    3. On or after the effective date of this section and  before  January
  first, two thousand, the registrar shall accept only adverse instruments
  which he or she shall register pursuant to this article.
    4. On and after the effective date of this section the registrar shall
  refuse  to  accept  for  registration any instrument that is a voluntary
  instrument.  Instead of accepting such instruments for registration, the
  registrar shall upon payment of the statutory recording fee, deliver  to
  the  county  clerk,  or  in the counties of Bronx, Kings, Queens and New
  York, the register for recording each current certificate  of  title  to
  all  lands  affected  by  that  voluntary  or adverse instrument. Before
  delivering the certificate, the registrar shall memorialize or  note  on
  the  certificate  any  instruments  relating  to  incumbrances, charges,
  trusts, liens and transfers that have been filed with the registrar that
  have not been memorialized or noted.  A certificate of  title  shall  be
  delivered in the form required for recording.
    5.  On  or  before  January  first,  two  thousand the registrar shall
  deliver to the county clerk, or in the counties of Bronx, Kings,  Queens
  and  New  York,  the register for recording the certificates of title of
  all remaining land which was previously registered under  this  article.
  Before delivering those certificates, the registrar shall memorialize or
  note  on  the  certificates  any  instruments  relating to incumbrances,
  charges, trusts, liens and transfers  that  have  been  filed  with  the
  registrar  and  that  have  not  yet  been  memorialized  or  noted.   A
  certificate of title  shall  be  delivered  in  the  form  required  for
  recording.
    6.   As of the date of recording of certificates delivered pursuant to
  subdivision four or five of  this  section,  the  recorded  certificates
  shall  be  subject  only  to  incumbrances,  charges,  trusts, liens and
  transfers as may be memorialized or noted on the certificate,  and  free
  from  all  others except those set forth in section four hundred of this
  article.
    After  the  recording  of  certificates  which  are  delivered   under
  subdivisions  four  and  five  of  this section, title to lands shall be
  conveyed or encumbered in the same manner as set forth in  article  nine
  of  this  chapter.    All  instruments  noted  or  memorialized  on  the
  certificates  of  title so recorded shall have the same force and effect
  as if they were filed with the county  clerk,  or  in  the  counties  of
  Bronx,  Kings,  Queens  and New York, the register at the time they were
  noted or were otherwise memorialized on the certificates of title.    No
  instrument,  however, that was filed, docketed or recorded by the county
  clerk, or in the counties of Bronx, Kings,  Queens  and  New  York,  the
  register,  but  that  was  not  duly  registered,  shall  become a lien,
  incumbrance, trust or charge  against  any  title  which  was  delivered
  pursuant  to  subdivisions  four  and  five of this section, unless such
  instrument was filed, recorded or docketed after the date such title was
  recorded, provided, however, that a judgement  docketed  by  the  county
  clerk  prior  to  the  time a certificate of title was recorded shall be
  valid as against such land if the  landowner  received  notice  of  such
  judgment.
    7.  Recording of a certificate of title under subdivision four or five
  of this section, shall not disturb the effect of any  proceedings  under
  the  registry  system  where  the question of title to the real property
  registered under this  article  has  been  determined.  All  proceedings
  concerning  the registration of title before delivery to the appropriate
  office  under  subdivision  four  or  five  of  this  section,  and  all
  provisions of this article that relate to the status of the title, shall
  have continuing force and effect with respect to the period of time that
  title  remained  under the registry system. Those provisions giving rise
  to a right of action for damages against the county shall also  continue
  in  force  and  effect  with  respect  to  the period of time that title
  remained under the registry system.
    8. Nothing contained in this section terminates, diminishes or impairs
  any existing right in or pertaining to registered land or  any  existing
  right  to  resort  to  the  assurance  fund  created under sections four
  hundred twenty-six through four hundred twenty-nine of this article  and
  that  right may be asserted and enforced in the same manner, to the same
  extent, and subject  to  the  same  limitations  as  provided  in  those
  sections.
    9.  No  claim  shall  be  made  based  upon  prescription  or  adverse
  possession for land which was recorded under subdivision four or five of
  this section and which was  previously  registered  under  this  article
  until after such time as the property is transferred or conveyed and the
  elements of such claims may be established against a subsequent owner.


ARTICLE 12-A
              REAL ESTATE BROKERS AND REAL ESTATE SALESPERSONS
  Section 440.   Definitions.
          440-a. License    required   for   real   estate   brokers   and
                   salespersons.
          440-b. Licenses in Putnam county.
          441.   Application for license.
          441-a. License and pocket card.
          441-b. License fees.
          441-c. Revocation and suspension of licenses.
          441-d. Salesperson's  license   suspended   by   revocation   or
                   suspension of employer's license.
          441-e. Denial of license; complaints; notice of hearing.
          441-f. Judicial review.
          442.   Splitting commissions.
          442-a. Compensation of salespersons; restrictions.
          442-b. Discontinuance  or  change  of salesperson's association;
                   report.
          442-c. Violations by salespersons; broker's responsibility.
          442-d. Actions for commissions; license prerequisite.
          442-e. Violations.
          442-f. Saving clause.
          442-g. Nonresident licensees.
          442-h. Rules of the secretary of state.
          442-i. State real estate board.
          442-j. Effect of invalid provision.
          442-k. Powers and duties of the state real estate board.
          442-l. After-the-fact referral fees.
          443.   Disclosure regarding  real  estate  agency  relationship;
                   form.
          443-a. Disclosure obligations.


§  440.  Definitions.  1.  Whenever  used in this article "real estate
  broker"  means  any  person,  firm,   limited   liability   company   or
  corporation,  who,  for  another  and  for  a  fee,  commission or other
  valuable consideration, lists for sale, sells, at auction or  otherwise,
  exchanges,  buys or rents, or offers or attempts to negotiate a sale, at
  auction or otherwise, exchange, purchase  or  rental  of  an  estate  or
  interest  in  real  estate, or collects or offers or attempts to collect
  rent for the use of real estate, or negotiates or offers or attempts  to
  negotiate,  a  loan secured or to be secured by a mortgage, other than a
  residential mortgage loan, as defined in section five hundred ninety  of
  the  banking  law, or other incumbrance upon or transfer of real estate,
  or  is  engaged  in  the  business  of  a  tenant  relocator,  or   who,
  notwithstanding  any  other  provision of law, performs any of the above
  stated functions with respect to  the  resale  of  condominium  property
  originally  sold  pursuant to the provisions of the general business law
  governing real  estate  syndication  offerings.  In  the  sale  of  lots
  pursuant  to  the provisions of article nine-A of this chapter, the term
  "real  estate  broker"  shall  also  include  any  person,  partnership,
  association  or  corporation  employed  by  or on behalf of the owner or
  owners of lots or other parcels of real estate, at a stated  salary,  or
  upon  a  commission,  or  upon a salary and commission, or otherwise, to
  sell such real estate, or any parts thereof, in lots or  other  parcels,
  and  who  shall  sell  or  exchange,  or  offer  or  attempt or agree to
  negotiate the sale or exchange, of  any  such  lot  or  parcel  of  real
  estate.  For  purposes  of  this subdivision the term, "interest in real
  estate" shall include the sale of a business wherein the  value  of  the
  real estate transferred as part of the business is not merely incidental
  to the transaction, and shall not include the assignment of a lease, and
  further,  the  transaction itself is not otherwise subject to regulation
  under state or  federal  laws  governing  the  sale  of  securities.  In
  connection  with  the  sale  of a business the term "real estate broker"
  shall not include a person, firm or corporation registered  pursuant  to
  the  provisions of article twenty-three-A of the general business law or
  federal securities laws.
    2. "Associate real estate broker" means a licensed real estate  broker
  who  shall  by  choice  elect  to work under the name and supervision of
  another individual broker or another broker  who  is  licensed  under  a
  partnership,  trade name, limited liability company or corporation. Such
  individual shall retain  their  license  as  a  real  estate  broker  as
  provided  for  in  this article; provided, however, that the practice of
  real estate sales and brokerage  by  such  individual  as  an  associate
  broker  shall  be governed exclusively by the provisions of this article
  as they pertain to real estate salespersons.  Nothing  contained  herein
  shall  preclude  an individual who elects to be licensed as an associate
  broker from also retaining a separate real estate broker's license under
  an individual, partnership, trade name,  limited  liability  company  or
  corporation.
    3. "Real estate salesperson" means a person associated with a licensed
  real  estate broker to list for sale, sell or offer for sale, at auction
  or otherwise, to buy or offer to buy or to  negotiate  the  purchase  or
  sale  or  exchange of real estate, or to negotiate a loan on real estate
  other than a mortgage loan as defined in section five hundred ninety  of
  the  banking  law,  or to lease or rent or offer to lease, rent or place
  for rent any real estate, or collects or offers or attempts  to  collect
  rent  for  the  use  of real estate for or in behalf of such real estate
  broker, or who, notwithstanding any other provision of law, performs any
  of  the  above  stated  functions  with  respect  to  the  resale  of  a
  condominium  property  originally sold pursuant to the provisions of the
  general business law governing real estate syndication offerings.
    4.   "Tenant   relocator"   means   any   person,  firm,  corporation,
  partnership, limited liability company or any legal  entity  whatsoever,
  which,  for  another  and  for  a  fee,  commission  or  other  valuable
  consideration, supervises, organizes, arranges, coordinates, handles  or
  is  otherwise  in  charge  of  or  responsible  for  the  relocation  of
  commercial or residential tenants from buildings or structures that  are
  to  be  demolished,  rehabilitated,  remodeled or otherwise structurally
  altered.
    5. "Association, associated; or associated with" whenever used in this
  article  shall  be  deemed  to  make  reference   to   a   salesperson's
  relationship  with their broker. Nothing in this article shall be deemed
  or construed to be indicative or determinative of the legal relationship
  of a salesperson to a broker nor shall any provision of this article  be
  deemed   or   construed   to   alter   or  otherwise  affect  the  legal
  responsibility of a real estate broker to third parties for the acts  of
  anyone associated with such broker pursuant to this article.
    6.  "Office manager" means a licensed associate real estate broker who
  shall by choice elect to work as an office manager under  the  name  and
  supervision  of  another  individual  broker  or  another  broker who is
  licensed under a partnership, trade name, limited liability  company  or
  corporation.  An  associate real estate broker shall be required to have
  been active as a licensed associate broker for at least two of the  four
  years  preceding appointment as an office manager. Such individual shall
  retain their license as a real estate broker as  provided  for  in  this
  article  and  shall be required to exercise the same duty of supervision
  over salespersons and  associate  brokers  as  a  licensed  real  estate
  broker;  provided,  however,  that the practice of real estate sales and
  brokerage by such individual as an associate broker  shall  be  governed
  exclusively  by  the  provisions of this article as they pertain to real
  estate  salespersons.  Nothing  contained  in  this  subdivision   shall
  preclude an individual who is licensed as an associate broker who elects
  to  work as an office manager from also retaining a separate real estate
  broker's license under an individual, partnership, trade  name,  limited
  liability company or corporation.


§ 440-a. License required for real estate brokers and salespersons. No
  person,  co-partnership,  limited liability company or corporation shall
  engage in or follow the business or occupation of, or hold themselves or
  itself out or act temporarily or otherwise as a real  estate  broker  or
  real  estate salesperson in this state without first procuring a license
  therefor as provided in this article. No person shall be entitled  to  a
  license  as  a  real  estate  broker  under  this  article, either as an
  individual or as a member of a co-partnership, or as a member or manager
  of a limited liability company or as an officer of a corporation, unless
  they are twenty years of age or over. No person shall be entitled  to  a
  license  as a real estate salesperson under this article unless they are
  over the age of eighteen years. No person shall be entitled to a license
  as a real estate broker or real estate salesperson  under  this  article
  who has been convicted in this state or elsewhere of a crime, unless the
  secretary  makes  a finding in conformance with all applicable statutory
  requirements, including those contained in article twenty-three-A of the
  correction law, that  such  convictions  do  not  constitute  a  bar  to
  licensure.  No  person  shall  be entitled to a license as a real estate
  broker or real estate salesperson under this article who does  not  meet
  the requirements of section 3-503 of the general obligations law.
    Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  in  this section, tenant
  associations and not-for-profit corporations authorized  in  writing  by
  the  commissioner of the department of the city of New York charged with
  enforcement of the housing maintenance  code  of  such  city  to  manage
  residential  property  owned  by  such  city  or appointed by a court of
  competent jurisdiction to manage residential property owned by such city
  shall be exempt from the  licensing  provisions  of  this  section  with
  respect to the properties so managed.


§  440-b.  Licenses  in  Putnam  county. On and after the first day of
  July,  nineteen  hundred  thirty-four,  no  person,   copartnership   or
  corporation  shall engage in or follow the business or occupation of, or
  hold themselves or itself out temporarily or otherwise as a real  estate
  broker or real estate salesperson in the county of Putnam, without first
  procuring  a  license  therefor as provided in this article, except that
  such license in such county shall be granted  and  issued,  without  the
  written examination provided in this article, to a person, copartnership
  or  corporation  who  was engaged in business as a real estate broker or
  real estate salesperson in  such  county  prior  to  the  first  day  of
  January, nineteen hundred thirty-four.


§   441.   Application   for   license.   1.  Form.  (a)  Any  person,
  copartnership, limited liability company or corporation desiring to  act
  as  a  real estate broker or any person desiring to act as a real estate
  salesperson on or after the  first  day  of  October,  nineteen  hundred
  twenty-two,  shall  file  with  the department of state at its office in
  Albany an application for the kind of license desired, in such form  and
  detail  as  such  department  shall  prescribe  and  conforming  to  the
  requirements of section 3-503 of the general  obligations  law,  setting
  forth the following, if the application be for a broker's license:
    (i)  The  name  and  residence  address  of  the  applicant, and if an
  individual the name under which they intend to conduct business.
    (ii) If the applicant  be  a  copartnership  the  name  and  residence
  address  of each member thereof and the name under which the business is
  to be conducted; or, if the applicant be a  limited  liability  company,
  the  name  of  the  company,  and  the name and residence of each of its
  members; or, if  the  applicant  be  a  corporation,  the  name  of  the
  corporation and the name and residence address of each of its officers.
    (iii)  The  place or places, including the city, town or village, with
  the street and number, where the business is to be conducted.
    (iv)  The  business  or  occupation  theretofore  engaged  in  by  the
  applicant,  or,  if  a  copartnership,  by each member thereof, or, if a
  limited liability company, by each member thereof, or, if a corporation,
  by each  officer  thereof,  for  a  period  of  two  years,  immediately
  preceding  the  date  of  such  application,  setting forth the place or
  places where such business or occupation was engaged in and the name  or
  names of employers, if any.
    (v)  The  form, information and statement required by section 3-503 of
  the general obligations law.
    (b) Such further information as the department may reasonably  require
  shall be furnished by the applicant including sufficient proof of having
  taken  and  passed  a written examination and answered such questions as
  may be prepared  by  the  department  to  enable  it  to  determine  the
  trustworthiness  of the applicant if an individual, or of each member of
  a co-partnership or each member of a limited liability company  or  each
  officer  of  a  corporation for whom a license as a broker is asked, and
  their competency to transact the business of real estate broker in  such
  a  manner  as  to  safeguard the interests of the public. In determining
  competency, the department shall require proof  that  the  person  being
  tested  to  qualify to apply for a broker's license has a fair knowledge
  of the English language, a fair understanding of  the  general  purposes
  and  general  legal  effect of deeds, mortgages, land contracts of sale,
  and leases, a general and fair understanding of the obligations  between
  principal  and agent, has taken a class on cultural competency training,
  a general and fair understanding of  the  laws,  rules  and  regulations
  pertaining  to  fair housing and discrimination in the sale or rental of
  real property or an interest  in  real  property,  as  well  as  of  the
  provisions  of  this section. The applicant must also furnish proof that
  they have attended for at least one  hundred  fifty-two  hours  and  has
  successfully  completed  a real estate course or courses approved by the
  secretary of state as  to  method  and  content  and  supervision  which
  approval  may  be  withdrawn if in the opinion of the secretary of state
  said course or courses are not being conducted properly  as  to  method,
  content  and  supervision,  and  that  either the applicant has actively
  participated in the general real estate brokerage business as a licensed
  real estate salesperson under the supervision of a licensed real  estate
  broker for a period of not less than two years or has had the equivalent
  experience  in  general  real  estate  business for a period of at least
  three years, the nature of which  experience  shall  be  established  by
  affidavit  duly  sworn  to  under  oath  and/or  other and further proof
  required   by   the   department   of    state.    Computer-based    and
  distance-learning  courses  may be approved by the department so long as
  providers demonstrate the ability to monitor and verify participation by
  the  applicant  for  the  specified  time  period.  Notwithstanding  the
  foregoing authority  to  approve  computer-based  and  distance-learning
  courses,  the  department may prescribe that specified subjects or hours
  must be presented in a classroom setting. For purposes of this  section,
  cultural   competency   is  defined  as  understanding  cultural  norms,
  preferences and challenges within our diverse communities.
    (c) In the event the applicant shall be a licensed  salesperson  under
  this  article  and shall have submitted acceptable proof pursuant to the
  provisions of either paragraph (d) of subdivision one-A of this  section
  or paragraph (a) of subdivision three of this section of having attended
  and  successfully  completed  seventy-seven  hours  of  an approved real
  estate course or courses, six hours of which have been focused  on  fair
  housing  and discrimination in the sale or rental of real property or an
  interest in real property,  within  eight  years  of  the  date  of  the
  application,  the  department may accept and credit same against the one
  hundred fifty-two hours required hereunder.
    (d) The one hundred fifty-two hours of an approved real estate  course
  or  courses  required by paragraph (b) of this subdivision shall include
  instruction on fair housing and discrimination in the sale or rental  of
  real  property or an interest in real property as described in paragraph
  (e) of subdivision three of this section and instruction on the licensed
  real estate broker's responsibility for ensuring that each licensed real
  estate salesman under such broker's supervision is  in  compliance  with
  his  or her obligations under applicable federal, state, and local laws,
  rules, and regulations pertaining to fair housing and discrimination  in
  the sale or rental of real property or an interest in real property.
    1-A.  (a)  Every  application  for a real estate salesperson's license
  shall set forth:
    (i) The name and residence address of the applicant.
    (ii) The name and principal business address of the broker  with  whom
  they are to be associated.
    (iii)  The  business  or  occupation  engaged  in  for  the  two years
  immediately preceding the date of the  application,  setting  forth  the
  place  or  places  where such business or occupation was engaged in, and
  the name or names of employers if any.
    (iv) The length of time they have been  engaged  in  the  real  estate
  business.
    (v)  The  form, information and statement required by section 3-503 of
  the general obligations law.
    (b) Each applicant for a  salesperson's  license  shall  provide  such
  further  information as the department may reasonably require, appearing
  at such time and place as may be designated by the department, to take a
  written examination and answer such questions as may be prepared by  the
  department  to  enable  it  to  determine  the  trustworthiness  of  the
  applicant and the applicant's competence to  transact  the  business  of
  real  estate  salesperson in such a manner as to safeguard the interests
  of the public, including the applicant's working knowledge of the  basic
  concepts  of law pertaining to contracts, real property, agency and this
  article which govern conduct of such business, knowledge of laws, rules,
  and regulations pertaining to fair housing  and  discrimination  in  the
  sale or rental of real property or an interest in real property, mastery
  of  basic  skills  needed  to  perform  the  applicant's duties, working
  knowledge of the ethical obligations of a real estate  salesperson,  and
  knowledge of the provisions of the general obligations law pertaining to
  performance of the applicant's duties.
    (c)  Each  application  for either a broker's or salesperson's license
  under this article shall be subscribed by the applicant; or if made by a
  co-partnership it shall be subscribed by a member thereof, or if made by
  a corporation it shall be subscribed by an officer  thereof,  and  shall
  conform  to the requirements of section 3-503 of the general obligations
  law. Each application shall contain an  affirmation  by  the  person  so
  subscribing  that the statements therein are true under the penalties of
  perjury. An application for  a  license  shall  be  accompanied  by  the
  appropriate license fee, as hereinafter prescribed in this article.
    (d)  Anything to the contrary herein notwithstanding, on and after the
  effective  date  of  this  paragraph,  no   salesperson's   license   or
  conditional  license  shall  be  issued  by  the  department  unless the
  application therefor has been accompanied by proof that  prior  to  such
  application  the applicant has attended at least seventy-seven hours and
  successfully completed a real estate course or courses approved  by  the
  secretary  of  state  as  to  method  and content and supervision, which
  approval may be withdrawn if in the opinion of the  secretary  of  state
  said  course or courses are not properly conducted as to method, content
  and supervision. Computer-based and  distance-learning  courses  may  be
  approved  by the department so long as providers demonstrate the ability
  to monitor and verify participation by the applicant for  the  specified
  time   period.   Notwithstanding  the  foregoing  authority  to  approve
  computer-based  and  distance-learning  courses,  the   department   may
  prescribe  that  specified  subjects  or  hours  must  be presented in a
  classroom setting.
    2. Renewals. Any license granted under the  provision  hereof  may  be
  renewed  by  the  department  upon  application  therefor  by the holder
  thereof, in such form as the department may prescribe and conforming  to
  the  requirements  of  section 3-503 of the general obligations law, and
  payment of the fee for such license. In case of application for  renewal
  of  license,  the  department  may dispense with the requirement of such
  statements as it deems unnecessary in view of  those  contained  in  the
  original   application  for  license  but  may  not  dispense  with  the
  requirements of section 3-503 of the general obligations law. A  renewal
  period within the meaning of this act is considered as being a period of
  two  years  from  the date of expiration of a previously issued license.
  The department shall require any  applicant,  who  does  not  apply  for
  renewal of license within such period, to qualify by passing the written
  examination as provided herein, and may require any licensee who has not
  yet  passed  the written examination, and who cannot reasonably prove to
  the satisfaction of the department, that  he  can  meet  the  competency
  requirements,  to  pass  the  written  examination  before  a renewal of
  license shall be granted; provided, however, that a person who failed or
  was unable to renew his license by reason of his induction or enlistment
  in the armed forces of the United States shall not be required  to  take
  or pass such examinations.
    3.  (a)  No  renewal  license  shall be issued any licensee under this
  article for any  license  period  commencing  November  first,  nineteen
  hundred  ninety-five unless such licensee shall have within the two year
  period immediately preceding such renewal attended at  least  twenty-two
  and  one-half  hours  which shall include at least two hours of cultural
  competency training, at least three hours of instruction  pertaining  to
  fair  housing  and/or  discrimination  in  the  sale  or  rental of real
  property or an  interest  in  real  property,  at  least  two  hours  of
  instruction  pertaining to implicit bias awareness and understanding, at
  least two and  one-half  hours  of  instruction  pertaining  to  ethical
  business  practices,  at  least  one  hour  of instruction pertaining to
  recent legal matters governing the practice of real estate  brokers  and
  salespersons  in New York which may include statutes, laws, regulations,
  rules,  codes,  department  of  state  opinions and decisions, and court
  decisions and at least one hour of instruction pertaining to the law  of
  agency  except  in  the  case of the initial two-year licensing term for
  real estate salespersons, two hours of agency related  instruction  must
  be  completed,  and  successfully  completed a continuing education real
  estate course or courses approved  by  the  secretary  of  state  as  to
  method,  content  and supervision, which approval may be withdrawn if in
  the opinion of the secretary of state such course  or  courses  are  not
  being  conducted  properly  as  to  method, content and supervision. For
  those individuals licensed pursuant to subdivision six of  section  four
  hundred forty-two-g of this article, in the individual's initial license
  term,  at  least  eleven  hours  of the required twenty-two and one-half
  hours of continuing education shall be completed during the  first  year
  of  the  term.  Of  those  eleven  hours,  three  hours shall pertain to
  applicable  New  York  state  statutes  and  regulations  governing  the
  practice   of   real  estate  brokers  and  salespersons.  To  establish
  compliance with the continuing education requirements  imposed  by  this
  section,  licensees  shall provide an affidavit, in a form acceptable to
  the department of state,  establishing  the  nature  of  the  continuing
  education  acquired  and shall provide such further proof as required by
  the department of state.  For purposes of  this  subdivision,  "implicit
  bias"   shall   mean   the  attitudes  or  stereotypes  that  affect  an
  individual's understanding, actions  and  decisions  in  an  unconscious
  manner.
    (b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section four hundred one of the
  state  administrative  procedure  act,  except  as  provided   in   this
  paragraph, no license issued under this article shall continue in effect
  beyond  the  period  for  which  it is issued if the proof of attendance
  required  hereunder  is  not  submitted  and  accepted  prior  to   such
  expiration  date.  The  department in its discretion may however issue a
  temporary renewal license for such period of time it  deems  appropriate
  to  permit  the  submission of the required proof of attendance when the
  failure to submit such proof is not due to the fault of the licensee.
    (c) (i) The secretary of state shall promulgate rules establishing the
  method, content, setting and supervision requirements of the  continuing
  education real estate course or courses provided for in this section. In
  establishing  the  requirements  for  the continuing education course or
  courses, the secretary of state shall permit alternatives  with  respect
  to  content  and  method of presentation in consideration of the type of
  brokerage practiced and the availability of the sources of  such  course
  or  courses  in  different areas of the state. Each course shall have an
  established curriculum composed primarily of real  estate  practice  and
  professional  responsibility  and  ethics  and properly prepared written
  materials of the subject matter which shall be distributed  as  part  of
  the  course.  It  shall  be taught by a qualified faculty with attorneys
  presenting legal subjects. Credit shall be awarded on the basis  of  one
  hour  for  each  sixty minutes of actual attendance and records shall be
  maintained of attendance at each session which shall be  transmitted  to
  the  department  at  the  conclusion  of  the course. Computer-based and
  distance learning courses may be approved by the department so  long  as
  providers demonstrate the ability to monitor and verify participation by
  the licensee for the specified time period.
    (ii) The secretary of state shall require approved faculty to sign and
  affirm,  under penalty of perjury, a document, approved by and submitted
  electronically to the department of state, attesting to compliance  with
  all  applicable  statutory and regulatory requirements pertaining to the
  instruction of the established curriculum. The secretary of state  shall
  promulgate  penalties  for  faculty  that  fail  to meet the obligations
  required   under  this  section  and  department  of  state  regulations
  including, but  not  limited  to,  the  temporary  suspension  of  their
  instructor  certificate for the first such failure and the revocation of
  their instructor certificate for any subsequent failure.
    (d) The state real estate board,  created  pursuant  to  section  four
  hundred  forty-two-i  of  this  article,  shall  not  have  the power to
  promulgate  any  rule,  regulation  or  guidance  requiring   continuing
  education   for   real   estate  brokers  or  salespeople  except  those
  requirements set forth in subdivisions two and  three  of  section  four
  hundred forty-two-k of this article.
    (e)  The  secretary  of state shall, upon notice and a public hearing,
  promulgate rules establishing the content of the instruction  pertaining
  to  fair  housing  and/or  discrimination  in the sale or rental of real
  property or an interest in real property required by  paragraph  (a)  of
  this subdivision. Such instruction shall include, but not be limited to,
  courses  on:  (1)  the  legacy  of  segregation,  unequal treatment, and
  historic lack of access to opportunity in housing; (2) unequal access to
  amenities and resources on the basis  of  race,  disability,  and  other
  protected  characteristics;  (3)  federal, state, and local fair housing
  laws; and (4) anti-bias training.
    4. The fees provided for by this section shall not be refundable.


§  441-a.  License  and  pocket  card.  1. The department of state, if
  satisfied of the competency and trustworthiness of the applicant,  shall
  issue  and  deliver  to  them  a  license in such form and manner as the
  department shall prescribe, but  which  must  set  forth  the  name  and
  principal  business  address of the licensee, and, in the case of a real
  estate salesperson, the name and business address  of  the  broker  with
  whom the salesperson is associated.
    2.  Terms.  A  license issued or reissued under the provisions of this
  article shall entitle  the  person,  co-partnership,  limited  liability
  company  or  corporation  to  act  as  a  real estate broker, or, if the
  application is for a real estate salesperson's license, to act as a real
  estate salesperson in this state up to and including the date  in  which
  the license by its terms expires.
    3.  Place  of  business;  business  sign required. Except as otherwise
  provided in this article, each licensed real estate  broker  shall  have
  and  maintain  a definite place of business within this state, and shall
  conspicuously post on the outside of the building in which  said  office
  is  conducted  a  sign  of  a  sufficient  size  to be readable from the
  sidewalk indicating the name and the business  of  the  applicant  as  a
  licensed  real  estate broker, unless said office shall be located in an
  office, apartment or hotel building, in which event  the  name  and  the
  words  "licensed  real  estate  broker"  shall  be  posted  in the space
  provided for posting of names of occupants of the building,  other  than
  the  mail  box.  Where  the applicant for a real estate broker's license
  maintains more than one place of business, the broker  shall  apply  for
  and  the  department  shall issue a supplemental license for each branch
  office so maintained upon payment to the department of  state  for  each
  supplemental  license  so issued the same fee prescribed in this article
  for a license to act as a real estate broker. Each  such  branch  office
  shall  be under the direct supervision of the broker to whom the license
  is issued, or a representative broker of a corporation or partnership or
  manager of a limited liability company holding such license, or  a  duly
  appointed  office manager. Such fee shall accompany such application and
  shall be non-refundable. For purposes of this subdivision, the principal
  residence of a real estate broker or salesperson shall not be  deemed  a
  place  of  business solely because such broker or salesperson shall have
  included the residence telephone number in their business cards.
    4. Display of license. The license of a real estate  broker  shall  be
  conspicuously displayed in his principal place of business at all times.
  Licenses  issued  for  branch  offices  shall be conspicuously displayed
  therein. The display of a real estate broker's license, the term whereof
  has expired, by any person, partnership, limited  liability  company  or
  corporation  not  duly  licensed as a real estate broker for the current
  license term is prohibited.
    5. Change of address.  Notice  in  writing  in  the  manner  and  form
  prescribed  by  the  department  shall  be  given  the department at its
  offices in Albany by a licensed real estate broker on their  own  behalf
  and  on behalf of each salesperson associated with them of any change in
  their or its principal business address. The filing fee of  ten  dollars
  for each licensee named therein shall accompany such notice. Such change
  by  a  licensee without such notification shall operate to suspend their
  license until such suspension shall be vacated by the department.
    6. Pocket card. The department shall prepare, issue and deliver,  with
  the  assistance  of the department of motor vehicles, to each licensee a
  pocket card in such form and manner as the department  shall  prescribe,
  but  which  shall  contain  the  photo, name and business address of the
  licensee, and, in the case of a real estate salesperson,  the  name  and
  business  address  of the broker with whom they are associated and shall
  certify that the person whose name appears thereon is  a  licensed  real
  estate  broker  or  salesperson,  as may be. Such cards must be shown on
  demand. In the case of loss, destruction or  damage,  the  secretary  of
  state  may,  upon  submission  of  satisfactory proof, issue a duplicate
  pocket card upon payment of a fee of ten dollars.
    7. License term. From and after the date when this  subdivision  shall
  take  effect,  the  term for which a license shall be issued or reissued
  under this article shall be a period of two years.
    8. Death of broker. A license issued to a real estate broker who  was,
  at  the  time  of their death, the sole proprietor of a brokerage office
  may be used after the death of such licensee  by  their  duly  appointed
  administrator  or  executor  in  the  name  of  the  estate  pursuant to
  authorization granted by the  surrogate  under  the  provisions  of  the
  surrogate's  court  procedure  act  for  a  period  of not more than one
  hundred twenty days from the date of death of such licensee in order  to
  complete   any   unfinished   realty  transactions  in  the  process  of
  negotiation by the broker or their salespersons existing prior to  their
  decease. There shall be endorsed upon the face of the license, after the
  name  of  the  decedent, the words "deceased", the date of death and the
  name of the administrator or executor under whose authority the  license
  is  being  used.  The  period of one hundred twenty days may be extended
  upon application to the secretary of state, for good cause shown, for an
  additional period not to exceed  one  hundred  twenty  days.  A  license
  expiring  during such period or extension shall be automatically renewed
  and continued in effect during such period or extension. No fee shall be
  charged for any such license or renewal thereof.
    9. Except for changes made on  a  renewal  application,  the  fee  for
  changing an address on a license shall be ten dollars.
    10.  Except  for  changes  made  on a renewal application, the fee for
  changing a name or for changing the status of  a  real  estate  broker's
  license  shall  be  one  hundred  fifty  dollars. The fee for changing a
  salesperson's name shall be fifty dollars.
    11. If a real estate salesperson shall leave the  service  of  a  real
  estate  broker,  the  real  estate  broker  shall  file a termination of
  association  notice  on  such  form  as  secretary  may  designate.  The
  salesperson's  license  may  be endorsed to a new sponsoring broker upon
  the establishment  of  a  new  record  of  association  filed  with  the
  department of state. The fee for filing a record of association shall be
  twenty dollars.
    12.  Whenever  any  person  licensed  as  a real estate broker or real
  estate salesperson is convicted in this state or elsewhere of a  felony,
  of  a  sex offense, as defined in subdivision two of section one hundred
  sixty-eight-a of the correction law or any offense committed outside  of
  this  state  which would constitute a sex offense, or a sexually violent
  offense,  as  defined  in  subdivision  three  of  section  one  hundred
  sixty-eight-a  of  the  correction  law or any offense committed outside
  this state which would constitute a sexually violent offense, such  real
  estate  broker  or real estate salesperson shall within five days of the
  imposition of sentence, transmit a certified copy  of  the  judgment  of
  conviction to the department of state.


§  441-b.  License fees.   1. The fee for a license issued or reissued
  under the provisions of this article entitling a person, co-partnership,
  limited liability company or corporation to act as a real estate  broker
  shall be one hundred fifty-five dollars plus an additional thirty dollar
  surcharge.  Such surcharge shall be collected by the department of state
  and deposited into the anti-discrimination in housing  fund  established
  pursuant  to  section  eighty-a  of the state finance law to be used for
  statewide fair housing testing efforts. The fee for a license issued  or
  reissued  under the provisions of this article entitling a person to act
  as a real  estate  salesperson  shall  be  fifty-five  dollars  plus  an
  additional  ten  dollar  surcharge. Such surcharge shall be collected by
  the department of state and deposited into  the  anti-discrimination  in
  housing  fund  established  pursuant  to  section  eighty-a of the state
  finance law to be used  for  statewide  fair  housing  testing  efforts.
  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  subdivision  seven of section four
  hundred forty-one-a of  this  article,  after  January  first,  nineteen
  hundred  eighty-six,  the  secretary  of  state  shall  assign staggered
  expiration dates for outstanding  licenses  that  have  been  previously
  renewed  on  October  thirty-first  of  each year from the assigned date
  unless renewed. If the assigned date results  in  a  term  that  exceeds
  twenty-four  months,  the  applicant  shall  pay  an additional prorated
  adjustment together with the regular renewal fee. The secretary of state
  shall assign dates to existing licenses in a manner which  shall  result
  in a term of not less than two years.
    1-A.  The  fee  for  a  person  to  take an examination offered by the
  secretary of state pursuant to this article shall  be  fifteen  dollars.
  Fees collected by the department of state pursuant to this article shall
  be  deposited  to  the  credit  of  the  business and licensing services
  account established pursuant to  section  ninety-seven-y  of  the  state
  finance law.
    2. Corporations and co-partnerships. If the licensee be a corporation,
  the  license  issued  to  it shall entitle the president thereof or such
  other officer as shall be designated by such corporation, to  act  as  a
  real  estate broker. For each other officer who shall desire to act as a
  real estate broker in behalf of such corporation an  additional  license
  expiring  on  the  same  date as the license of the corporation shall be
  applied for and issued, as hereinbefore  provided,  the  fee  for  which
  shall be the same as the fee required by this section for the license to
  the corporation. No license as a real estate salesperson shall be issued
  to  any  officer  of  a  corporation  nor  to any manager or member of a
  limited liability company nor to a member of a  co-partnership  licensed
  as a real estate broker. If the licensee be a co-partnership the license
  issued  to  it  shall entitle one member thereof to act as a real estate
  broker, and for each other member of the firm who desires to  act  as  a
  real  estate  broker  an additional license expiring on the same date as
  the license of the co-partnership shall be applied for  and  issued,  as
  hereinbefore  provided,  the  fee for which shall be the same as the fee
  required by this section for the license to the co-partnership.  If  the
  licensee  be a limited liability company, the license issued to it shall
  entitle one member thereof or one manager  thereof  to  act  as  a  real
  estate  broker,  and  for  each  other member or manager of the firm who
  desires to act as a real estate broker an additional license expiring on
  the same date as the license of the limited liability company  shall  be
  applied  for  and  issued,  as  hereinbefore provided, the fee for which
  shall be the same as the fee required by this section for the license to
  the limited liability company. In case a person licensed individually as
  a real estate broker thereafter becomes an officer of a corporation or a
  member or manager of a limited  liability  company  or  a  member  of  a
  co-partnership   an   application  shall  be  made  in  behalf  of  such
  corporation, limited liability company or co-partnership for a  broker's
  license  for  them  as  its representative for the remainder of the then
  current  license  term,  provided  that  the  license  and  pocket  card
  previously issued to the licensee in  their  individual  capacity  shall
  have  been  returned  to  the  department whereupon the department shall
  cause a properly signed endorsement to be made  without  charge  on  the
  face of such license and pocket card as to such change of license status
  and return the license and pocket card to the licensee.
    3. Disposition of fees. The department of state shall on the first day
  of  each  month make a verified return to the department of taxation and
  finance of all fees  received  by  it  under  this  article  during  the
  preceding  calendar month, stating from what city or county received and
  by whom and when paid.


§   441-c.  Revocation  and  suspension  of  licenses.  1.  Powers  of
  department.  (a) The department of state may revoke  the  license  of  a
  real  estate  broker or salesperson or suspend the same, for such period
  as the department may deem proper, or in lieu thereof may impose a  fine
  not  exceeding  two thousand dollars payable to the department of state,
  provided that fifty percent of all moneys received by the department  of
  state  for  such  fines  shall  be payable to the anti-discrimination in
  housing fund established pursuant  to  section  eighty-a  of  the  state
  finance  law,  or  a  reprimand  upon  conviction  of  the licensee of a
  violation of any provision of  this  article,  or  for  a  violation  of
  subdivision four of section four hundred forty-two-h of this article, or
  for  a  material misstatement in the application for such license, or if
  such licensee has been guilty of fraud or fraudulent practices,  or  for
  dishonest    or    misleading    advertising,    or   has   demonstrated
  untrustworthiness or incompetency to act as  a  real  estate  broker  or
  salesperson,  or for a violation of article fifteen of the executive law
  committed in their capacity as a real estate broker or  salesperson,  as
  the  case  may  be.  In  the case of a real estate broker engaged in the
  business of a tenant relocator, untrustworthiness or incompetency  shall
  include engaging in any course of conduct including, but not limited to,
  the  interruption  or discontinuance of essential building service, that
  interferes with  or  disturbs  the  peace,  comfort,  repose  and  quiet
  enjoyment of a tenant.
    (b)  (i)  The provisions of this paragraph shall apply in all cases of
  licensed broker or licensed salesperson who have failed, after receiving
  appropriate notice, to  comply  with  a  summons,  subpoena  or  warrant
  relating  to a paternity or child support proceeding or is in arrears in
  payment of child support or combined child and spousal support  referred
  to the department by a court pursuant to the requirements of section two
  hundred  forty-four-c  of  the  domestic  relations  law  or pursuant to
  section four hundred fifty-eight-b or five hundred forty-eight-b of  the
  family court act.
    (ii)  Upon  receipt  of an order from the court pursuant to one of the
  foregoing provisions of law based on arrears in payment of child support
  or combined child and spousal support, the department, if it finds  such
  person  to  be  so licensed, shall within thirty days of receipt of such
  order from the court, provide notice to the licensee of, and initiate, a
  hearing which shall be held by it at least twenty days and no more  than
  thirty  days  after  the  sending  of  such  notice to the licensee. The
  hearing shall be held solely for  the  purpose  of  determining  whether
  there  exists  as  of the date of the hearing proof that full payment of
  all arrears of support established by the order of the court to  be  due
  from  the  licensee  have  been  paid.  Proof of such payment shall be a
  certified check showing full payment of established arrears or a  notice
  issued  by  the court, or the support collection unit where the order is
  payable to the support collection unit  designated  by  the  appropriate
  social  services  district. Such notice shall state that full payment of
  all arrears of support established by the order of the court to  be  due
  have  been paid. The licensee shall be given full opportunity to present
  such proof of payment from the court or support collection unit  at  the
  hearing  in person or by counsel. The only issue to be determined by the
  department as a result of the hearing is whether the arrears  have  been
  paid. No evidence with respect to the appropriateness of the court order
  or  ability of the respondent party in arrears to comply with such order
  shall be received or considered by the department.
    (iii) Upon receipt of an order from the  court  based  on  failure  to
  comply  with  a summons, subpoena, or warrant relating to a paternity or
  child support proceeding, the department, if it finds such person to  be
  so  licensed, shall within thirty days of receipt of such order from the
  court, provide notice to the licensee that his or her license  shall  be
  suspended within sixty days unless the conditions in subparagraph (v) of
  this section are met.
    (iv)  Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this article or of
  any other provision of law to the contrary, the license of a real estate
  broker or salesperson shall be suspended if at the hearing, provided for
  by subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, the licensee  fails  to  present
  proof  of payment as required by such subdivision. Such suspension shall
  not be lifted unless the court or the support collection unit, where the
  court order is payable to the support collection unit designated by  the
  appropriate  social  services  district, issues notice to the department
  that full payment of all arrears of support established by the order  of
  the court to be due have been paid.
    (v)  Notwithstanding  any inconsistent provision of this article or of
  any other provision of law to the contrary, the license of a real estate
  broker or a salesperson  shall  be  suspended  in  accordance  with  the
  provisions  of  subparagraph  (iii)  of  this paragraph unless the court
  terminates its order to commence suspension proceedings. Such suspension
  shall not be lifted unless the court issues an order to  the  department
  terminating its order to commence suspension proceedings.
    (vi)  The  department  shall  inform  the  court  of all actions taken
  hereunder as required by law.
    (vii)  This  paragraph  applies  to  paternity   and   child   support
  proceedings  commenced  under,  and support obligations paid pursuant to
  any order of child support or child and  spousal  support  issued  under
  provisions of section two hundred thirty-six or two hundred forty of the
  domestic  relations  law, or article four, five, five-A or five-B of the
  family court act.
    (viii) Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this  article  or
  of  any  other  provision of law to the contrary, the provisions of this
  paragraph shall apply to the exclusion of any other requirements of this
  article and to the exclusion of any other  requirement  of  law  to  the
  contrary.
    2. Determination of department. In the event that the department shall
  revoke  or  suspend any such license, or impose any fine or reprimand on
  the holder thereof, its determination shall be in writing and officially
  signed. The original of such determination, when  so  signed,  shall  be
  filed in the office of the department and copies thereof shall be served
  personally  or  by  registered  mail  upon the broker or salesperson and
  addressed  to  the  principal  place  of  business  of  such  broker  or
  salesperson,  and  to  the  complainant.  All brokers' and salespersons'
  licenses and pocket cards shall be returned to the department  of  state
  within  five  days  after  the  receipt  of  notice  of  a revocation or
  suspension, or in lieu thereof, the broker or salesperson whose  license
  has  been  revoked or suspended shall make and file an affidavit in form
  prescribed by the department of  state,  showing  that  the  failure  to
  return such license and pocket card is due either to loss or destruction
  thereof.
    3.  The display of a real estate broker's license after the revocation
  or suspension thereof is prohibited.
    4. Whenever the license  of  a  real  estate  broker  or  real  estate
  salesperson  is  revoked  by  the department, such real estate broker or
  real estate salesperson shall be ineligible to be relicensed either as a
  real estate broker or real estate salesperson until after the expiration
  of a period of one year from the date of such revocation.


§  441-d.  Salesperson's license suspended by revocation or suspension
  of employer's license.  The  revocation  or  suspension  of  a  broker's
  license  shall  operate  to  suspend  the  license  of  each real estate
  salesperson associated with such broker, pending a change of association
  of the salesperson or the expiration of the period of suspension of  the
  broker's  license. Such suspension of the salesperson's license shall be
  deemed to be a discontinuance  of  association  with  the  broker  being
  Suspended.


§  441-e.  Denial of license; complaints; notice of hearing. 1. Denial
  of license. The  department  of  state  shall,  before  making  a  final
  determination to deny an application for a license, notify the applicant
  in  writing of the reasons for such proposed denial and shall afford the
  applicant an opportunity to be heard in person or by  counsel  prior  to
  denial  of the application. Such notification shall be served personally
  or by certified mail or in any manner authorized by the  civil  practice
  law  and  rules.  If  the  applicant  is a salesperson or has applied to
  become a salesperson, the department shall also notify the  broker  with
  whom  such  salesperson  is associated, or with whom such salesperson or
  applicant is about to become associated, of such proposed denial.  If  a
  hearing  is requested, such hearing shall be held at such time and place
  as the department shall prescribe. If the  applicant  fails  to  make  a
  written  request  for a hearing within thirty days after receipt of such
  notification, then the notification of denial  shall  become  the  final
  determination  of the department. The department, acting by such officer
  or person in the department as the secretary  of  state  may  designate,
  shall  have the power to subpoena and bring before the officer or person
  so designated any person in this state, and administer an  oath  to  and
  take  testimony  of  any person or cause their deposition to be taken. A
  subpoena issued under this section  shall  be  regulated  by  the  civil
  practice  law  and  rules.  If,  after  such hearing, the application is
  denied, written notice of such denial shall be served upon the applicant
  personally or by certified mail or in any manner authorized by the civil
  practice law and rules, and if the applicant is a  salesperson,  or  has
  applied  to become a salesperson, the department shall notify the broker
  with whom such applicant is associated.
    2. Revocation, suspension, reprimands, fines. The department of  state
  shall, before revoking or suspending any license or imposing any fine or
  reprimand  on  the  holder  thereof or before imposing any fine upon any
  person not licensed pursuant to this article who  is  deemed  to  be  in
  violation  of  section  four hundred forty-two-h of this article, and at
  least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing, notify in  writing
  the holder of such license or such unlicensed person of any charges made
  and shall afford such licensee or unlicensed person an opportunity to be
  heard  in person or by counsel in reference thereto. Such written notice
  may be served by delivery of same personally  to  the  licensee,  or  by
  mailing  same  by  certified  mail to the last known business address of
  such licensee or unlicensed person, or by any method authorized  by  the
  civil  practice  law  and  rules. If said licensee be a salesperson, the
  department shall also notify the broker with whom they are associated of
  the charges by mailing notice by certified mail  to  the  broker's  last
  known  business  address.  The  hearing on such charges shall be at such
  time and place as the department shall prescribe.
    3. Power to suspend a license. The department, acting by such  officer
  or  person  in  the  department as the secretary of state may designate,
  shall have the power to suspend a  license  pending  a  hearing  and  to
  subpoena and bring before the officer or person so designated any person
  in  this  state,  and  administer  an  oath to and take testimony of any
  person or cause his deposition to be taken. A subpoena issued under this
  section shall be regulated by the civil practice law and rules.


§  441-f.  Judicial  review.  The action of the department of state in
  granting or refusing to grant or to renew a license under  this  article
  or  in  revoking  or  suspending  such a license or imposing any fine or
  reprimand on the holder thereof or refusing to revoke or suspend such  a
  license  or impose any fine or reprimand shall be subject to review by a
  proceeding brought under and pursuant to article  seventy-eight  of  the
  civil  practice  law and rules at the instance of the applicant for such
  license, the holder  of  a  license  so  revoked,  suspended,  fined  or
  reprimanded or the person aggrieved.


§  442.  Splitting commissions. 1. No real estate broker shall pay any
  part of a fee, commission or other compensation received by  the  broker
  to  any  person  for  any  service, help or aid rendered in any place in
  which this article is applicable,  by  such  person  to  the  broker  in
  buying, selling, exchanging, leasing, renting or negotiating a loan upon
  any  real  estate  including  the resale of a condominium or cooperative
  apartment  unless  such  a  person  be  a  duly  licensed  real   estate
  salesperson  regularly  associated  with  such broker or a duly licensed
  real estate broker or a person regularly  engaged  in  the  real  estate
  brokerage  business  in  a state outside of New York; provided, however,
  that notwithstanding any other provision of this section,  it  shall  be
  permissible  for  a  real  estate  broker  to  pay  any  part  of a fee,
  commission, or other compensation received to an unlicensed  corporation
  or  an  unlicensed limited liability company if each of its shareholders
  or members, respectively, is associated as an individual with the broker
  as a duly licensed associate broker or salesperson.
    2. Furthermore, notwithstanding any other provision of law,  it  shall
  be  permissible  for  a  broker  properly  registered  pursuant  to  the
  provisions of article twenty-three-A of the  general  business  law  who
  earns  a  commission on the original sale of a cooperative or homeowners
  association interest in real estate, including condominium units to  pay
  any  part  of  a  fee,  commission  or  other  compensation received for
  bringing about such sale to a person whose principal business is not the
  sale or offering of cooperatives or homeowners association interests  in
  real  property,  including  condominium  units  in this state but who is
  either: (i) a real estate salesperson duly licensed under  this  article
  who  is  regularly  associated  with  such  broker;  (ii)  a broker duly
  licensed under this article; or a person regularly engaged in  the  real
  estate brokerage business in a state outside of New York.
    Except  when  permitted  pursuant  to the foregoing provisions of this
  section no real estate broker shall pay or agree to pay any  part  of  a
  fee,  commission,  or other compensation received by the broker, or due,
  or to become due to the broker to any person, firm or corporation who or
  which is or is to be a party to  the  transaction  in  which  such  fee,
  commission  or  other compensation shall be or become due to the broker;
  provided, however, that nothing in this section shall  prohibit  a  real
  estate  broker  from  offering  any  part of a fee, commission, or other
  compensation received by the broker to the seller,  buyer,  landlord  or
  tenant   who   is  buying,  selling,  exchanging,  leasing,  renting  or
  negotiating a loan upon any  real  estate  including  the  resale  of  a
  condominium  or  cooperative  apartment.  Such fee, commission, or other
  compensation must not be made to the seller, buyer, landlord  or  tenant
  for performing any activity requiring a license under this article.


§  442-a.  Compensation  of salespersons; restrictions. No real estate
  salesperson in any place in  which  this  article  is  applicable  shall
  receive or demand compensation of any kind from any person, other than a
  duly  licensed  real  estate  broker  with whom they associated, for any
  service rendered or work done by such  salesperson  in  the  appraising,
  buying,  selling,  exchanging, leasing, renting or negotiating of a loan
  upon any real estate.


§  442-b.  Discontinuance  or  change  of  salesperson's  association;
  report.  When the association of any real estate salesperson shall  have
  been  terminated for any reason whatsoever, their broker shall forthwith
  notify the department of state thereof in such manner as the  department
  shall  prescribe.  Where change of such salesperson's association is the
  basis for such termination, the  salesperson's  successor  broker  shall
  forthwith  notify  the  department  of such change in such manner as the
  department shall prescribe, such notice to be accompanied by  a  fee  of
  one  dollar. No real estate salesperson shall perform any act within any
  of the prohibitions of this article from and after the  termination  for
  any  cause  of their association until they thereafter shall have become
  associated with a licensed real estate broker.


§  442-c.  Violations  by  salespersons;  broker's  responsibility. No
  violation of a provision of this article by a real estate salesperson or
  employee of a real estate broker shall be deemed to  be  cause  for  the
  revocation  or  suspension of the license of the broker, unless it shall
  appear that the broker had actual knowledge of such violation or retains
  the benefits, profits or proceeds of a transaction wrongfully negotiated
  by their salesperson or employee after notice of  the  salesperson's  or
  employee's  misconduct.  A  broker  shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for
  having any salesperson associated with their firm who  has  not  secured
  the required license authorizing such employment.


§  442-d.  Actions  for  commissions; license prerequisite. No person,
  copartnership, limited liability company or corporation shall  bring  or
  maintain  an  action  in  any  court  of  this state for the recovery of
  compensation for services rendered, in any place in which  this  article
  is  applicable,  in the buying, selling, exchanging, leasing, renting or
  negotiating a loan upon any real estate  without  alleging  and  proving
  that  such  person was a duly licensed real estate broker or real estate
  salesperson on the date when the alleged cause of action arose.




    §  442-e.  Violations.  1.  Misdemeanors;  triable in court of special
  sessions. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be
  guilty of a misdemeanor. The commission of a single  act  prohibited  by
  this  article shall constitute a violation hereof. All courts of special
  sessions, within their respective territorial jurisdictions, are  hereby
  empowered  to  hear,  try and determine such crimes, without indictment,
  and to impose the punishments prescribed by law therefor.
    2. Attorney general to prosecute. Criminal actions for  violations  of
  this article shall be prosecuted by the attorney general, or his deputy,
  in  the name of the people of the state, and in any such prosecution the
  attorney general, or his deputy,  shall  exercise  all  the  powers  and
  perform  all  the  duties which the district attorney would otherwise be
  authorized to exercise or  to  perform  therein.  The  attorney  general
  shall,  upon  a  conviction  for  a  violation  of any provision of this
  article, and  within  ten  days  thereafter,  make  and  file  with  the
  department  of  state  a  detailed  report  showing  the  date  of  such
  conviction, the name of the person convicted and the exact nature of the
  charge.
    3. Penalty recoverable by person aggrieved. In case the offender shall
  have received any sum of money as commission, compensation or profit  by
  or  in consequence of his violation of any provision of this article, he
  shall also be liable to a penalty of not less than the amount of the sum
  of money received by him as such commission, compensation or profit  and
  not  more  than  four  times  the  sum  so  received  by  him, as may be
  determined by the court, which penalty may be sued for and recovered  by
  any  person  aggrieved  and  for  his  use  and benefit, in any court of
  competent jurisdiction.
    4. In  any  prosecution  under  this  article,  any  person,  firm  or
  corporation  who, for another, performs or offers to perform or attempts
  or offers to attempt, the performance of any one of the acts  set  forth
  in  section  four hundred forty of this article, shall be presumed to do
  so for a fee, commission  or  other  valuable  consideration,  but  such
  presumption  shall  not  arise  out of a single transaction, except upon
  proof of repeated and successive acts, offers  or  attempts  of  a  like
  nature.
    5.  The  secretary  of  state  shall  have  the  power  to enforce the
  provisions of this article and upon complaint of any person, or on their
  own initiative, to investigate any violation thereof or  to  investigate
  the  business,  business  practices  and business methods of any person,
  firm or corporation applying for or holding a license as a  real  estate
  broker  or salesperson, if in the opinion of the secretary of state such
  investigation is warranted. Each such applicant  or  licensee  shall  be
  obliged,   on  request  of  the  secretary  of  state,  to  supply  such
  information as  may  be  required  concerning  their  or  its  business,
  business  practices  or business methods, or proposed business practices
  or methods.
    6. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article and  in
  making  investigations  relating  to  any violation thereof, and for the
  purpose of investigating the character, competency and integrity of  the
  applicants  or licensees hereunder, and for the purpose of investigating
  the business, business practices and business methods of  any  applicant
  or  licensee,  or  of  the officers or agents thereof, the department of
  state, acting by such  officer  or  person  in  the  department  as  the
  secretary  of  state may designate, shall have the power to subpoena and
  bring before the officer or person so  designated  any  person  in  this
  state  and  require the production of any books or papers which he deems
  relevant to the inquiry and administer an oath to and take testimony  of
  any  person  or  cause his deposition to be taken with the same fees and
  mileage and in the same manner as prescribed by law for civil cases in a
  court of record, except that any applicant or  licensee  or  officer  or
  agent  thereof  shall  not  be entitled to such fees and/or mileage. Any
  person,  duly  subpoenaed,  who  fails  to  obey  such  subpoena without
  reasonable cause or without such cause refuses  to  be  examined  or  to
  answer   any  legal  or  pertinent  question  as  to  the  character  or
  qualification of such applicant  or  licensee  or  such  applicant's  or
  licensee's  business, business practices and methods or such violations,
  shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
    7. In any criminal proceeding before any court or grand jury, or  upon
  any  investigation before the department of state for a violation of any
  of the provisions of this section, the  court  or  grand  jury,  or  the
  secretary   of  state,  his  deputy  or  other  officer  conducting  the
  investigation, may confer immunity, in accordance with the provisions of
  section 50.20 or 190.40 of the criminal procedure law.
    8. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law, with respect  to
  violations  of  section  four  hundred  forty-two-h of this article, the
  secretary of state is authorized, upon the complaint of any person or on
  his or her own initiative, to investigate and  prosecute  violations  of
  the  provisions of such section by persons not licensed pursuant to this
  article and may impose a fine not exceeding one  hundred  fifty  dollars
  for the first violation, not exceeding five hundred dollars for a second
  violation,  and  not exceeding one thousand dollars for a third and each
  subsequent violation. The attorney general,  acting  on  behalf  of  the
  secretary  of  state, may commence an action or proceeding in a court of
  competent jurisdiction to obtain  a  judgment  against  such  unlicensed
  person in an amount equal to that imposed as a fine.


§ 442-f. Saving clause. The provisions of this article shall not apply
  to  receivers,  referees,  administrators, executors, guardians or other
  persons appointed by or acting under the judgment or order of any court;
  or public officers while performing their official duties, or  attorneys
  at law.


§  442-g.  Nonresident  licensees.  1. A nonresident of this state may
  become a real estate broker or a real estate salesperson  by  conforming
  to  all  of  the  provisions  of this article, except that a nonresident
  broker regularly engaged in the real estate business as a  vocation  who
  is licensed and maintains a definite place of business in another state,
  which  offers the same privileges to the licensed brokers of this state,
  shall not be required to maintain a place of business within this state.
  Anything to the contrary herein notwithstanding, if any state  prohibits
  or  restricts the right of a resident of this state to become a licensed
  nonresident real estate broker or salesperson, then the issuance of such
  a license to an applicant resident in  such  state  shall  be  similarly
  restricted.  The  department of state shall recognize the license issued
  to  a  real  estate  broker  or  salesperson   by   another   state   as
  satisfactorily  qualifying them for license as broker or salesperson, as
  the case may be, under this section; provided that the laws of the state
  of which they are a resident require that  applicants  for  licenses  as
  real estate brokers and salespersons shall establish their competency by
  written  examinations  but  permit licenses to be issued to residents of
  the State  of  New  York  duly  licensed  under  this  article,  without
  examination.  If  the  applicant  is a resident of a state which has not
  such  requirement  then  the  applicant  must   meet   the   examination
  requirement as provided herein and the department of state shall issue a
  license  to  such  nonresident broker or salesperson upon payment of the
  license fee and the filing by the applicant with  the  department  of  a
  certified copy of the applicant's license issued by such other state.
    2.  Every  nonresident  applicant  shall  file with his application or
  renewal application an irrevocable consent on a form prescribed  by  the
  department of state submitting himself to the jurisdiction of the courts
  of this state and designating the secretary of state of the state of New
  York as his agent upon whom may be served any summons, subpoena or other
  process  against  him  in any action or special proceeding. Such process
  may issue in any court in this state having jurisdiction of the  subject
  matter,  and  the  process  shall  set  forth that the action or special
  proceeding is within the jurisdiction of the court.
    3. Service of such process upon the secretary of state shall  be  made
  by  personally  delivering to and leaving with him or his deputy or with
  any person authorized by the secretary of state to receive such service,
  at the office of  the  department  of  state  in  the  city  of  Albany,
  duplicate  copies of such process together with a fee of five dollars if
  the action is solely for the recovery of a sum of money not in excess of
  two hundred dollars and the process is so endorsed, and  a  fee  of  ten
  dollars  in any other action or proceeding, which fee shall be a taxable
  disbursement. If such process is served upon behalf of a  county,  city,
  town or village, or other political subdivision of the state, the fee to
  be paid to the secretary of state shall be five dollars, irrespective of
  the amount involved or the nature of the action on account of which such
  service  of  process  is  made.  If  the  cost  of  registered  mail for
  transmitting a  copy  of  the  process  shall  exceed  two  dollars,  an
  additional  fee  equal  to  such excess shall be paid at the time of the
  service of such process. Proof of  service  shall  be  by  affidavit  of
  compliance  with this subdivision filed by or on behalf of the plaintiff
  together with the process, within ten days after such service, with  the
  clerk of the court in which the action or special proceeding is pending.
  Service  made  as  provided  in  this section shall be complete ten days
  after such papers are filed with the clerk of the court and  shall  have
  the  same  force  and validity as if served on him personally within the
  state and within the territorial jurisdiction of the  court  from  which
  the process issues.
    4.  The  secretary  of state shall promptly send one of such copies by
  registered mail, return receipt requested, to the nonresident broker  or
  nonresident  salesperson at the post office address of their main office
  as set forth in the last application filed by him or her.
    5.  Nothing in this section shall effect the right to serve process in
  any other manner permitted by law.
    6.  Notwithstanding  any  other  provisions  of  this   article,   the
  department  of  state  shall grant a real estate broker or a real estate
  salesperson license to an applicant who is a member of the household  of
  a  member  of  the  armed forces of the United States, national guard or
  reserves and was a member of such household before such  member  of  the
  armed forces relocated to the state who submits satisfactory evidence of
  licensure,  certification  or  registration  to  practice  an equivalent
  occupation issued by a state, territory, protectorate or  dependency  of
  the   United  States,  provided  that  such  license,  certification  or
  certificate of registration was current and effective within one year of
  the date of the individual's application for licensure in New York,  was
  granted  in  compliance  with standards that are, in the judgment of the
  secretary, no less rigorous than those required  for  licensure  in  New
  York. If such standards for licensure, certification or registration are
  deemed  by  the  secretary  to  be less rigorous than those required for
  licensure in New York, the secretary shall permit an applicant to submit
  evidence in a form acceptable to the department of state to  demonstrate
  the  applicant's  competency  and  trustworthiness.  If such evidence is
  sufficient in the judgment of the secretary, the secretary shall grant a
  real estate broker or real estate salesperson license.


§  442-h.  Rules of the secretary of state. 1. The secretary of state,
  and not the state real  estate  board  established  under  section  four
  hundred  forty-two-i  of  this  article,  shall  adopt  such  rules  and
  regulations as the secretary of state may determine  are  necessary  for
  the administration and enforcement of this section.
    2.  (a) If, after a public hearing and a reasonable investigation, the
  secretary of state  determines  that  the  owners  of  residential  real
  property  within  a  defined  geographic area are subject to intense and
  repeated solicitations by real estate brokers and salespersons or others
  to place their property for  sale  with  such  real  estate  brokers  or
  salespersons,  or  otherwise  to  sell  their  property,  and  that such
  solicitations have caused owners to  reasonably  believe  that  property
  values  may  decrease because persons of different race, ethnic, social,
  or religious backgrounds are moving  or  are  about  to  move  into  the
  neighborhood  or  geographic  area,  the  secretary of state may adopt a
  rule, to be known as a nonsolicitation order, directing all real  estate
  brokers,  salespersons  and other persons regularly engaged in the trade
  or business of buying and selling real estate to refrain from soliciting
  residential real estate listings or otherwise  soliciting  the  sale  of
  residential  real  estate  within the subject area. Each area subject to
  such an order shall be bounded or otherwise specifically defined in  the
  order.  The  nonsolicitation  order  shall  be subject to such terms and
  conditions as the secretary of state may determine are, on  balance,  in
  the  best  interest  of  the  public,  including  but not limited to the
  affected owners and licensees. A nonsolicitation order may prohibit  any
  or  all  types  of solicitation directed towards particular home-owners,
  including but  not  limited  to  letters,  postcards,  telephone  calls,
  door-to-door  calls,  and  handbills.  Every nonsolicitation order shall
  contain a provision setting forth the day, month and year that the order
  shall become effective, as well as the day,  month  and  year  that  the
  order  shall  expire. A nonsolicitation order shall not be effective for
  more  than  five  years.  However,  a  nonsolicitation  order  and   the
  boundaries  of  the  area  where it applies may be re-adopted or amended
  from time to time in accordance with the procedures set forth herein.
    (b) No real estate broker shall establish a new  principal  office  or
  branch  office  within  any  geographic  area  which is the subject of a
  nonsolicitation order without  prior  approval  from  the  secretary  of
  state.  The  secretary  of  state  may  deny  any  application  for  the
  establishment or relocation of a principal office or  branch  office  if
  approval  of  the  application would cause the total number of principal
  and branch offices within the subject area to exceed the total number of
  principal and branch offices that were licensed within the area  on  the
  date the nonsolicitation order became effective.
    3.  (a)  If  the  secretary  of  state  determines that some owners of
  residential real property within a defined geographic area  are  subject
  to  intense  and  repeated  solicitation  by  real  estate  brokers  and
  salespersons to place their property for  sale  with  such  real  estate
  brokers  or  salespersons,  or  are  subject  to  intense  and  repeated
  solicitation by other persons regularly engaged in the trade or business
  of buying and selling  real  estate  to  sell  their  real  estate,  the
  secretary  of  state  may  adopt  a rule establishing a cease and desist
  zone, which zone shall be bounded or otherwise specifically  defined  in
  the  rule.  After  the  secretary  of  state has established a cease and
  desist zone, the owners of residential real property located within  the
  zone  may  file  an  owner's  statement  with  the  secretary  of  state
  expressing their wish not  to  be  solicited  by  real  estate  brokers,
  salespersons or other persons regularly engaged in the trade or business
  of buying and selling real estate. The form and content of the statement


 shall  be prescribed by the secretary of state. After a cease and desist
  zone has been established by the secretary  of  state,  no  real  estate
  broker,  salesperson  or  other person regularly engaged in the trade or
  business  of buying and selling real estate shall solicit a listing from
  any owner who has filed a statement with the secretary of state if  such
  owner's  name  appears  on the current cease and desist list prepared by
  the secretary of state. The prohibition on solicitation shall  apply  to
  direct forms of solicitation such as the use of the telephone, the mail,
  personal  contact  and  other  forms  of  direct  solicitation as may be
  specified by the secretary of state.
    (b) The secretary of state shall compile a cease and desist  list  for
  each  zone established pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subdivision. In
  addition to such other information as the secretary of  state  may  deem
  appropriate,  each  cease and desist list shall contain the name of each
  owner who has filed an owner's statement with the secretary, as well  as
  the  address  of  the  property  within  the  zone  to which the owner's
  statement applies. The secretary of state shall send to each  owner  who
  has  filed  an  owner's  statement  a  written  acknowledgement  of  the
  secretary of state's receipt thereof and a pamphlet  explaining  to  the
  owner  his  or her rights in connection therewith and the procedures and
  time limits applicable to the filing of complaints for  violations.  The
  secretary  of state shall allow an owner who files, or on behalf of whom
  is filed, a complaint or other report of a  violation  of  a  cease  and
  desist  rule  ninety  days in which to perfect a complaint by submitting
  such other or further information or documents as the secretary of state
  may require. The secretary of state shall print a list  for  each  zone.
  Each  list shall be revised and reprinted at least annually on or before
  December thirty-first and shall be made available to the public  and  to
  real  estate brokers at a reasonable price to be set by the secretary of
  state and approved by the  director  of  the  division  of  the  budget.
  Additions  or  deletions shall be made to each list only at the time the
  list is reprinted, and the secretary of state shall not issue amendments
  or addenda to any printed list.
    (c) No rule establishing a cease and desist zone  shall  be  effective
  for longer than five years. However, the secretary of state may re-adopt
  the  rule  to  continue the cease and desist zone for additional periods
  not to exceed five years each. Whenever a rule establishing a cease  and
  desist  zone shall have expired or shall have been repealed, all owner's
  statements filed with the secretary of state pursuant to that rule shall
  also expire. However, an  owner  may  file  a  new  statement  with  the
  secretary  of  state  if  a new rule is adopted establishing a cease and
  desist zone containing the owner's property. Once the  boundaries  of  a
  cease  and desist zone have been established by rule of the secretary of
  state, the boundaries may  not  be  changed  except  by  repeal  of  the
  existing   rule  and  adoption  of  a  new  rule  establishing  the  new
  boundaries.
    4. (a) Each real estate broker shall institute standardized  operating
  procedures  for the prerequisites prospective homebuyers must meet prior
  to receiving any services. Such standardized operating procedures  shall
  include but not be limited to the following:
    (i) whether prospective clients shall show identification;
    (ii) whether an exclusive broker agreement is required;
    (iii) whether pre-approval for a mortgage loan is required; and
    (iv) any other such standardized operating procedures as the secretary
  of  state  shall  determine  by  regulation  and  upon notice and public
  hearing.
    (b) Real estate brokers shall  date  stamp,  notarize  and  post  such
  standardized  operating procedures on any publicly available website and


 mobile device application they maintain,  shall  make  a  copy  of  such
  procedures  available  to  the  public  upon  request  at  their  office
  locations, and shall maintain a  file  of  such  standardized  operating
  procedures  while  the broker's license is active. Any website or mobile
  device application maintained by a team or  a  real  estate  salesperson
  should also have the brokers' policies posted or have a direct link from
  such  website  or  mobile  device application to the brokers' website or
  mobile  device  application.  If  any  alterations  are  made   to   the
  standardized  operating  procedures  subsequent  to  such  posting, real
  estate brokers shall date stamp, notarize and  post  such  new  standard
  operating  procedures on any publicly available website or mobile device
  application  they  maintain  within  thirty  days,  and   archive   such
  alterations.  Any  broker  or  salesperson  operating  under a brokerage
  license that fails to adhere  to  such  operating  procedures  shall  be
  subject  to the penalties imposed by section four hundred forty-one-c of
  this article.
    (c) Any time a real estate broker is required to renew  their  license
  they  must affirm to the department of state that they are in compliance
  with the  requirements  of  this  subdivision  related  to  standardized
  operating procedures.


§  442-i.  State  real  estate  board.  1. There is hereby established
  within the department of state a state real  estate  board  which  shall
  consist of the secretary of state, superintendent of financial services,
  and thirteen additional members. At least five of these members shall be
  "real  estate  brokers", each of whom, at the time of appointment, shall
  be licensed and qualified as a real estate broker under the laws of  New
  York  state  and  shall have been engaged in the real estate business in
  this state for a period of not less than ten years prior to appointment.
  The remaining members shall be "public members" who shall  not  be  real
  estate licensees.
    2.  The  thirteen members shall be appointed as follows: seven members
  shall be appointed by the governor, three of whom shall be  real  estate
  brokers  and  four of whom shall be public members; two members shall be
  appointed by the temporary president of the senate, one of whom shall be
  a real estate broker and one of whom  shall  be  a  public  member;  two
  members  shall  be appointed by the speaker of the assembly, one of whom
  shall be a real estate broker and one of whom shall be a public  member;
  one  member shall be appointed by the minority leader of the senate, who
  shall be either a real estate broker or a public member; and one  member
  shall  be appointed by the minority leader of the assembly, who shall be
  either a real estate broker or a public member.
    3. Each appointed member shall serve for a term of two years;  at  any
  point during such term the appointed member may be removed by the person
  who  appointed  such member. In the event that any of said members shall
  die or resign  during  the  term  of  office,  the  successor  shall  be
  appointed  in the same way and with the same qualifications as set forth
  above. A member may be reappointed for successive terms  but  no  member
  shall serve more than ten years in his or her lifetime.
    4.  A  majority  of  members  currently  serving on the board shall be
  required in order to pass any resolution or to approve any matter before
  the board. The secretary of state shall be chairperson of the board. The
  vice-chairperson and  a  secretary  shall  be  elected  from  among  the
  members.  A  board member who fails to attend three consecutive meetings
  shall forfeit the seat unless  the  secretary  of  state,  upon  written
  request  from the member, finds that the member should have been excused
  from a meeting because of illness or death of a family member.
    5. Each member of the board shall receive no compensation  other  than
  reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses.
    6.  The board shall meet no fewer than three times per year and at the
  call of the secretary of state or a majority of the board.  In  addition
  to  regularly  scheduled  meetings of the board, there shall be at least
  one public hearing each year in New York city, one public  hearing  each
  year  in  Buffalo,  and one public hearing each year in Albany. At least
  fifteen days prior to the  holding  of  any  of  these  public  hearings
  pursuant  to this subdivision, the board shall give public notice of the
  hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in  each  area  where  the
  public  meeting is to be held. The purpose of these hearings shall be to
  solicit  from  members  of  the  public,  suggestions,   comments,   and
  observations about real estate practice in New York state.


§  442-j. Effect of invalid provision. Should the courts of this state
  declare any provision of this article unconstitutional, or unauthorized,
  or in conflict with any other section or provision of this article, then
  such decision shall affect only the section or provision so declared  to
  be  unconstitutional  or  unauthorized  and  shall  not affect any other
  section or part of this article.


§  442-k.  Powers  and  duties of the state real estate board. 1.  The
  state real estate board shall have the  power  to  promulgate  rules  or
  regulations  affecting  brokers and sales persons in order to administer
  and effectuate  the  purposes  of  this  article,  except  that  matters
  pertaining to commingling money of a principal, rendering accounts for a
  client,  managing  property  for a client, broker's purchase of property
  listed with him or her, inducing breach of contract of  sale  or  lease,
  and  records  of  transactions  to  be  maintained  are reserved for the
  exclusive regulatory authority of the secretary of state.  The secretary
  of state, and not the state real estate board,  shall  promulgate  rules
  and  regulations  to  administer or implement the provisions of sections
  four hundred forty-one and four hundred forty-two-h of this article.  In
  addition,  the  secretary  of  state  shall  have  exclusive  regulatory
  authority  to promulgate rules regarding the duties and responsibilities
  of real estate brokers and salespersons with regard to the  handling  of
  clients' funds.
    2.  Authority  to  examine  applicants.  The  board  is  empowered  to
  prescribe the content for the courses of study for the  examination  and
  education of persons licensed under this article. The board shall advise
  the  secretary  of state on policies governing the administration of the
  examinations.
    3. Approval of schools.  The  board  shall  establish  the  rules  and
  regulations  governing the approval by the secretary of state of schools
  to offer or conduct courses required either  for  licensure  under  this
  article or for the satisfaction of the continuing education requirements
  contained  in paragraph (a) of subdivision three of section four hundred
  forty-one of this article.
    4. Study of laws and regulations. The board shall study the  operation
  of laws and regulations with respect to the rights, responsibilities and
  liabilities  of  real  estate  licensees  arising out of the transfer of
  interests in real property and shall make recommendation on  pending  or
  proposed   legislation   affecting  the  same,  with  the  exception  of
  legislation affecting section four hundred forty-two-h of this article.
    5. Enforcement programs and activities. The  board  shall  advise  and
  assist  the  secretary  of  state  in  carrying  out  the provisions and
  purposes  of  this  article  and  make  recommendations  concerning  the
  programs  and  activities  of  the  department  in  connection  with the
  enforcement of this article.
    6. Administration and enforcement. The department of state shall  have
  the  power  and its duty shall be to administer and enforce the laws and
  regulations of the state relating to  those  activities  involving  real
  estate  for  which  licensing  is  required  under  this  article and to
  instruct and require its agents to bring prosecutions  for  unauthorized
  and unlawful practice.
    7.  Reports to legislative committees. The board shall submit annually
  a report to the judiciary  committee  of  the  state  assembly  and  the
  judiciary committee of the state senate, containing a description of the
  types  of  complaints  received, status of cases, and the length of time
  from the initial complaint to any final disposition.


§  442-l.  After-the-fact  referral  fees. 1. No real estate broker or
  salesperson, in any place in which this  article  is  applicable,  shall
  demand  or  receive a referral fee or compensation of any kind for (i) a
  referral from any person or other entity relative to  finding  a  seller
  after  a  bona  fide  listing agreement has been signed, (ii) a referral
  from any person or other entity relative to finding a buyer after a bona
  fide offer to purchase is accepted, or (iii) a referral from any  person
  or other entity relative to finding a property after a bona fide buyer's
  agency agreement has been signed, unless reasonable cause for payment of
  such compensation exists.
    2.  A  violation  of this section shall be a violation of this article
  and shall constitute a deceptive act or practice within the  meaning  of
  section three hundred forty-nine of the general business law.


§  443. Disclosure regarding real estate agency relationship; form. 1.
  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
  following meanings:
    a. "Agent" means a person who is licensed as  a  real  estate  broker,
  associate  real  estate  broker or real estate salesperson under section
  four hundred forty-a of this  article  and  is  acting  in  a  fiduciary
  capacity.
    b.   "Buyer"  means  a  transferee  in  a  residential  real  property
  transaction and includes a person who  executes  an  offer  to  purchase
  residential  real  property  from  a seller through an agent, or who has
  engaged the services of an agent with the  object  of  entering  into  a
  residential real property transaction as a transferee.
    c.  "Buyer's agent" means an agent who contracts to locate residential
  real property for a buyer or who  finds  a  buyer  for  a  property  and
  presents  an  offer  to  purchase  to  the  seller or seller's agent and
  negotiates on behalf of the buyer.
    d. "Listing agent" means a person  who  has  entered  into  a  listing
  agreement to act as an agent of the seller or landlord for compensation.
    e.  "Listing agreement" means a contract between an owner or owners of
  residential real property and an agent, by  which  the  agent  has  been
  authorized  to sell or lease the residential real property or to find or
  obtain a buyer or lessee therefor.
    f. "Residential real property" means real property used  or  occupied,
  or  intended  to  be  used or occupied, wholly or partly, as the home or
  residence of one or more persons improved by (i)  a  one-to-four  family
  dwelling  or  (ii)  condominium  or cooperative apartments but shall not
  refer to unimproved real property upon which such dwellings  are  to  be
  constructed.
    g.  "Seller"  means  the  transferor  in  a  residential real property
  transaction, and includes an owner who lists residential  real  property
  for  sale  with  an  agent,  whether  or  not a transfer results, or who
  receives an offer to purchase residential real property.
    h. "Seller's agent" means a listing agent who acts alone, or an  agent
  who  acts  in  cooperation  with  a  listing  agent,  acts as a seller's
  subagent or acts as a broker's agent to  find  or  obtain  a  buyer  for
  residential real property.
    i.  "Dual agent" means an agent who is acting as a buyer's agent and a
  seller's agent or a tenant's agent and a landlord's agent  in  the  same
  transaction.
    j.  "Designated  sales agent" means a licensed real estate salesperson
  or associate broker, working under the  supervision  of  a  real  estate
  broker,  who  has  been  assigned to represent a client when a different
  client is also represented by  such  real  estate  broker  in  the  same
  transaction.
    k.  "Broker's agent" means an agent that cooperates or is engaged by a
  listing agent, buyer's agent or tenant's agent (but does  not  work  for
  the  same firm as the listing agent, buyer's agent or tenant's agent) to
  assist the listing agent, buyer's agent or tenant's agent in locating  a
  property  to  sell,  buy  or lease respectively, for the listing agent's
  seller or landlord, the  buyer  agent's  buyer  or  the  tenant's  agent
  tenant.  The broker's agent does not have a direct relationship with the
  seller, buyer, landlord or tenant and the  seller,  buyer,  landlord  or
  tenant  can  not  provide  instructions  or  direction  directly  to the
  broker's agent. Therefore, the seller, buyer, landlord or tenant do  not
  have vicarious liability for the acts of the broker's agent. The listing
  agent,  buyer's  agent  or  tenant's  agent  do  provide  direction  and
  instruction to the broker's  agent  and  therefore  the  listing  agent,
  buyer's  agent  or  tenant's  agent will have liability for the broker's
  agent.
    l.  "Tenant" means a lessee in a residential real property transaction
  and includes a person who executes an offer to  lease  residential  real
  property  from  a  landlord  through  an  agent,  or who has engaged the
  services of an agent with the object of entering into a residential real
  property transaction as a lessee.
    m.  "Landlord"  means  the  lessor  in  a  residential  real  property
  transaction,  and  includes an owner who lists residential real property
  for lease with an agent, whether or not a lease results, or who receives
  an offer to lease residential real property.
    n. "Tenant's agent" means an agent who contracts to locate residential
  real property for a tenant or who finds a  tenant  for  a  property  and
  presents  an  offer  to  lease  to  the landlord or landlord's agent and
  negotiates on behalf of the tenant.
    o. "Landlord's agent" means a listing agent  who  acts  alone,  or  an
  agent who acts in cooperation with a listing agent, acts as a landlord's
  subagent  or  acts  as  a  broker's agent to find or obtain a tenant for
  residential real property.
    p. "Advance consent to dual agency"  means  written  informed  consent
  signed  by  the  seller/landlord  or buyer/tenant that the listing agent
  and/or buyer's agent may act as a dual agent  for  that  seller/landlord
  and a buyer/tenant for residential real property which is the subject of
  a listing agreement.
    q. "Advance consent to dual agency with designated sales agents" means
  written  informed  consent signed by the seller/landlord or buyer/tenant
  that indicates  the  name  of  the  agent  appointed  to  represent  the
  seller/landlord   or  buyer/tenant  as  a  designated  sales  agent  for
  residential real property which is the subject of a listing agreement.
    2. This section shall apply only to transactions involving residential
  real property.
    3. a. A listing agent shall provide the disclosure form set  forth  in
  subdivision  four  of  this  section  to  a  seller or landlord prior to
  entering into a listing agreement with the seller or landlord and  shall
  obtain  a  signed  acknowledgment from the seller or landlord, except as
  provided in paragraph e of this subdivision.
    b. A seller's agent or landlord's agent shall provide  the  disclosure
  form  set  forth in subdivision four of this section to a buyer, buyer's
  agent, tenant or tenant's agent at the time  of  the  first  substantive
  contact   with   the   buyer   or  tenant  and  shall  obtain  a  signed
  acknowledgement  from  the  buyer  or  tenant,  except  as  provided  in
  paragraph e of this subdivision.
    c. A buyer's agent or tenant's agent shall provide the disclosure form
  to the buyer or tenant prior to entering into an agreement to act as the
  buyer's agent or tenant's agent and shall obtain a signed acknowledgment
  from  the  buyer  or  tenant,  except as provided in paragraph e of this
  subdivision. A buyer's agent or tenant's agent shall provide the form to
  the seller, seller's agent, landlord or landlord's agent at the time  of
  the  first  substantive  contact  with  the seller or landlord and shall
  obtain a signed acknowledgment from the seller, landlord or the  listing
  agent, except as provided in paragraph e of this subdivision.
    d.  The agent shall provide to the buyer, seller, tenant or landlord a
  copy of the signed acknowledgment and  shall  maintain  a  copy  of  the
  signed acknowledgment for not less than three years.
    e.  If  the  seller,  buyer,  landlord  or  tenant  refuses to sign an
  acknowledgment of receipt pursuant to this subdivision, the agent  shall
  set  forth  under oath or affirmation a written declaration of the facts
  of the refusal and shall maintain a copy of the declaration for not less
  than three years.
    f.  A  seller/landlord  or  buyer/tenant  may provide advance informed
  consent to dual agency and dual agency with designated sales  agents  by
  indicating  the  same  on the form set forth in subdivision four of this
  section.
    4. a. For  buyer-seller  transactions,  the  following  shall  be  the
  disclosure form:
                       NEW YORK STATE DISCLOSURE FORM
                                     FOR
                              BUYER AND SELLER
                           THIS IS NOT A CONTRACT
    New  York  state  law requires real estate licensees who are acting as
  agents of buyers or sellers of property to advise the  potential  buyers
  or   sellers  with  whom  they  work  of  the  nature  of  their  agency
  relationship and the rights and obligations it creates. This  disclosure
  will  help you to make informed choices about your relationship with the
  real estate broker and its sales agents.
    Throughout the transaction you may receive more  than  one  disclosure
  form.  The  law  may  require each agent assisting in the transaction to
  present you with this disclosure form. A real estate agent is  a  person
  qualified to advise about real estate.
    If you need legal, tax or other advice, consult with a professional in
  that field.
            DISCLOSURE REGARDING REAL ESTATE AGENCY RELATIONSHIPS
                               SELLER'S AGENT
    A  seller's  agent is an agent who is engaged by a seller to represent
  the seller's interests. The seller's agent does this by securing a buyer
  for the seller's home at a price and on terms acceptable to the  seller.
  A seller's agent has, without limitation, the following fiduciary duties
  to the seller: reasonable care, undivided loyalty, confidentiality, full
  disclosure,  obedience  and  duty  to account. A seller's agent does not
  represent the interests of the buyer.  The  obligations  of  a  seller's
  agent  are  also  subject  to  any  specific  provisions set forth in an
  agreement between the agent and the seller. In dealings with the  buyer,
  a  seller's  agent  should  (a)  exercise  reasonable  skill and care in
  performance of the agent's duties; (b) deal honestly, fairly and in good
  faith; and  (c)  disclose  all  facts  known  to  the  agent  materially
  affecting  the  value  or  desirability of property, except as otherwise
  provided by law.
                                BUYER'S AGENT
    A buyer's agent is an agent who is engaged by a buyer to represent the
  buyer's interests. The  buyer's  agent  does  this  by  negotiating  the
  purchase  of  a  home at a price and on terms acceptable to the buyer. A
  buyer's agent has, without limitation, the following fiduciary duties to
  the buyer: reasonable care,  undivided  loyalty,  confidentiality,  full
  disclosure,  obedience  and  duty  to  account. A buyer's agent does not
  represent the interests of the seller.  The  obligations  of  a  buyer's
  agent  are  also  subject  to  any  specific  provisions set forth in an
  agreement between the agent and the buyer. In dealings with the  seller,
  a  buyer's  agent  should  (a)  exercise  reasonable  skill  and care in
  performance of the agent's duties; (b) deal honestly, fairly and in good
  faith; and  (c)  disclose  all  facts  known  to  the  agent  materially
  affecting  the  buyer's ability and/or willingness to perform a contract
  to acquire seller's property that are not inconsistent with the  agent's
  fiduciary duties to the buyer.
                               BROKER'S AGENTS
    A  broker's  agent  is  an  agent  that  cooperates or is engaged by a
  listing agent or a buyer's agent (but does not work for the same firm as
  the listing agent or buyer's agent)  to  assist  the  listing  agent  or
  buyer's  agent  in locating a property to sell or buy, respectively, for
  the  listing  agent's  seller  or  the buyer agent's buyer. The broker's
  agent does not have a direct relationship with the buyer or  seller  and
  the  buyer  or seller can not provide instructions or direction directly
  to the broker's agent. The buyer and the seller therefore  do  not  have
  vicarious  liability  for  the  acts  of the broker's agent. The listing
  agent or buyer's agent do  provide  direction  and  instruction  to  the
  broker's  agent  and  therefore  the listing agent or buyer's agent will
  have liability for the acts of the broker's agent.
                                 DUAL AGENT
    A real estate broker may represent both the buyer and  the  seller  if
  both  the  buyer  and  seller give their informed consent in writing. In
  such a dual agency situation, the agent will not be able to provide  the
  full  range of fiduciary duties to the buyer and seller. The obligations
  of an agent are also subject to any specific provisions set forth in  an
  agreement  between  the agent, and the buyer and seller. An agent acting
  as a dual agent must explain carefully to both the buyer and seller that
  the agent is acting for the other party as well. The agent  should  also
  explain  the  possible effects of dual representation, including that by
  consenting to the dual agency relationship  the  buyer  and  seller  are
  giving  up  their  right  to undivided loyalty. A buyer or seller should
  carefully  consider  the  possible  consequences  of   a   dual   agency
  relationship  before  agreeing to such representation. A seller or buyer
  may provide advance informed consent to dual agency  by  indicating  the
  same on this form.
                                 DUAL AGENT
                                    WITH
                           DESIGNATED SALES AGENTS
    If the buyer and the seller provide their informed consent in writing,
  the principals and the real estate broker who represents both parties as
  a  dual  agent  may  designate  a sales agent to represent the buyer and
  another sales agent to represent the seller to  negotiate  the  purchase
  and  sale  of  real estate. A sales agent works under the supervision of
  the real estate broker. With the informed consent of the buyer  and  the
  seller  in  writing,  the  designated  sales  agent  for  the buyer will
  function  as  the  buyer's  agent  representing  the  interests  of  and
  advocating on behalf of the buyer and the designated sales agent for the
  seller will function as the seller's agent representing the interests of
  and  advocating  on behalf of the seller in the negotiations between the
  buyer and seller. A designated sales agent cannot provide the full range
  of fiduciary duties to the buyer or seller. The designated  sales  agent
  must  explain  that  like  the  dual  agent under whose supervision they
  function, they cannot provide  undivided  loyalty.  A  buyer  or  seller
  should  carefully  consider  the  possible consequences of a dual agency
  relationship with  designated  sales  agents  before  agreeing  to  such
  representation.  A  seller or buyer may provide advance informed consent
  to dual agency with designated sales agents by indicating  the  same  on
  this form.
 
    This  form  was  provided to me by ____________________ (print name of
  licensee) of ____________________________ (print name of  company,  firm
  or  brokerage),  a licensed real estate broker acting in the interest of
  the:
 
     (  ) Seller as a         (  ) Buyer as a
   (check relationship below)  (check relationship below)
     (  ) Seller's agent      (  ) Buyer's agent
     (  ) Broker's agent      (  ) Broker's agent
     (  ) Dual agent          (  ) Dual agent with designated sales agents
 
    For advance informed consent to either dual agency or dual agency with
  designated sales agents complete section below:
     (  ) Advance informed consent dual agency.
     (  )  Advance  informed  consent to dual agency with designated sales
  agents.
 
    If dual agent with designated sales agents is indicated above:
    ____________________ is appointed to represent the buyer; and
    ____________________ is appointed to  represent  the  seller  in  this
  transaction.
 
    (I)(We) acknowledge receipt of a copy of this disclosure form:
    Signature of { } Buyer(s) and/or { } Seller(s):
    ____________________             ____________________
    ____________________             ____________________
    Date:_______________             Date:_______________
    b.  For  landlord-tenant  transactions,  the  following  shall  be the
  disclosure form:
                       NEW YORK STATE DISCLOSURE FORM
                                     FOR
                             LANDLORD AND TENANT
 
                           THIS IS NOT A CONTRACT
    New York state law requires real estate licensees who  are  acting  as
  agents of landlords and tenants of real property to advise the potential
  landlords  and tenants with whom they work of the nature of their agency
  relationship and the rights and obligations it creates. This  disclosure
  will  help you to make informed choices about your relationship with the
  real estate broker and its sales agents.
    Throughout the transaction you may receive more  than  one  disclosure
  form.  The  law  may  require each agent assisting in the transaction to
  present you with this disclosure form. A real estate agent is  a  person
  qualified to advise about real estate.
  If  you  need legal, tax or other advice, consult with a professional in
  that field.
 
            DISCLOSURE REGARDING REAL ESTATE AGENCY RELATIONSHIPS
                              LANDLORD'S AGENT
 
    A landlord's agent is an  agent  who  is  engaged  by  a  landlord  to
  represent  the  landlord's  interest.  The landlord's agent does this by
  securing a tenant for the landlord's apartment or house at a rent and on
  terms acceptable to  the  landlord.  A  landlord's  agent  has,  without
  limitation,  the  following fiduciary duties to the landlord: reasonable
  care, undivided loyalty, confidentiality, full disclosure, obedience and
  duty to account. A landlord's agent does not represent the interests  of
  the  tenant.  The  obligations of a landlord's agent are also subject to
  any specific provisions set forth in an agreement between the agent  and
  the landlord. In dealings with the tenant, a landlord's agent should (a)
  exercise reasonable skill and care in performance of the agent's duties;
  (b)  deal honestly, fairly and in good faith; and (c) disclose all facts
  known to the agent materially affecting the  value  or  desirability  of
  property, except as otherwise provided by law.
                               TENANT'S AGENT
 
    A  tenant's  agent is an agent who is engaged by a tenant to represent
  the tenant's interest. The tenant's agent does this by  negotiating  the
  rental  or  lease  of  an  apartment  or  house  at  a rent and on terms
  acceptable to the tenant. A tenant's agent has, without limitation,  the
  following  fiduciary  duties  to  the tenant: reasonable care, undivided
  loyalty,  confidentiality,  full  disclosure,  obedience  and  duty   to
  account.  A  tenant's  agent  does  not  represent  the  interest of the
  landlord. The obligations of a tenant's agent are also  subject  to  any
  specific  provisions set forth in an agreement between the agent and the
  tenant. In dealings with the  landlord,  a  tenant's  agent  should  (a)
  exercise reasonable skill and care in performance of the agent's duties;
  (b)  deal honestly, fairly and in good faith; and (c) disclose all facts
  known to the  tenant's ability and/or willingness to perform a  contract
  to  rent or lease landlord's property that are not inconsistent with the
  agent's fiduciary duties to the buyer.
 
                               BROKER'S AGENTS
 
    A broker's agent is an agent  that  cooperates  or  is  engaged  by  a
  listing  agent  or a tenant's agent (but does not work for the same firm
  as the listing agent or tenant's agent) to assist the listing  agent  or
  tenant's  agent  in locating a property to rent or lease for the listing
  agent's landlord or the tenant agent's tenant. The broker's  agent  does
  not  have  a  direct  relationship  with  the tenant or landlord and the
  tenant or landlord can not provide instructions or direction directly to
  the broker's agent. The tenant and the landlord therefore  do  not  have
  vicarious  liability  for  the  acts  of the broker's agent. The listing
  agent or tenant's agent do provide  direction  and  instruction  to  the
  broker's  agent  and  therefore the listing agent or tenant's agent will
  have liability for the acts of the broker's agent.
 
                                 DUAL AGENT
 
    A real estate broker may represent both the tenant and the landlord if
  both the tenant and landlord give their informed consent in writing.  In
  such  a dual agency situation, the agent will not be able to provide the
  full range of fiduciary duties to  the  landlord  and  the  tenant.  The
  obligations  of an agent are also subject to any specific provisions set
  forth in an agreement between the agent, and the tenant and landlord. An
  agent acting as a dual agent must explain carefully to both the landlord
  and tenant that the agent is acting for the other  party  as  well.  The
  agent  should  also explain the possible effects of dual representation,
  including that  by  consenting  to  the  dual  agency  relationship  the
  landlord  and  tenant  are giving up their right to undivided loyalty. A
  landlord and tenant should carefully consider the possible  consequences
  of a dual agency relationship before agreeing to such representation.  A
  landlord  or  tenant may provide advance informed consent to dual agency
  by indicating the same on this form.
 
                                 DUAL AGENT
                                    WITH
                           DESIGNATED SALES AGENTS
 
    If the tenant and the  landlord  provide  their  informed  consent  in
  writing,  the  principals and the real estate broker who represents both
  parties as a dual agent may designate a sales  agent  to  represent  the
  tenant  and another sales agent to represent the landlord. A sales agent
  works under the supervision of the real estate broker. With the informed
  consent in writing of the tenant and the landlord, the designated  sales
  agent  for  the  tenant will function as the tenant's agent representing
  the interests of  and  advocating  on  behalf  of  the  tenant  and  the
  designated  sales agent for the landlord will function as the landlord's
  agent representing the interests of and  advocating  on  behalf  of  the
  landlord  in  the  negotiations  between  the tenant and the landlord. A
  designated sales agent cannot provide the full range of fiduciary duties
  to the landlord or tenant. The designated sales agent must explain  that
  like  the  dual agent under whose supervision they function, they cannot
  provide  undivided  loyalty.  A  landlord  or  tenant  should  carefully
  consider  the  possible  consequences of a dual agency relationship with
  designated sales agents before  agreeing  to  such  representation.    A
  landlord  or  tenant may provide advance informed consent to dual agency
  with designated sales agents by indicating the same on this form.
 
    This form was provided to me by _____________________ (print  name  of
  licensee)   of  __________________  (print  name  of  company,  firm  or
  brokerage), a licensed real estate broker acting in the interest of the:
 
     (  ) Landlord as a     (  ) Tenant as a
  (check relationship below) (check relationship below)
     (  ) Landlord's agent  (  ) Tenant's agent
     (  ) Broker's agent    (  ) Broker's agent
     (  ) Dual agent        (  ) Dual agent with designated sales agents
 
    For advance informed consent to either dual agency or dual agency with
  designated sales agents complete section below:
     (  ) Advance informed consent dual agency.
     (  ) Advance informed consent to dual agency  with  designated  sales
  agents.
 
    If dual agent with designated sales agents is indicated above:
    _________________________ is appointed to represent the tenant; and
    _________________________ is  appointed  to  represent the landlord in
  this transaction.
 
    (I)  (We)  _____________________________________________   acknowledge
  receipt of a copy of this disclosure form:
 
      Signature of { } Landlord(s) and/or { } Tenant(s):
 
  ______________________________________________________
 
  _______________________________________________________
 
  Date: _______________              Date: ________________
 
    5.  This  section  shall not apply to a real estate licensee who works
  with a buyer, seller, tenant or landlord in accordance with terms agreed
  to by the licensee and buyer,  seller,  tenant  or  landlord  and  in  a
  capacity  other than as an agent, as such term is defined in paragraph a
  of subdivision one of this section.
    6. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit  or  alter  the
  application of the common law of agency with respect to residential real
  estate transactions.


§   443-a.   Disclosure  obligations.  1.  Notwithstanding  any  other
  provision of law, it is not  a  material  defect  or  fact  relating  to
  property  offered  for  sale  or  lease,  including residential property
  regardless of the number of units contained therein, that:
    (a) an owner or occupant of the  property  is,  or  was  at  any  time
  suspected to be, infected with human immunodeficiency virus or diagnosed
  with  acquired immune deficiency syndrome or any other disease which has
  been determined  by  medical  evidence  to  be  highly  unlikely  to  be
  transmitted through occupancy of a dwelling place; or
    (b)  the  property  is,  or  is  suspected to have been, the site of a
  homicide, suicide or other death by accidental or natural causes, or any
  crime punishable as a felony.
    2. (a) No cause of action shall arise against an owner or occupant  of
  real property, or the agent of such owner or occupant, or the agent of a
  seller  or  buyer  of real property, for failure to disclose in any real
  estate transaction a fact or suspicion contained in subdivision  one  of
  this section.
    (b)  Failure  to  disclose a fact contained in subdivision one of this
  section to a transferee shall not be grounds for a  disciplinary  action
  against a real estate agent or broker licensed pursuant to this article.
    (c)  As  used in this section, the terms "agent", "buyer" and "seller"
  shall have the same meanings as such terms are defined in  section  four
  hundred forty-three of this article.
    3.  Notwithstanding  the  fact that this information is not a material
  defect or fact, if such information is important to the decision of  the
  buyer to purchase or lease the property, the buyer may, when negotiating
  or  making  a  bona  fide  offer,  submit  a  written  inquiry  for such
  information. The buyer or the agent  of  the  buyer  shall  provide  the
  written  request  to  the seller's agent or to the seller if there is no
  seller's agent. The seller may choose whether or not to respond  to  the
  inquiry.  The seller's agent, with the consent of the seller and subject
  to applicable laws regarding privacy,  shall  report  any  response  and
  information  to the buyer's agent or to the buyer if there is no buyer's
  agent. If there is no  seller's  agent,  the  seller  shall  inform  the
  buyer's agent, or the buyer if there is no buyer's agent, whether or not
  the seller chooses to provide a response.
    4.  This  section  shall  preempt  any local law inconsistent with the
  provisions of this section.


ARTICLE 12-B
                   HOME INSPECTION PROFESSIONAL LICENSING
  Section 444-a. Short title.
          444-b. Definitions.
          444-c. Code of ethics and standards of practice.
          444-d. License requirements for home inspectors.
          444-e. Qualifications for licensure.
          444-f. License periods, renewals and fees.
          444-g. Duty of care of home inspectors.
          444-h. Suspension and revocation of licenses.
          444-i. Denial of license; complaints; notice of hearing.
          444-j. Practice of architecture and professional engineering.
          444-k. Liability coverage.
          444-l. Duties of the secretary.
          444-m. Construction with other laws.
          444-n. Unlicensed activities.
          444-o. Violations and penalties for unlicensed activities.
          444-p. Judicial review.
          444-q. Severability.


§  444-a. Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as
  the "home inspection professional licensing act".


§  444-b.  Definitions.  As  used in this article, the following terms
  shall have the following meanings:
    1. "Client" means any person  who  engages  or  seeks  to  engage  the
  services  of a home inspector for the purpose of obtaining inspection of
  and written report about the condition of a residential building.
    2. "Department" means the department of state.
    3. "Home inspector" means  a  person  licensed  as  a  home  inspector
  pursuant to the provisions of this article.
    4.  "Home  inspection"  means  the  process  by which a home inspector
  observes and provides a written report of the systems and components  of
  a  residential  building  including  but  not limited to heating system,
  cooling  system,  plumbing   system,   electrical   system,   structural
  components,  foundation,  roof, masonry structure, exterior and interior
  components or  any  other  related  residential  building  component  as
  recommended  or required by the department through regulation to provide
  a  client  with  objective  information  about  the  condition  of   the
  residential  building.  The home inspector shall clearly identify in the
  written report which systems and components of the residential  building
  were  observed.  A  home  inspection shall not include an inspection for
  radon or pests.
    5. "Person" means an individual, firm, company,  partnership,  limited
  liability company, or corporation.
    6.  "Residential building" means a structure consisting of one to four
  dwelling units and their garages and carport but shall not  include  any
  such  structure  newly  constructed  or  not  previously  occupied  as a
  dwelling unit.
    7. "Secretary" means the secretary of the department of state.


§  444-c.  Code  of ethics and standards of practice. 1. The secretary
  shall promulgate regulations to implement the provisions of this article
  including but not limited to:
    (a) standards for training including approval of the course  of  study
  and examination required for licensure of home inspectors;
    (b)  requirements  and  standards  for  continuing  education  of home
  inspectors;
    (c) a code of ethics and  standards  of  practice  for  licensed  home
  inspectors  consistent  with  the  provisions  of this article and sound
  ethical practices which code and standards shall be  subject  to  public
  notice  and  comment prior to adoption of the regulations. The standards
  of practice shall not require a reporting format  or  limit  information
  which  licensees  are  authorized  to  provide a client pursuant to this
  article; and
    (d) development of information and educational  materials  about  home
  inspection for distribution to clients.
    2.   Nothing  in  this  section  shall  be  deemed  to  supersede  any
  established authority, duty and power established by  local  law,  state
  law or regulation or otherwise granted to any agency, body or entity.


§  444-d.  License  requirements  for home inspectors. No person shall
  conduct or represent that he or she has the ability to  conduct  a  home
  inspection for compensation unless such person is:
    1. licensed as home inspector pursuant to this article; or
    2.  a person regulated by the state or a political subdivision thereof
  as an architect who is acting within the scope of his or her profession;
  or
    3. a person regulated by the state or a political subdivision  thereof
  as  an engineer who is acting within the scope of his or her profession;
  or
    4. a person who is employed as a  code  enforcement  official  by  the
  state or a political subdivision thereof when acting within the scope of
  that government employment; or
    5.  a  person  making  home inspections for the purpose of meeting the
  requirements of section four hundred forty-four-e  of  this  article  to
  qualify for licensure as a home inspector.


§  444-e.  Qualifications for licensure. 1. An applicant for a license
  as a home inspector shall:
    (a) have successfully completed high school or its equivalent; and
    (b) (i) have successfully completed a course of study of not less than
  one hundred forty hours approved by the secretary,  of  which  at  least
  forty  hours  shall  have  been  in  the  form  of  unpaid  field  based
  inspections in the presence of and under the  direct  supervision  of  a
  home  inspector  licensed  by  the  state  of New York or a professional
  engineer or architect regulated by the state of New  York  who  oversees
  and takes full responsibility for the inspection and any report provided
  to a client; or
    (ii)  have performed not less than one hundred home inspections in the
  presence of and  under  the  direct  supervision  of  a  home  inspector
  licensed  by  the  state  of  New  York  or  a  professional engineer or
  architect regulated by the state of New York who oversees and takes full
  responsibility for the inspection and any report provided to  a  client;
  and
    (c)  have  passed  the  National  Home  Inspector  examination  or  an
  examination offered by the secretary. Any  examination  offered  by  the
  secretary  must  meet  or  exceed the national exam standards set by the
  Examination Board of Professional Home Inspectors in  consultation  with
  the  New  York State Association of Home Inspectors to include questions
  related  to  state-specific  procedures,  rules,  and  regulations,  and
  changes to state and federal law, and be updated annually; and
    (d) pay the applicable fees.
    2.  The  provisions  of  this  section  shall  not  apply  to a person
  performing a home inspection pursuant to subparagraph (ii) of  paragraph
  (b)  of  subdivision  one  of  this  section  for the purpose of meeting
  requirements for a home inspector license.
    3. Upon submission of an application and payment  of  the  application
  and  licensure  fee  to  the secretary, the secretary shall issue a home
  inspector's license to a person who holds a  valid  license  as  a  home
  inspector  issued by another state or possession of the United States or
  the District of Columbia which has standards substantially equivalent to
  those of this state as determined by the secretary.
    4. On or before the effective date  of  this  article,  the  secretary
  shall, upon application, issue a home inspector license to a person who:
    (a)  meets  the  requirements of paragraphs (a) and (c) of subdivision
  one of  this  section  and  has  performed  one  hundred  or  more  home
  inspections  for  compensation  within  two years prior to the effective
  date of this section; or
    (b) meets the requirements of paragraph (a) of subdivision one of this
  section and has been engaged in the  practice  of  home  inspection  for
  compensation  for  not less than three years prior to the effective date
  of this section during which such person has performed two hundred fifty
  home inspections for  compensation  within  three  years  prior  to  the
  effective date of this section; or
    (c)  has  education  and  experience  which  the  secretary, considers
  equivalent to that required pursuant to paragraphs (a) and (b)  of  this
  Subdivision.


§  444-f.  License  periods,  renewals  and  fees.  1.  Home inspector
  licenses and renewals thereof shall be issued for a period of two years,
  except that the secretary may, in order to stagger the  expiration  date
  thereof,  provide  that those licenses first issued or renewed after the
  effective date of this section shall expire or become  void  on  a  date
  fixed  by  the  secretary,  not  sooner  than  six months nor later than
  twenty-nine months after the date of issue.  No  renewal  of  a  license
  shall be issued unless the applicant has successfully completed a course
  of continuing education approved by the secretary.
    2.  The secretary shall collect a fee of two hundred fifty dollars for
  the first application for a license and the license as a home inspector.
  The secretary shall collect a fee of one hundred dollars to renew a home
  inspector license. The secretary shall collect  an  examination  fee  of
  fifty  dollars. All fees and any fines imposed by the secretary pursuant
  to this article  shall  be  deposited  in  the  business  and  licensing
  services  account  established pursuant to section ninety-seven-y of the
  state finance law.


§  444-g.  Duty  of  care  of home inspectors. 1. Every home inspector
  shall comply with  the  provisions  of  this  article,  and  the  rules,
  regulations  and  standards  adopted pursuant thereto. The duty of every
  home inspector shall be to the client.
    2. Every home inspector shall display his or her  license  number  and
  status  as a licensed home inspector on every home inspection report and
  in all advertising. Upon request of any client or interested party to  a
  real  estate  transaction, every home inspector shall provide such proof
  of licensure pursuant  to  this  article  as  shall  be  issued  by  the
  secretary for such purpose.
    3.  No  later  than  five business days after the completion of a home
  inspection on behalf of a client, each home inspector shall provide such
  client with a written report of the findings  of  such  inspection.  The
  home  inspection  shall  clearly  identify  in  the written report which
  systems and components of the residential building were observed.  Every
  such  written  report  and  the  information  contained therein shall be
  deemed confidential and shall  not  be  disclosed  without  the  express
  consent    of   the   client;   provided,   however,   that   department
  representatives, conducting an investigation or other official  business
  for  the  purpose  of  enforcing this article, shall have access to such
  reports and the information contained therein.
    4. No home inspector shall:
    (a) perform or offer to perform, for any additional fee,  any  repair,
  improvement  or  replacement of any component or system in a residential
  building for  which  such  inspector,  or  partner  thereof  shall  have
  prepared  a  home  inspection  report prior to the close of escrow. This
  paragraph shall not  include  repairs  to  components  and  systems  not
  included in the standards of practice adopted pursuant to this article;
    (b)  inspect any residential building in which such inspector, partner
  or relative thereof has a financial interest  or  any  interest  in  the
  transfer thereof, including the receipt of any commission as an agent;
    (c)  offer  to  provide  or  provide  any  commission, referral fee or
  kickback to the seller of any inspected residential building, or to  the
  agent  of  either or both the seller and buyer of such building, for the
  referral of any business to such inspector or partner thereof; or
    (d)  agree  to  perform  any  home  inspection  or  prepare  any  home
  inspection  report  for  which  compensation or employment is contingent
  upon the conclusions of the home inspection report,  pre-established  or
  prescribed findings, or the closing of a real estate transaction.
    Nothing  in  this  article  authorizes  a  home  inspector to practice
  engineering or architecture.


§  444-h.  Suspension and revocation of licenses. 1. The secretary may
  refuse to grant or may suspend or revoke a home inspector  license,  and
  may  impose  a  civil  penalty  not  to  exceed one thousand dollars per
  violation, upon proof to the satisfaction  of  the  secretary  that  the
  holder thereof has:
    (a)  Violated  the  provisions  of  subdivision  four  of section four
  hundred forty-four-g of this article;
    (b) Disclosed any information  concerning  the  results  of  the  home
  inspection   without   the  approval  of  the  client  or  the  client's
  representatives;
    (c) Accepted compensation from more than one interested party for  the
  same service without the consent of all interested parties;
    (d)  Accepted  commissions or allowances, directly or indirectly, from
  other parties dealing with the client in connection with work for  which
  the licensee is responsible;
    (e)  Failed  to  disclose  promptly  to a client information about any
  business interest of the licensee which may reasonably affect the client
  in connection with the home inspection;
    (f) Been convicted of a felony  involving  fraud,  theft,  perjury  or
  bribery;
    (g)  Failed  to  pay  a  fine  or restitution ordered by the secretary
  within a reasonable time; or
    (h) Made a willfully false statement in the context of home inspection
  activities or an application for licensure pursuant to this article.
    2. Whenever a license  is  revoked  pursuant  to  this  section,  such
  license  shall  not be reinstated or reissued until after the expiration
  of a period of five years from the date of such revocation.
    3. A violation of this article by a professional engineer or architect
  regulated by the state of New York shall be enforced by their respective
  state licensing boards.


§  444-i.  Denial  of  license;  complaints;  notice  of  hearing. The
  department shall,  before  making  a  final  determination  to  deny  an
  application  for a license, revoke a license, suspend a license, issue a
  reprimand, or impose a civil penalty  for  violation  of  this  article,
  notify  the  applicant  or  licensee  in writing of the reasons for such
  proposed denial, revocation, suspension, reprimand, or imposition  of  a
  civil  penalty and afford the applicant or licensee an opportunity to be
  heard in person  or  by  counsel.  Such  notification  shall  be  served
  personally or by certified mail or in any manner authorized by the civil
  practice  law  and  rules  for  service  of  a  summons. If a hearing is
  requested, such hearing shall be held at such  time  and  place  as  the
  department shall prescribe and shall be conducted in accordance with the
  provisions  of  the state administrative procedure act. If the applicant
  or licensee fails to make a written request for a hearing within  thirty
  days  after  receipt  of  such notification, then the notification shall
  become the final determination of the department. The department, acting
  by such officer or  person  in  the  department  as  the  secretary  may
  designate, shall have the power to subpoena and bring before the officer
  or  person so designated any person in this state and administer an oath
  to and take testimony of any person or cause his or her deposition to be
  taken. A subpoena issued under this section shall be  regulated  by  the
  civil  practice  law  and  rules. If, after such hearing, the license is
  denied, revoked, or suspended, a reprimand is issued, or a civil penalty
  is imposed, written notice of such determination shall  be  served  upon
  the  applicant  or  licensee  personally  or by certified mail or in any
  manner authorized by the civil practice law and rules for the service of
  a summons.


§  444-j.  Practice  of  architecture  and professional engineering. A
  person regulated by the state of New York to engage in the  practice  of
  architecture  when  acting  within  the scope of that practice, a person
  licensed in the state of New York to practice  professional  engineering
  when  acting  within  the  scope  of  that  practice  or a person who is
  employed as a code enforcement official by  the  state  or  a  political
  subdivision  thereof  when  acting  within  the scope of that government
  employment may  perform  home  inspections  without  need  of  licensure
  pursuant to this article.


§  444-k.  Liability coverage. 1. Every licensed home inspector who is
  engaged in home inspection shall secure, maintain,  and  file  with  the
  secretary  proof of a certificate of liability coverage, which terms and
  conditions shall be determined by the secretary.
    2. Every proof of liability coverage required to  be  filed  with  the
  secretary  shall  provide  that cancellation or nonrenewal of the policy
  shall not be effective unless and until at least  ten  days'  notice  of
  intention  to  cancel  or  nonrenew  has been received in writing by the
  Secretary.


§  444-l.  Duties of the secretary. The secretary shall establish such
  rules and regulations as shall be necessary to implement the  provisions
  of this article.


§  444-m.  Construction with other laws. Nothing in this article shall
  prevent  any  licensed  engineer,  registered  architect  or  any  other
  licensed  or  regulated  profession or governmental employee from acting
  within the scope of his or her profession or employment.


§  444-n.  Unlicensed  activities.  The  secretary  may issue an order
  requiring restitution and/or directing the cessation of any activity for
  which a license is required by this article upon a determination that  a
  person has engaged in or followed the business or occupation of, or held
  himself,  herself,  or  itself  out  as  or  acted  as,  temporarily  or
  otherwise, a home inspector within this state without a  valid  license.
  The  department  shall, before making such determination and order, give
  such person notice as provided in section four hundred  forty-four-i  of
  this article and afford such person an opportunity to be heard in person
  or  by  counsel  in reference thereto in an adjudicatory proceeding held
  pursuant to this article.


§  444-o.  Violations  and  penalties  for  unlicensed activities. Any
  person subject to  an  administrative  order  issued  by  the  secretary
  directing  the cessation of any activity for which a license is required
  and/or suspending or revoking a license previously issued  who  directly
  or indirectly engages in the business of home inspection, holds himself,
  herself,  or  itself  out  to  the public as being able to engage in the
  business of home inspection without a license therefor, engages  in  the
  business  of  home inspection after having his or her license revoked or
  suspended, or without a license  to  engage  in  the  business  of  home
  inspection,  directly  or  indirectly  employs, permits or authorizes an
  unlicensed person to engage in the business of home inspection shall  be
  guilty  of  a misdemeanor and upon the first conviction thereof shall be
  sentenced to a fine of not more than one thousand dollars; upon a second
  or subsequent conviction thereof shall be sentenced to  a  fine  of  not
  less than one thousand dollars nor more than five thousand dollars. Each
  violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense.


§  444-p.  Judicial review. The action of the secretary in suspending,
  revoking, or refusing to issue or renew a license, or imposing an  order
  directing  the  cessation  of  unlicensed activity or imposing a fine or
  reprimand may be reviewed by the supreme court in the manner provided by
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules.


§  444-q.  Severability.  In  the event it is determined by a court of
  competent jurisdiction  that  any  phrase,  clause,  part,  subdivision,
  paragraph  or  section,  or  any  of  the provisions of this article, is
  unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or inoperative, such determination
  shall not affect the validity or effect of the remaining  provisions  of
  this article.


ARTICLE 12-C
                        APARTMENT INFORMATION VENDORS
  Section 446-a. Definitions.
          446-b. License required.
          446-c. Contracts; fees; reporting procedures.
          446-d. Display of license and business sign.
          446-e. Revocation and suspension of licenses.
          446-f. Notice of hearing on complaints.
          446-g. Judicial review.
          446-h. Violations.
          446-i. Rules and regulations.
          446-j. Partial invalidity.


§  446-a.  Definitions.  As  used  in this article, unless the context
  otherwise requires: 1. "Person" means any natural  person,  corporation,
  limited liability company, partnership, firm, or association.
    2.  "Apartment information vendor" means any person who engages in the
  business of claiming, demanding,  charging,  receiving,  collecting,  or
  contracting  for the collection of, a fee from a customer for furnishing
  information concerning the location and availability of  real  property,
  including  apartment  housing,  which  may  be leased, rented, shared or
  sublet as  a  private  dwelling,  abode,  or  place  of  residence.  The
  definition  of  apartment  information vendor shall include an apartment
  sharing agent which means any person who, for a fee, arranges, conducts,
  coordinates, handles or causes  meetings  between  a  customer  and  the
  current  owner  or occupant of legally occupied real property, including
  apartment housing, who wishes to share that housing  with  one  or  more
  individuals  as  a private dwelling, abode or place of residence, but it
  shall not apply to any person who for another and for a fee,  commission
  or   other  valuable  consideration,  supervises,  organizes,  arranges,
  coordinates, handles or is otherwise in charge of or responsible for the
  relocation of  commercial  or  residential  tenants  from  buildings  or
  structures  that  are  to  be  demolished,  rehabilitated,  remodeled or
  otherwise structurally altered.
    3. "Advance fee" means any fee claimed, demanded, charged, received or
  collected from a customer before the customer has  leased  or  rented  a
  private  dwelling,  abode  or place of residence through the information
  provided by an apartment information vendor.


§  446-b. License required. 1. It is unlawful for any person to act or
  engage in the business as an apartment information vendor in this  state
  without  first having obtained a license from the secretary of state. No
  person shall be granted a license until he has established  that  he  is
  trustworthy and bears a reputation for good and fair dealing.
    2.  The  application  for such license shall be filed in the office of
  the secretary of state on such forms as the secretary may prescribe.
    3. When the apartment information vendor maintains more than one place
  of business, he shall apply for a supplemental license for  each  branch
  office  so  maintained.  Supplemental  licenses  shall  be conspicuously
  displayed in each branch office. The display of an  expired  license  by
  any  person,  firm,  partnership  or  corporation  is a violation of the
  provisions of this article.
    4. From and after the date when this subdivision  shall  take  effect,
  the  term  for  which  a  license shall be issued or reissued under this
  article shall be a period  of  one  year  beginning  the  first  day  of
  November in any year and ending the thirty-first day of October one year
  later. A license which takes effect on a day other than the first day of
  November   in  any  year  shall  extend  for  a  term  expiring  on  the
  thirty-first day of October following the  date  on  which  the  license
  takes effect.
    5.  Any license granted under the provisions hereof may be renewed for
  one year by the secretary upon application therefor by  the  holder,  in
  such  form  as  the  secretary may prescribe. The secretary may dispense
  with the requirement for the filing of such statements as was  contained
  in the original application for license.
    6. Every applicant for a license under the provisions of this section,
  shall establish and maintain a special interest bearing trust account in
  the minimum amount of five thousand dollars in a branch of a national or
  state  chartered  banking  institution having a place of business within
  the state, plus twenty-five hundred dollars for each additional licensed
  office, except that any applicant whose business is limited  exclusively
  to  acting  as an apartment sharing agent shall be required to establish
  and maintain an account of only twenty-five hundred dollars plus  twelve
  hundred  fifty  dollars  for each additional licensed office. No license
  shall be issued unless a copy of a certificate of  deposit  showing  the
  minimum  balance in said special interest bearing trust account has been
  filed with the secretary simultaneously with the filing of  the  license
  application.  Moneys  may  be withdrawn, from such account only upon the
  certification of the secretary.
    7. No license shall be granted to a person under the age  of  eighteen
  or  a corporation, limited liability company, partnership or association
  whose principal shareholder, member or partner is under such age.


§  446-c.  Contracts;  fees;  reporting procedures. 1. Every apartment
  information vendor licensed under this article shall  furnish  customers
  with  a  contract prepared on a form approved by the secretary of state.
  Such contract shall include in plain language form a  statement  setting
  forth   the   sources   of   information  concerning  the  location  and
  availability of real property, including apartment housing, which may be
  leased, rented, shared or sublet as a private dwelling, abode, or  place
  of residence.
    1-a.  Each  listing  of  real  property  furnished  by  the  apartment
  information vendor  shall  cite  the  source  of  information  for  each
  property  in plain language form, provided, however, that the failure to
  provide such information  shall  not  constitute  a  violation  of  this
  article  but shall be grounds for license suspension pursuant to section
  four hundred forty-six-e of this article.
    2. No  apartment  information  vendor  shall  claim,  demand,  charge,
  receive,  collect  or contract for an advance fee from a customer except
  as set forth in subdivision five of this section. In no event shall  the
  fee charged to the customer or legal occupant exceed one month's rent.
    3.  Notwithstanding  the above, an apartment information vendor may at
  any time accept a fee from the current legal occupant of  real  property
  including apartment housing available to share or sublet.
    4.  Each  apartment  information  vendor shall file a quarterly report
  with the secretary containing such  information  as  the  secretary  may
  require.
    5.  (a)  An  apartment  information  vendor  may  retain not more than
  fifteen dollars out of any advance fee for administrative services.  The
  balance of any advance fee shall be placed in an account similar to that
  required  by subdivision six of section four hundred forty-six-b of this
  article, except that it need not be interest  bearing  and  moneys  from
  such  account  may  be  withdrawn  as  provided in paragraph (b) of this
  subdivision. The balance of the advance fee shall  continue  to  be  the
  property of the person paying the advance fee and shall be held in trust
  by  the  apartment  information vendor. Such balance may be mingled with
  other moneys in such account and  any  interest  thereon  shall  be  the
  property  of the apartment information vendor.  Such vendor shall notify
  in writing each person paying an advance fee giving the name and address
  of the banking organization in which the advance fee is deposited.
    (b) If the customer  pays  an  advance  fee,  the  contract  with  the
  apartment  information vendor shall contain a provision stating that the
  customer may, under the  circumstances  set  forth  in  this  paragraph,
  recover  his  advance  fee  less  the amount deducted for administrative
  services. The vendor shall be entitled to his fee when  a  customer  has
  leased or rented a private dwelling, abode or place of residence through
  the  information provided by the vendor.  Within ten days of the receipt
  by the apartment information vendor of written notice stating  that  the
  customer  paying  an  advance  fee  has  not  leased or rented a private
  dwelling, abode or place of residence through the  information  supplied
  by  the  vendor  and  does not intend to rent any such private dwelling,
  abode or place of residence, the vendor shall refund  the  advance  fee,
  less  the  fee for administrative services, to such customer. The vendor
  shall also be required to refund any  portion  of  the  advance  fee  in
  excess  of  one  month's  rent  to a customer who has leased or rented a
  private dwelling, abode or place of residence  through  the  information
  supplied by the vendor.
    (c) Notwithstanding anything in this subdivision five to the contrary,
  if  the services to be rendered by the apartment information vendor to a
  particular customer relate exclusively to acting as an apartment sharing
  agent, the vendor may retain the full advance fee, whether  or  not  the
  customer leases or rents a private dwelling, abode or place of residence
  through  the  information  provided by the vendor, and the provisions of
  paragraphs (a) and (b) of this subdivision five shall not be  applicable
  to such transaction.


§  446-d.  Display  of  license and business sign. 1. A license issued
  hereunder shall be conspicuously displayed at all times by the apartment
  information vendor at the place of business for which it was granted.
    2. The secretary shall be notified in writing at his or her office  in
  Albany  of  any change of a licensee's business address or name, and the
  secretary shall issue a license for the unexpired term, upon  return  of
  the  original  license.  A licensee who fails to notify the secretary of
  any change in business address or name within ten days shall forfeit his
  or her license.


§ 446-e. Revocation and suspension of licenses. 1. Powers of secretary
  of  state.  The secretary may revoke or suspend a license, impose a fine
  not to exceed five thousand dollars, order refunds to aggrieved parties,
  and issue reprimands, upon a finding that a licensee has violated any of
  the provisions of this article, or has made a material  misstatement  in
  his  application  for  such  license, or has been found to be engaged in
  fraudulent  practices,  dishonest  or  misleading  advertising,  or  has
  demonstrated  untrustworthiness  or  incompetency to act as an apartment
  information vendor.
    2. Determination of secretary. In the event that the  secretary  shall
  revoke  or suspend any such license, impose a fine or issue a reprimand,
  his determination shall be in writing and signed by  him.  The  original
  thereof  shall be filed in the office of the secretary and copies served
  personally or by registered mail upon the  licensee,  addressed  to  his
  principal  place  of  business.    All licenses shall be returned to the
  secretary within five days after receipt  of  notice  of  revocation  or
  suspension,  or  in  lieu  thereof,  the licensee shall make and file an
  affidavit in form prescribed by the secretary showing that  the  failure
  to return such license is due either to loss or destruction thereof.
    3.  The display of a license after revocation or suspension thereof is
  a violation of this article.


§  446-f. Notice of hearing on complaints. The secretary shall, before
  denying an  application  for,  revoking  or  suspending  a  license,  or
  imposing  any  fine or issuing a reprimand to the licensee, and at least
  ten days prior to the date set for the hearing, notify  in  writing  the
  applicant,  or  licensee  of  any  charges  made  and  shall afford said
  applicant or licensee an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel
  in reference thereto. Such written notice  may  be  served  by  delivery
  thereof personally to the applicant or licensee, or by certified mail to
  the  last  known business address of such licensee, or in the case of an
  applicant to the business  address  indicated  on  the  application  for
  license.  The hearing on such charges shall be at such time and place as
  the secretary shall prescribe. The secretary, acting by such officer  or
  person  as  he  may designate, shall have the power to suspend a license
  pending a hearing and to subpoena and bring before the officer or person
  so designated any  person,  firm  or  corporation  in  this  state,  and
  administer  an  oath  to  and  take testimony of any person or cause his
  deposition to be taken. A subpoena issued under this  section  shall  be
  regulated by the civil practice law and rules.


§  446-g.  Judicial review. The action of the secretary in granting or
  refusing to grant or to  renew  a  license  under  this  article  or  in
  revoking  or suspending such a license or imposing any fine or issuing a
  reprimand to the licensee or refusing to do any of the  foregoing  shall
  be  subject  to  review  by  a  proceeding brought under and pursuant to
  article seventy-eight of  the  civil  practice  law  and  rules  at  the
  instance  of  the  applicant  for such license or holder of a license so
  revoked, suspended, fined or reprimanded or the person aggrieved.


§  446-h. Violations. 1. Misdemeanors. Any person, firm or corporation
  violating  any  provision  of  this  article  shall  be  guilty   of   a
  misdemeanor.  The  commission of a single act prohibited by this article
  shall constitute a violation hereof.
    2. Criminal actions for violations of this article shall be prosecuted
  by the attorney general, or his deputy, in the name of the people of the
  state, and in any such prosecution the attorney general, or his  deputy,
  shall  exercise  all  the  powers  and  perform all the duties which the
  district attorney would  otherwise  be  authorized  to  exercise  or  to
  perform  therein.  The  attorney  general shall, upon a conviction for a
  violation of  any  provision  of  this  article,  and  within  ten  days
  thereafter,  make  and file with the secretary a detailed report showing
  the date of such conviction, the name of the person  convicted  and  the
  exact nature of the charge.
    3.  In  case  the  offender  shall  have  received any sum of money as
  compensation or profit by or in consequence  of  his  violation  of  any
  provision  of  this article, he shall also be liable to a penalty of not
  less than the amount of the  sum  of  money  received  by  him  as  such
  compensation  or profit and not more than four times the sum so received
  by him, as may be determined by the court, which penalty may be sued for
  and recovered by any person aggrieved and for his use  and  benefit,  in
  any court of competent jurisdiction.
    4.  The  secretary  shall  have the power to enforce the provisions of
  this article and upon complaint of any person, or on his own initiative,
  to investigate the business, business practices and business methods  of
  any  person, firm or corporation applying for or holding a license as an
  apartment information vendor, if in his opinion  such  investigation  is
  warranted.  Each such applicant or licensee shall be obliged, on request
  of  the  secretary  to  supply  such  information  as  may  be  required
  concerning  his or its business, business practices or business methods,
  or proposed business practices or methods.
    5. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article and  in
  making  investigations  relating  to  any violation thereof, and for the
  purpose of investigating the character, competency and integrity of  the
  applicants  or licensees hereunder, and for the purpose of investigating
  the business, business practices and business methods of  any  applicant
  or  licensee,  or of the officers or agents thereof, the secretary shall
  have the power to subpoena and bring before the  officer  or  person  so
  designated  any  person  in this state and require the production of any
  books or papers which he deems relevant to the inquiry and administer an
  oath to and take testimony of any person or cause his deposition  to  be
  taken  with  the  same  fees  and  mileage  and  in  the  same manner as
  prescribed by law for civil cases in a court of record, except that  any
  applicant  or licensee or officer or agent thereof shall not be entitled
  to such fees and/or mileage.  Any person, duly subpoenaed, who fails  to
  obey  such  subpoena  without  reasonable  cause  or  without such cause
  refuses to be examined or to answer any legal or pertinent  question  as
  to  the character or qualification of such applicant or licensee or such
  applicant's or licensee's business, business practices  and  methods  or
  such violations, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
    6.  In  any  criminal proceeding before any court, magistrate or grand
  jury, or upon any investigation before the department  of  state  for  a
  violation  of  any  of  the  provisions  of  this  section,  the  court,
  magistrate or grand jury, or the secretary of state, his deputy or other
  officer conducting the investigation, may confer immunity, in accordance
  with the provisions of the criminal procedure law.


§  446-i.  Rules  and  regulations.  The secretary may enact rules and
  regulations necessary to accomplish the purposes of this article.


§ 446-j. Partial invalidity. If any provision of this article shall be
  held unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective, in whole or in part, such
  determination  shall  not be deemed to affect, impair, or invalidate the
  remainder thereof.


ARTICLE 13
                               CEMETERY LANDS
  Section 450. Lands  used  for  cemetery  purposes  not  to  be  sold  or
                 mortgaged.
          451. Acquisition of  lands  for  cemetery  purposes  in  certain
                 Counties.


§  450.  Lands used for cemetery purposes not to be sold or mortgaged.
  1.  No land actually used and occupied for cemetery  purposes  shall  be
  sold under execution or for any tax or assessment, nor shall such tax or
  assessment  be  levied,  collected or imposed, nor shall it be lawful to
  mortgage such land, or to apply it in payment of debts, so  long  as  it
  shall  continue  to  be used for such cemetery purposes, except cemetery
  lands in which interments have not been made may be sold under execution
  to satisfy a valid judgment of a court of record. Whenever any such land
  shall cease to be used for  cemetery  purposes,  any  judgment,  tax  or
  assessment which, but for the provisions of this section would have been
  levied,  collected  or imposed, shall thereupon forthwith, together with
  interest thereon, become and be a lien and charge upon  such  land,  and
  collectible  out  of  the same. The provisions of this section shall not
  apply to any lands held by the city  of  Rochester  or  to  lands  lying
  within the village of Lewiston, Niagara county.
    2.  The  provisions of subdivision one of this section shall not apply
  to real property taxes and assessments levied or  imposed  on  the  land
  described  in  subdivision one of this section on or after the first day
  of January, nineteen hundred eighty-two, but the provisions  of  section
  four  hundred forty-six of the real property tax law shall be applicable
  to such land on or after such date.


§ 451. Acquisition of lands for cemetery purposes in certain counties.
  It  shall  not  be  lawful  for  any  person  to take by deed, devise or
  otherwise or set apart or use any land or ground in any of the  counties
  of  Westchester,  Kings,  Queens,  Richmond,  Bronx, New York, Rockland,
  Suffolk, Putnam or Nassau, for cemetery purposes without the consent  of
  the  board of supervisors for such county, or of the city council of the
  city of New York, as the case may be, first had  and  obtained  in  like
  manner  as  provided  for  in  the membership corporations law; and said
  board of supervisors or city council in granting such consent may  annex
  thereto  such conditions, regulations and restrictions as such board may
  deem the public health or the public good require.


ARTICLE 14
        PROPERTY CONDITION DISCLOSURE IN THE SALE OF RESIDENTIAL REAL
                                  PROPERTY
  Section   460. Short title.
       461. Definitions.
       462. Property condition disclosure statement.
       463. Exemptions.
       464. Revision.
       465. Liability.
       466. Duty of an agent.
       467. Liability.


§  460.  Short  title. This article shall be known and may be cited as
  the "property condition disclosure act".


§ 461. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall
  have the following meanings:
    1. "Agent" means a person who is licensed as a real estate broker or a
  real estate salesperson pursuant to section four hundred forty-a of this
  chapter and is acting in a fiduciary capacity.
    2. "Binding contract of sale" means a real estate purchase contract or
  offer that would, upon signing by the seller and subject to satisfaction
  of any contingencies, require the buyer to accept a transfer of title.
    3. "Knowledge" means only actual knowledge of a defect or condition on
  the part of the seller of residential real property.
    4. "Real estate purchase contract" means any of the following:
    (a) a contract which provides for the purchase and sale or exchange of
  residential real property;
    (b) a lease with an option to purchase residential real property;
    (c) a lease-with-obligation-to-purchase agreement for residential real
  property; or
    (d) an installment land sale contract for residential real property.
    5.  "Residential  real property" means real property improved by a one
  to four family dwelling used or occupied, or  intended  to  be  used  or
  occupied,  wholly  or  partly,  as  the home or residence of one or more
  persons, but shall not refer to (a) unimproved real property upon  which
  such  dwellings  are  to  be  constructed,  or  (b) condominium units or
  cooperative apartments, or (c) property  in  a  homeowners'  association
  that is not owned in fee simple by the seller.
    6.   "Transfer  of  title"  means  delivery  of  a  properly  executed
  instrument conveying  title  to  residential  real  property  and  shall
  include  delivery  of a real estate purchase contract that is a lease or
  installment land sale contract.


§  462.  Property  condition  disclosure  statement.  1.  Except as is
  provided in section four hundred  sixty-three  of  this  article,  every
  seller  of  residential real property pursuant to a real estate purchase
  contract  shall  complete  and  sign  a  property  condition  disclosure
  statement as prescribed by subdivision two of this section and cause it,
  or  a copy thereof, to be delivered to a buyer or buyer's agent prior to
  the signing by the buyer of a binding contract of sale. A  copy  of  the
  property  condition  disclosure  statement  containing the signatures of
  both seller and buyer shall be attached  to  the  real  estate  purchase
  contract. Nothing contained in this article or this disclosure statement
  is  intended  to prevent the parties to a contract of sale from entering
  into agreements of any kind or  nature  with  respect  to  the  physical
  condition  of  the  property  to be sold, including, but not limited to,
  agreements for the sale of real property "as is".
    * 2. The following shall be the disclosure form:
 
                   PROPERTY CONDITION DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
 
  NAME OF SELLER OR SELLERS:
 
  PROPERTY ADDRESS:
 
    THE  PROPERTY  CONDITION  DISCLOSURE  ACT  REQUIRES  THE   SELLER   OF
  RESIDENTIAL  REAL  PROPERTY TO CAUSE THIS DISCLOSURE STATEMENT OR A COPY
  THEREOF TO BE DELIVERED TO A BUYER OR BUYER'S AGENT PRIOR TO THE SIGNING
  BY THE BUYER OF A BINDING CONTRACT OF SALE.
    PURPOSE OF STATEMENT: THIS IS A STATEMENT OF  CERTAIN  CONDITIONS  AND
  INFORMATION CONCERNING THE PROPERTY KNOWN TO THE SELLER. THIS DISCLOSURE
  STATEMENT  IS  NOT  A WARRANTY OF ANY KIND BY THE SELLER OR BY ANY AGENT
  REPRESENTING THE SELLER IN THIS TRANSACTION. IT IS NOT A SUBSTITUTE  FOR
  ANY  INSPECTIONS  OR  TESTS AND THE BUYER IS ENCOURAGED TO OBTAIN HIS OR
  HER OWN INDEPENDENT PROFESSIONAL INSPECTIONS AND ENVIRONMENTAL TESTS AND
  ALSO IS ENCOURAGED TO CHECK PUBLIC RECORDS PERTAINING TO THE PROPERTY.
    A KNOWINGLY FALSE OR INCOMPLETE STATEMENT BY THE SELLER ON  THIS  FORM
  MAY  SUBJECT  THE  SELLER  TO  CLAIMS BY THE BUYER PRIOR TO OR AFTER THE
  TRANSFER OF TITLE.
    "RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY" MEANS REAL PROPERTY IMPROVED BY A  ONE  TO
  FOUR  FAMILY  DWELLING  USED  OR  OCCUPIED,  OR  INTENDED  TO BE USED OR
  OCCUPIED, WHOLLY OR PARTLY, AS THE HOME OR  RESIDENCE  OF  ONE  OR  MORE
  PERSONS,  BUT SHALL NOT REFER TO (A) UNIMPROVED REAL PROPERTY UPON WHICH
  SUCH DWELLINGS ARE  TO  BE  CONSTRUCTED  OR  (B)  CONDOMINIUM  UNITS  OR
  COOPERATIVE APARTMENTS OR (C) PROPERTY ON A HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION THAT
  IS NOT OWNED IN FEE SIMPLE BY THE SELLER.
 
  INSTRUCTIONS TO THE SELLER:
    (a) ANSWER ALL QUESTIONS BASED UPON YOUR ACTUAL KNOWLEDGE.
    (b) ATTACH ADDITIONAL PAGES WITH YOUR SIGNATURE IF ADDITIONAL SPACE IS
  REQUIRED.
    (c) COMPLETE THIS FORM YOURSELF.
    (d)  IF  SOME  ITEMS  DO  NOT  APPLY  TO  YOUR  PROPERTY,  CHECK  "NA"
  (NON-APPLICABLE). IF YOU DO NOT KNOW THE ANSWER CHECK "UNKN" (UNKNOWN).
 
    SELLER'S STATEMENT: THE SELLER MAKES THE FOLLOWING REPRESENTATIONS  TO
  THE  BUYER  BASED  UPON  THE  SELLER'S  ACTUAL  KNOWLEDGE AT THE TIME OF
  SIGNING THIS DOCUMENT. THE SELLER AUTHORIZES HIS OR HER AGENT,  IF  ANY,
  TO  PROVIDE  A  COPY  OF  THIS  STATEMENT  TO A PROSPECTIVE BUYER OF THE
  RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY. THE FOLLOWING ARE REPRESENTATIONS MADE BY THE
  SELLER AND ARE NOT THE REPRESENTATIONS OF THE SELLER'S AGENT.
  GENERAL INFORMATION
    1. HOW LONG HAVE YOU OWNED THE PROPERTY?
    2. HOW LONG HAVE YOU OCCUPIED THE PROPERTY?
    3. WHAT  IS  THE AGE OF THE STRUCTURE OR STRUCTURES? NOTE TO BUYER--IF
       THE  STRUCTURE  WAS  BUILT  BEFORE  1978  YOU  ARE  ENCOURAGED   TO
       INVESTIGATE FOR THE PRESENCE OF LEAD BASED PAINT.
    4. DOES  ANYBODY  OTHER  THAN  YOURSELF  HAVE A LEASE, EASEMENT OR ANY
       OTHER RIGHT TO USE OR OCCUPY ANY PART OF YOUR PROPERTY  OTHER  THAN
       THOSE  STATED  IN DOCUMENTS AVAILABLE IN THE PUBLIC RECORD, SUCH AS
       RIGHTS TO USE A ROAD OR PATH OR CUT TREES OR CROPS? YES NO UNKN NA
    5. DOES ANYBODY ELSE CLAIM TO OWN ANY PART OF YOUR PROPERTY?   YES  NO
       UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    6. HAS ANYONE DENIED YOU ACCESS TO THE PROPERTY OR MADE A FORMAL LEGAL
       CLAIM  CHALLENGING  YOUR  TITLE TO THE PROPERTY? YES NO UNKN NA (IF
       YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    7. ARE THERE ANY FEATURES  OF  THE  PROPERTY  SHARED  IN  COMMON  WITH
       ADJOINING  LAND  OWNERS OR A HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION, SUCH AS WALLS,
       FENCES OR DRIVEWAYS? YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES DESCRIBE BELOW)
    8. ARE  THERE  ANY  ELECTRIC  OR  GAS  UTILITY  SURCHARGES  FOR   LINE
       EXTENSIONS,  SPECIAL  ASSESSMENTS OR HOMEOWNER OR OTHER ASSOCIATION
       FEES THAT APPLY TO THE PROPERTY? YES NO UNKN NA  (IF  YES,  EXPLAIN
       BELOW)
    9. ARE  THERE  CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY RELATED TO THE PROPERTY?  YES
       NO UNKN NA (IF NO, EXPLAIN BELOW)
 
  ENVIRONMENTAL
    NOTE TO SELLER  -  IN  THIS  SECTION,  YOU  WILL  BE  ASKED  QUESTIONS
  REGARDING  PETROLEUM PRODUCTS AND HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC SUBSTANCES THAT YOU
  KNOW TO HAVE BEEN SPILLED, LEAKED OR  OTHERWISE  BEEN  RELEASED  ON  THE
  PROPERTY  OR  FROM  THE  PROPERTY  ONTO  ANY  OTHER  PROPERTY. PETROLEUM
  PRODUCTS MAY INCLUDE, BUT ARE NOT LIMITED  TO,  GASOLINE,  DIESEL  FUEL,
  HOME  HEATING  FUEL,  AND  LUBRICANTS. HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC SUBSTANCES ARE
  PRODUCTS OR OTHER MATERIAL THAT COULD POSE SHORT- OR LONG-TERM DANGER TO
  PERSONAL HEALTH OR THE ENVIRONMENT IF THEY ARE NOT PROPERLY DISPOSED OF,
  APPLIED OR STORED.  THESE INCLUDE, BUT ARE NOT LIMITED TO,  FERTILIZERS,
  PESTICIDES  AND  INSECTICIDES,  PAINT  INCLUDING  PAINT THINNER, VARNISH
  REMOVER AND WOOD PRESERVATIVES,  TREATED  WOOD,  CONSTRUCTION  MATERIALS
  SUCH  AS  ASPHALT AND ROOFING MATERIALS, ANTIFREEZE AND OTHER AUTOMOTIVE
  PRODUCTS, BATTERIES, CLEANING SOLVENTS INCLUDING SEPTIC  TANK  CLEANERS,
  HOUSEHOLD CLEANERS, POOL CHEMICALS, PRODUCTS CONTAINING MERCURY AND LEAD
  AND INDOOR MOLD.
 
    NOTE  TO  BUYER  -  IF  CONTAMINATION  OF THIS PROPERTY FROM PETROLEUM
  PRODUCTS AND/OR HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC SUBSTANCES IS A CONCERN TO  YOU,  YOU
  ARE URGED TO CONSIDER SOIL AND GROUNDWATER TESTING OF THIS PROPERTY.
 
    10. IS  ANY  OR  ALL  OF  THE  PROPERTY LOCATED IN A FEDERAL EMERGENCY
        MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) DESIGNATED FLOODPLAIN?  YES  NO  UNKN  NA
        (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    11. IS ANY OR ALL OF THE PROPERTY LOCATED WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY  IN  THE
        SPECIAL   FLOOD   HAZARD   AREA  ("SFHA";  "100-YEAR  FLOODPLAIN")
        ACCORDING TO THE FEDERAL EMERGENCY  MANAGEMENT  AGENCY'S  (FEMA'S)
        CURRENT  FLOOD  INSURANCE RATE MAPS FOR YOUR AREA?  YES NO UNKN NA
        (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    12. IS ANY OR ALL OF THE PROPERTY LOCATED WHOLLY  OR  PARTIALLY  IN  A
        MODERATE  RISK FLOOD HAZARD AREA ("500-YEAR FLOODPLAIN") ACCORDING
        TO FEMA'S CURRENT FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS FOR YOUR AREA?  YES NO
        UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    13. IS THE PROPERTY SUBJECT TO ANY REQUIREMENT UNDER  FEDERAL  LAW  TO
        OBTAIN  AND  MAINTAIN FLOOD INSURANCE ON THE PROPERTY? YES NO UNKN
        NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
        HOMES  IN  THE  SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA, ALSO KNOWN AS HIGH RISK
        FLOOD ZONES, ON FEMA'S FLOOD INSURANCE RATE  MAPS  WITH  MORTGAGES
        FROM FEDERALLY REGULATED OR INSURED LENDERS ARE REQUIRED TO OBTAIN
        AND  MAINTAIN  FLOOD  INSURANCE.  EVEN  WHEN  NOT  REQUIRED,  FEMA
        ENCOURAGES HOMEOWNERS IN HIGH RISK, MODERATE RISK,  AND  LOW  RISK
        FLOOD   ZONES   TO   PURCHASE  FLOOD  INSURANCE  THAT  COVERS  THE
        STRUCTURE(S) AND THE PERSONAL PROPERTY  WITHIN  THE  STRUCTURE(S).
        ALSO  NOTE THAT HOMES IN COASTAL AREAS MAY BE SUBJECT TO INCREASED
        RISK OF FLOODING OVER TIME DUE TO PROJECTED  SEA  LEVEL  RISE  AND
        INCREASED EXTREME STORMS CAUSED BY CLIMATE CHANGE WHICH MAY NOT BE
        REFLECTED IN CURRENT FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS.
    14. HAVE  YOU  EVER  RECEIVED  ASSISTANCE,  OR  ARE  YOU  AWARE OF ANY
        PREVIOUS OWNERS RECEIVING ASSISTANCE, FROM THE  FEDERAL  EMERGENCY
        MANAGEMENT  AGENCY  (FEMA), THE U.S. SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
        (SBA), OR ANY OTHER FEDERAL DISASTER FLOOD  ASSISTANCE  FOR  FLOOD
        DAMAGE TO THE PROPERTY?  YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
        FOR PROPERTIES THAT HAVE RECEIVED FEDERAL DISASTER ASSISTANCE, THE
        REQUIREMENT  TO  OBTAIN  FLOOD INSURANCE PASSES DOWN TO ALL FUTURE
        OWNERS.  FAILURE TO OBTAIN AND MAINTAIN FLOOD INSURANCE CAN RESULT
        IN AN INDIVIDUAL BEING INELIGIBLE FOR FUTURE ASSISTANCE.
    15. IS THERE FLOOD INSURANCE ON THE PROPERTY? YES NO UNKN NA (IF  YES,
        ATTACH A COPY OF THE POLICY)
        A  STANDARD  HOMEOWNER'S INSURANCE POLICY TYPICALLY DOES NOT COVER
        FLOOD DAMAGE.  YOU  ARE  ENCOURAGED  TO  EXAMINE  YOUR  POLICY  TO
        DETERMINE WHETHER YOU ARE COVERED.
    16.  IS THERE A FEMA ELEVATION CERTIFICATE AVAILABLE FOR THE PROPERTY?
        YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, ATTACH A COPY OF THE CERTIFICATE)
        AN ELEVATION CERTIFICATE IS A FEMA FORM, COMPLETED BY  A  LICENSED
        SURVEYOR OR ENGINEER. THE FORM PROVIDES CRITICAL INFORMATION ABOUT
        THE  FLOOD  RISK  OF  THE  PROPERTY AND IS USED BY FLOOD INSURANCE
        PROVIDERS UNDER THE NATIONAL FLOOD  INSURANCE  PROGRAM  (NFIP)  TO
        HELP  DETERMINE  THE  APPROPRIATE  FLOOD  INSURANCE RATING FOR THE
        PROPERTY. A BUYER MAY BE ABLE TO  USE  THE  ELEVATION  CERTIFICATE
        FROM A PREVIOUS OWNER FOR THEIR FLOOD INSURANCE POLICY.
    17. HAVE  YOU EVER FILED A CLAIM FOR FLOOD DAMAGE TO THE PROPERTY WITH
        ANY INSURANCE PROVIDER, INCLUDING  THE  NATIONAL  FLOOD  INSURANCE
        PROGRAM (NFIP)? YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    18. IS  ANY  OR  ALL  OF THE PROPERTY LOCATED IN A DESIGNATED WETLAND?
        YES  NO  UNKN  NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    19. IS THE PROPERTY LOCATED IN AN AGRICULTURAL  DISTRICT?    YES    NO
        UNKN  NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    19-a. HAS  THE  PROPERTY  BEEN  TESTED FOR INDOOR MOLD?  YES  NO  UNKN
        (IF YES, ATTACH A COPY OF THE REPORT)
    20. WAS THE PROPERTY EVER THE SITE OF A LANDFILL?  YES  NO   UNKN   NA
        (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    21. ARE  THERE  OR  HAVE  THERE  EVER BEEN FUEL STORAGE TANKS ABOVE OR
        BELOW THE GROUND ON THE PROPERTY?  YES  NO  UNKN  NA  IF YES,  ARE
        THEY CURRENTLY IN USE? YES NO UNKN NA LOCATION(S) ARE THEY LEAKING
        OR HAVE THEY EVER LEAKED? YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    22. IS  THERE ASBESTOS IN THE STRUCTURE? YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, STATE
        LOCATION OR LOCATIONS BELOW)
    23. IS LEAD PLUMBING PRESENT? YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES,  STATE  LOCATION
        OR LOCATIONS BELOW)
    24. HAS  A RADON TEST BEEN DONE? YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, ATTACH A COPY
        OF THE REPORT)
    25. HAS MOTOR FUEL, MOTOR OIL, HOME HEATING FUEL, LUBRICATING  OIL  OR
        ANY  OTHER  PETROLEUM  PRODUCT,  METHANE  GAS, OR ANY HAZARDOUS OR
        TOXIC SUBSTANCE SPILLED, LEAKED OR OTHERWISE BEEN RELEASED ON  THE
        PROPERTY  OR  FROM  THE  PROPERTY ONTO ANY OTHER PROPERTY?  YES NO
        UNKN NA (IF YES, DESCRIBE BELOW)
    26. HAS THE PROPERTY BEEN TESTED FOR THE PRESENCE OF MOTOR FUEL, MOTOR
        OIL,  HOME  HEATING  FUEL, LUBRICATING OIL, OR ANY OTHER PETROLEUM
        PRODUCT, METHANE GAS, OR ANY HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC SUBSTANCE? YES  NO
        UNKN NA (IF YES, ATTACH REPORT(S))
 
  STRUCTURAL
    27. IS  THERE  ANY ROT OR WATER DAMAGE TO THE STRUCTURE OR STRUCTURES?
        YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    28. IS THERE ANY FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE TO THE STRUCTURE OR  STRUCTURES?
        YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    29. IS  THERE  ANY  TERMITE,  INSECT,  RODENT  OR  PEST INFESTATION OR
        DAMAGE?  YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    30. HAS THE PROPERTY BEEN TESTED FOR TERMITE, INSECT, RODENT  OR  PEST
        INFESTATION  OR  DAMAGE?  YES  NO  UNKN  NA (IF YES, PLEASE ATTACH
        REPORT(S))
    31. WHAT IS THE TYPE OF ROOF/ROOF COVERING (SLATE,  ASPHALT,  OTHER.)?
        ANY  KNOWN  MATERIAL  DEFECTS?  HOW  OLD  IS  THE ROOF? IS THERE A
        TRANSFERABLE WARRANTY ON THE ROOF IN EFFECT NOW? YES  NO  UNKN  NA
        (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    32. ARE  THERE  ANY  KNOWN  MATERIAL  DEFECTS  IN ANY OF THE FOLLOWING
        STRUCTURAL SYSTEMS: FOOTINGS, BEAMS, GIRDERS, LINTELS, COLUMNS  OR
        PARTITIONS? YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
 
  MECHANICAL SYSTEMS & SERVICES
    33. WHAT  IS  THE WATER SOURCE (CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY - WELL, PRIVATE,
        MUNICIPAL, OTHER)? IF MUNICIPAL, IS IT METERED? YES NO UNKN NA
    34. HAS THE WATER QUALITY AND/OR FLOW RATE BEEN TESTED? YES NO UNKN NA
        (IF YES, DESCRIBE BELOW)
    35. WHAT IS THE TYPE OF SEWAGE SYSTEM (CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY -  PUBLIC
        SEWER, PRIVATE SEWER, SEPTIC OR CESSPOOL)?  IF SEPTIC OR CESSPOOL,
        AGE?  ________  DATE  LAST  PUMPED? ________ FREQUENCY OF PUMPING?
        ________ ANY KNOWN MATERIAL DEFECTS?   YES NO  UNKN  NA  (IF  YES,
        EXPLAIN BELOW)
    36. WHO  IS  YOUR  ELECTRIC  SERVICE  PROVIDER?  ________  WHAT IS THE
        AMPERAGE?  ________  DOES  IT  HAVE  CIRCUIT  BREAKERS  OR  FUSES?
        ________  PRIVATE  OR  PUBLIC  POLES?  ________ ANY KNOWN MATERIAL
        DEFECTS? YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    37. ARE THERE ANY FLOODING, DRAINAGE OR GRADING PROBLEMS THAT RESULTED
        IN STANDING WATER ON ANY PORTION OF THE PROPERTY? YES NO  UNKN  NA
        (IF YES, STATE LOCATIONS AND EXPLAIN BELOW)
    38. HAS  THE  STRUCTURE(S) EXPERIENCED ANY WATER PENETRATION OR DAMAGE
        DUE TO SEEPAGE OR A  NATURAL  FLOOD  EVENT,  SUCH  AS  FROM  HEAVY
        RAINFALL, COASTAL STORM SURGE, TIDAL INUNDATION OR RIVER OVERFLOW?
        YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
 
  ARE  THERE  ANY  KNOWN MATERIAL DEFECTS IN ANY OF THE FOLLOWING (IF YES,
  EXPLAIN BELOW. USE ADDITIONAL SHEETS IF NECESSARY.):
 
    39.       PLUMBING SYSTEM?            YES      NO      UNKN        NA
    40.       SECURITY SYSTEM?            YES      NO      UNKN        NA
    41.       CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR?   YES      NO      UNKN        NA
    42.       SMOKE DETECTOR?             YES      NO      UNKN        NA
    43.       FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM?      YES      NO      UNKN        NA
    44.       SUMP PUMP?                  YES      NO      UNKN        NA
    45.       FOUNDATION/SLAB?            YES      NO      UNKN        NA
    46.       INTERIOR WALLS/CEILINGS?    YES      NO      UNKN        NA
    47.       EXTERIOR WALLS OR SIDING?   YES      NO      UNKN        NA
    48.       FLOORS?                     YES      NO      UNKN        NA
    49.       CHIMNEY/FIREPLACE OR STOVE? YES      NO      UNKN        NA
    50.       PATIO/DECK?                 YES      NO      UNKN        NA
    51.       DRIVEWAY?                   YES      NO      UNKN        NA
    52.       AIR CONDITIONER?            YES      NO      UNKN        NA
    53.       HEATING SYSTEM?             YES      NO      UNKN        NA
    54.       HOT WATER HEATER?           YES      NO      UNKN        NA
    55.       THE PROPERTY IS LOCATED IN THE
              FOLLOWING SCHOOL DISTRICT                    UNKN
 
    NOTE:  BUYER  IS  ENCOURAGED  TO  CHECK  PUBLIC RECORDS CONCERNING THE
  PROPERTY  (E.G.  TAX  RECORDS  AND  WETLAND  AND  FEMA'S  CURRENT  FLOOD
  INSURANCE RATE MAPS AND ELEVATION CERTIFICATES)
    THE  SELLER SHOULD USE THIS AREA TO FURTHER EXPLAIN ANY ITEM ABOVE. IF
  NECESSARY, ATTACH ADDITIONAL PAGES  AND  INDICATE  HERE  THE  NUMBER  OF
  ADDITIONAL PAGES ATTACHED.
 
    ______________________________________________________________________
    ______________________________________________________________________
    ______________________________________________________________________
    ______________________________________________________________________
 
    SELLER'S  CERTIFICATION: SELLER CERTIFIES THAT THE INFORMATION IN THIS
  PROPERTY CONDITION DISCLOSURE STATEMENT IS  TRUE  AND  COMPLETE  TO  THE
  SELLER'S  ACTUAL  KNOWLEDGE  AS  OF  THE DATE SIGNED BY THE SELLER. IF A
  SELLER OF RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY  ACQUIRES  KNOWLEDGE  WHICH  RENDERS
  MATERIALLY INACCURATE A PROPERTY CONDITION DISCLOSURE STATEMENT PROVIDED
  PREVIOUSLY,  THE  SELLER  SHALL  DELIVER  A  REVISED  PROPERTY CONDITION
  DISCLOSURE STATEMENT TO THE BUYER AS SOON AS PRACTICABLE. IN  NO  EVENT,
  HOWEVER,  SHALL  A  SELLER  BE  REQUIRED  TO  PROVIDE A REVISED PROPERTY
  CONDITION DISCLOSURE STATEMENT AFTER THE  TRANSFER  OF  TITLE  FROM  THE
  SELLER TO THE BUYER OR OCCUPANCY BY THE BUYER, WHICHEVER IS EARLIER.
 
    SELLER _______________________________________  DATE ________________
    SELLER _______________________________________  DATE ________________
 
    BUYER'S  ACKNOWLEDGMENT:  BUYER ACKNOWLEDGES RECEIPT OF A COPY OF THIS
  STATEMENT AND BUYER UNDERSTANDS THAT THIS INFORMATION IS A STATEMENT  OF
  CERTAIN  CONDITIONS AND INFORMATION CONCERNING THE PROPERTY KNOWN TO THE
  SELLER. IT IS NOT A WARRANTY OF ANY KIND BY THE SELLER OR SELLER'S AGENT
  AND IS NOT A SUBSTITUTE FOR ANY HOME, PEST, RADON OR  OTHER  INSPECTIONS
  OR TESTING OF THE PROPERTY OR INSPECTION OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS.
 
    BUYER _______________________________________   DATE ________________
    BUYER _______________________________________   DATE ________________
 
    * NB Effective until March 20, 2024
    * 2. The following shall be the disclosure form:
                   PROPERTY CONDITION DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
  NAME OF SELLER OR SELLERS:
  PROPERTY ADDRESS:
    THE   PROPERTY   CONDITION  DISCLOSURE  ACT  REQUIRES  THE  SELLER  OF
  RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY TO CAUSE THIS DISCLOSURE STATEMENT OR  A  COPY
  THEREOF TO BE DELIVERED TO A BUYER OR BUYER'S AGENT PRIOR TO THE SIGNING
  BY THE BUYER OF A BINDING CONTRACT OF SALE.
    PURPOSE  OF  STATEMENT:  THIS IS A STATEMENT OF CERTAIN CONDITIONS AND
  INFORMATION CONCERNING THE PROPERTY KNOWN TO THE SELLER. THIS DISCLOSURE
  STATEMENT IS NOT A WARRANTY OF ANY KIND BY THE SELLER OR  BY  ANY  AGENT
  REPRESENTING  THE SELLER IN THIS TRANSACTION. IT IS NOT A SUBSTITUTE FOR
  ANY INSPECTIONS OR TESTS AND THE BUYER IS ENCOURAGED TO  OBTAIN  HIS  OR
  HER OWN INDEPENDENT PROFESSIONAL INSPECTIONS AND ENVIRONMENTAL TESTS AND
  ALSO IS ENCOURAGED TO CHECK PUBLIC RECORDS PERTAINING TO THE PROPERTY.
    A  KNOWINGLY  FALSE OR INCOMPLETE STATEMENT BY THE SELLER ON THIS FORM
  MAY SUBJECT THE SELLER TO CLAIMS BY THE BUYER  PRIOR  TO  OR  AFTER  THE
  TRANSFER OF TITLE.
    "RESIDENTIAL  REAL  PROPERTY" MEANS REAL PROPERTY IMPROVED BY A ONE TO
  FOUR FAMILY DWELLING USED  OR  OCCUPIED,  OR  INTENDED  TO  BE  USED  OR
  OCCUPIED,  WHOLLY  OR  PARTLY,  AS  THE HOME OR RESIDENCE OF ONE OR MORE
  PERSONS, BUT SHALL NOT REFER TO (A) UNIMPROVED REAL PROPERTY UPON  WHICH
  SUCH  DWELLINGS  ARE  TO  BE  CONSTRUCTED  OR  (B)  CONDOMINIUM UNITS OR
  COOPERATIVE APARTMENTS OR (C) PROPERTY ON A HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION THAT
  IS NOT OWNED IN FEE SIMPLE BY THE SELLER.
 
  INSTRUCTIONS TO THE SELLER:
    (a) ANSWER ALL QUESTIONS BASED UPON YOUR ACTUAL KNOWLEDGE.
    (b) ATTACH ADDITIONAL PAGES WITH YOUR SIGNATURE IF ADDITIONAL SPACE IS
  REQUIRED.
    (c) COMPLETE THIS FORM YOURSELF.
    (d)  IF  SOME  ITEMS  DO  NOT  APPLY  TO  YOUR  PROPERTY,  CHECK  "NA"
  (NON-APPLICABLE). IF YOU DO NOT KNOW THE ANSWER CHECK "UNKN" (UNKNOWN).
 
    SELLER'S  STATEMENT: THE SELLER MAKES THE FOLLOWING REPRESENTATIONS TO
  THE BUYER BASED UPON THE  SELLER'S  ACTUAL  KNOWLEDGE  AT  THE  TIME  OF
  SIGNING  THIS  DOCUMENT. THE SELLER AUTHORIZES HIS OR HER AGENT, IF ANY,
  TO PROVIDE A COPY OF THIS  STATEMENT  TO  A  PROSPECTIVE  BUYER  OF  THE
  RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY. THE FOLLOWING ARE REPRESENTATIONS MADE BY THE
  SELLER AND ARE NOT THE REPRESENTATIONS OF THE SELLER'S AGENT.
  GENERAL INFORMATION
    1. HOW LONG HAVE YOU OWNED THE PROPERTY?
    2. HOW LONG HAVE YOU OCCUPIED THE PROPERTY?
    3. WHAT  IS  THE AGE OF THE STRUCTURE OR STRUCTURES? NOTE TO BUYER--IF
       THE  STRUCTURE  WAS  BUILT  BEFORE  1978  YOU  ARE  ENCOURAGED   TO
       INVESTIGATE FOR THE PRESENCE OF LEAD BASED PAINT.
    4. DOES  ANYBODY  OTHER  THAN  YOURSELF  HAVE A LEASE, EASEMENT OR ANY
       OTHER RIGHT TO USE OR OCCUPY ANY PART OF YOUR PROPERTY  OTHER  THAN
       THOSE  STATED  IN DOCUMENTS AVAILABLE IN THE PUBLIC RECORD, SUCH AS
       RIGHTS TO USE A ROAD OR PATH OR CUT TREES OR CROPS. YES NO UNKN NA
    5. DOES ANYBODY ELSE CLAIM TO OWN ANY PART OF YOUR PROPERTY?   YES  NO
       UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    6. HAS ANYONE DENIED YOU ACCESS TO THE PROPERTY OR MADE A FORMAL LEGAL
       CLAIM  CHALLENGING  YOUR  TITLE TO THE PROPERTY? YES NO UNKN NA (IF
       YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    7. ARE THERE ANY FEATURES  OF  THE  PROPERTY  SHARED  IN  COMMON  WITH
       ADJOINING  LAND  OWNERS OR A HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION, SUCH AS WALLS,
       FENCES OR DRIVEWAYS? YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES DESCRIBE BELOW)
    8. ARE  THERE  ANY  ELECTRIC  OR  GAS  UTILITY  SURCHARGES  FOR   LINE
       EXTENSIONS,  SPECIAL  ASSESSMENTS OR HOMEOWNER OR OTHER ASSOCIATION
       FEES THAT APPLY TO THE PROPERTY? YES NO UNKN NA  (IF  YES,  EXPLAIN
       BELOW)
    9. ARE  THERE  CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY RELATED TO THE PROPERTY?  YES
       NO UNKN NA (IF NO, EXPLAIN BELOW)
  ENVIRONMENTAL
    NOTE  TO  SELLER  -  IN  THIS  SECTION,  YOU  WILL  BE ASKED QUESTIONS
  REGARDING PETROLEUM PRODUCTS AND HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC SUBSTANCES THAT  YOU
  KNOW  TO  HAVE  BEEN  SPILLED,  LEAKED OR OTHERWISE BEEN RELEASED ON THE
  PROPERTY OR  FROM  THE  PROPERTY  ONTO  ANY  OTHER  PROPERTY.  PETROLEUM
  PRODUCTS  MAY  INCLUDE,  BUT  ARE NOT LIMITED TO, GASOLINE, DIESEL FUEL,
  HOME HEATING FUEL, AND LUBRICANTS. HAZARDOUS  OR  TOXIC  SUBSTANCES  ARE
  PRODUCTS OR OTHER MATERIAL THAT COULD POSE SHORT- OR LONG-TERM DANGER TO
  PERSONAL HEALTH OR THE ENVIRONMENT IF THEY ARE NOT PROPERLY DISPOSED OF,
  APPLIED  OR  STORED. THESE INCLUDE, BUT ARE NOT LIMITED TO, FERTILIZERS,
  PESTICIDES AND INSECTICIDES,  PAINT  INCLUDING  PAINT  THINNER,  VARNISH
  REMOVER  AND  WOOD  PRESERVATIVES,  TREATED WOOD, CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
  SUCH AS ASPHALT AND ROOFING MATERIALS, ANTIFREEZE AND  OTHER  AUTOMOTIVE
  PRODUCTS,  BATTERIES,  CLEANING SOLVENTS INCLUDING SEPTIC TANK CLEANERS,
  HOUSEHOLD CLEANERS, POOL CHEMICALS, PRODUCTS CONTAINING MERCURY AND LEAD
  AND INDOOR MOLD.
 
    NOTE TO BUYER - IF  CONTAMINATION  OF  THIS  PROPERTY  FROM  PETROLEUM
  PRODUCTS  AND/OR  HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC SUBSTANCES IS A CONCERN TO YOU, YOU
  ARE URGED TO CONSIDER SOIL AND GROUNDWATER TESTING OF THIS PROPERTY.
 
    10. IS ANY OR ALL OF THE  PROPERTY  LOCATED  IN  A  FEDERAL  EMERGENCY
        MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) DESIGNATED FLOODPLAIN?  YES  NO  UNKN  NA
        (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    11. IS  ANY  OR ALL OF THE PROPERTY LOCATED WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY IN THE
        SPECIAL  FLOOD  HAZARD  AREA   ("SFHA";   "100-YEAR   FLOODPLAIN")
        ACCORDING  TO  THE  FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY'S (FEMA'S)
        CURRENT FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS FOR YOUR AREA? YES  NO  UNKN  NA
        (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    12. IS  ANY  OR  ALL  OF THE PROPERTY LOCATED WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY IN A
        MODERATE RISK FLOOD HAZARD AREA ("500-YEAR FLOODPLAIN")  ACCORDING
        TO  FEMA'S CURRENT FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS FOR YOUR AREA? YES NO
        UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    13. IS THE PROPERTY SUBJECT TO ANY REQUIREMENT UNDER  FEDERAL  LAW  TO
        OBTAIN  AND  MAINTAIN FLOOD INSURANCE ON THE PROPERTY? YES NO UNKN
        NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
        HOMES IN THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA, ALSO KNOWN  AS  HIGH  RISK
        FLOOD  ZONES,  ON  FEMA'S FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS WITH MORTGAGES
        FROM FEDERALLY REGULATED OR INSURED LENDERS ARE REQUIRED TO OBTAIN
        AND  MAINTAIN  FLOOD  INSURANCE.  EVEN  WHEN  NOT  REQUIRED,  FEMA
        ENCOURAGES  HOMEOWNERS  IN  HIGH RISK, MODERATE RISK, AND LOW RISK
        FLOOD  ZONES  TO  PURCHASE  FLOOD  INSURANCE   THAT   COVERS   THE
        STRUCTURE(S)  AND  THE  PERSONAL PROPERTY WITHIN THE STRUCTURE(S).
        ALSO NOTE THAT HOMES IN COASTAL AREAS MAY BE SUBJECT TO  INCREASED
        RISK  OF  FLOODING  OVER  TIME DUE TO PROJECTED SEA LEVEL RISE AND
        INCREASED EXTREME STORMS CAUSED BY CLIMATE CHANGE WHICH MAY NOT BE
        REFLECTED IN CURRENT FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS.
    14. HAVE YOU EVER  RECEIVED  ASSISTANCE,  OR  ARE  YOU  AWARE  OF  ANY
        PREVIOUS  OWNERS  RECEIVING ASSISTANCE, FROM THE FEDERAL EMERGENCY
        MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA), THE U.S. SMALL  BUSINESS  ADMINISTRATION
        (SBA),  OR  ANY  OTHER FEDERAL DISASTER FLOOD ASSISTANCE FOR FLOOD
        DAMAGE TO THE PROPERTY? YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW) FOR
        PROPERTIES THAT HAVE RECEIVED  FEDERAL  DISASTER  ASSISTANCE,  THE
        REQUIREMENT  TO  OBTAIN  FLOOD INSURANCE PASSES DOWN TO ALL FUTURE
        OWNERS. FAILURE TO OBTAIN AND MAINTAIN FLOOD INSURANCE CAN  RESULT
        IN AN INDIVIDUAL BEING INELIGIBLE FOR FUTURE ASSISTANCE.
    15. IS  THERE FLOOD INSURANCE ON THE PROPERTY? YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES,
        ATTACH A COPY OF THE POLICY)
        A STANDARD HOMEOWNER'S INSURANCE POLICY TYPICALLY DOES  NOT  COVER
        FLOOD  DAMAGE.  YOU  ARE  ENCOURAGED  TO  EXAMINE  YOUR  POLICY TO
        DETERMINE WHETHER YOU ARE COVERED.
    16. IS  THERE A FEMA ELEVATION CERTIFICATE AVAILABLE FOR THE PROPERTY?
        YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, ATTACH A COPY OF THE CERTIFICATE)
        AN ELEVATION CERTIFICATE IS A FEMA FORM, COMPLETED BY  A  LICENSED
        SURVEYOR OR ENGINEER. THE FORM PROVIDES CRITICAL INFORMATION ABOUT
        THE  FLOOD  RISK  OF  THE  PROPERTY AND IS USED BY FLOOD INSURANCE
        PROVIDERS UNDER THE NATIONAL FLOOD  INSURANCE  PROGRAM  (NFIP)  TO
        HELP  DETERMINE  THE  APPROPRIATE  FLOOD  INSURANCE RATING FOR THE
        PROPERTY. A BUYER MAY BE ABLE TO  USE  THE  ELEVATION  CERTIFICATE
        FROM A PREVIOUS OWNER FOR THEIR FLOOD INSURANCE POLICY.
    17.  HAVE YOU EVER FILED A CLAIM FOR FLOOD DAMAGE TO THE PROPERTY WITH
          ANY INSURANCE PROVIDER, INCLUDING THE NATIONAL  FLOOD  INSURANCE
          PROGRAM (NFIP)? YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    18. IS  ANY  OR  ALL  OF THE PROPERTY LOCATED IN A DESIGNATED WETLAND?
          YES  NO  UNKN  NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    19. IS THE PROPERTY LOCATED IN AN AGRICULTURAL  DISTRICT?    YES    NO
          UNKN  NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    20. WAS  THE  PROPERTY EVER THE SITE OF A LANDFILL?  YES  NO  UNKN  NA
          (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    21. ARE THERE OR HAVE THERE EVER BEEN  FUEL  STORAGE  TANKS  ABOVE  OR
          BELOW  THE  GROUND  ON THE PROPERTY?  YES  NO  UNKN  NA  IF YES,
          ARE THEY CURRENTLY IN USE? YES NO UNKN NA LOCATION(S)  ARE  THEY
          LEAKING  OR  HAVE  THEY  EVER  LEAKED?  YES  NO UNKN NA (IF YES,
          EXPLAIN BELOW)
    22. IS THERE ASBESTOS IN THE STRUCTURE? YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES,  STATE
          LOCATION OR LOCATIONS BELOW)
    23. IS  LEAD  PLUMBING PRESENT? YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, STATE LOCATION
          OR LOCATIONS BELOW)
    24. HAS A RADON TEST BEEN DONE? YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, ATTACH A  COPY
          OF THE REPORT)
    25. HAS  MOTOR  FUEL, MOTOR OIL, HOME HEATING FUEL, LUBRICATING OIL OR
          ANY OTHER PETROLEUM PRODUCT, METHANE GAS, OR  ANY  HAZARDOUS  OR
          TOXIC  SUBSTANCE  SPILLED,  LEAKED OR OTHERWISE BEEN RELEASED ON
          THE PROPERTY OR FROM THE PROPERTY ONTO ANY OTHER PROPERTY?   YES
          NO UNKN NA (IF YES, DESCRIBE BELOW)
    26. HAS THE PROPERTY BEEN TESTED FOR THE PRESENCE OF MOTOR FUEL, MOTOR
          OIL,  HOME HEATING FUEL, LUBRICATING OIL, OR ANY OTHER PETROLEUM
          PRODUCT, METHANE GAS, OR ANY HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC  SUBSTANCE?  YES
          NO UNKN NA (IF YES, ATTACH REPORT(S))
    27. HAS THE PROPERTY BEEN TESTED FOR INDOOR MOLD? YES NO UNKN (IF YES,
          ATTACH A COPY OF THE REPORT)
 
  STRUCTURAL
    28. IS  THERE  ANY ROT OR WATER DAMAGE TO THE STRUCTURE OR STRUCTURES?
        YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    29. IS THERE ANY FIRE OR SMOKE DAMAGE TO THE STRUCTURE OR  STRUCTURES?
        YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    30. IS  THERE  ANY  TERMITE,  INSECT,  RODENT  OR  PEST INFESTATION OR
        DAMAGE?  YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    31. HAS THE PROPERTY BEEN TESTED FOR TERMITE, INSECT, RODENT  OR  PEST
        INFESTATION  OR  DAMAGE?  YES  NO  UNKN  NA (IF YES, PLEASE ATTACH
        REPORT(S))
    32. WHAT IS THE TYPE OF ROOF/ROOF COVERING (SLATE,  ASPHALT,  OTHER.)?
        ANY  KNOWN  MATERIAL  DEFECTS?  HOW  OLD  IS  THE ROOF? IS THERE A
        TRANSFERABLE WARRANTY ON THE ROOF IN EFFECT NOW? YES  NO  UNKN  NA
        (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    33. ARE  THERE  ANY  KNOWN  MATERIAL  DEFECTS  IN ANY OF THE FOLLOWING
        STRUCTURAL SYSTEMS: FOOTINGS, BEAMS, GIRDERS, LINTELS, COLUMNS  OR
        PARTITIONS? YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
 
  MECHANICAL SYSTEMS & SERVICES
    34. WHAT  IS  THE WATER SOURCE (CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY - WELL, PRIVATE,
        MUNICIPAL, OTHER)? IF MUNICIPAL, IS IT METERED? YES NO UNKN NA
    35. HAS THE WATER QUALITY AND/OR FLOW RATE BEEN TESTED? YES NO UNKN NA
        (IF YES, DESCRIBE BELOW)
    36. WHAT IS THE TYPE OF SEWAGE SYSTEM (CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY -  PUBLIC
        SEWER, PRIVATE SEWER, SEPTIC OR CESSPOOL)?  IF SEPTIC OR CESSPOOL,
        AGE?  ________  DATE  LAST  PUMPED? ________ FREQUENCY OF PUMPING?
        ________ ANY KNOWN MATERIAL DEFECTS?   YES NO  UNKN  NA  (IF  YES,
        EXPLAIN BELOW)
    37. WHO  IS  YOUR  ELECTRIC  SERVICE  PROVIDER?  ________  WHAT IS THE
        AMPERAGE?  ________  DOES  IT  HAVE  CIRCUIT  BREAKERS  OR  FUSES?
        ________  PRIVATE  OR  PUBLIC  POLES?  ________ ANY KNOWN MATERIAL
        DEFECTS? YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    38. ARE THERE ANY FLOODING, DRAINAGE OR GRADING PROBLEMS THAT RESULTED
        IN STANDING WATER ON ANY PORTION OF THE PROPERTY? YES NO  UNKN  NA
        (IF YES, STATE LOCATIONS AND EXPLAIN BELOW)
    39.  HAS THE STRUCTURE(S) EXPERIENCED ANY WATER  PENETRATION OR DAMAGE
        DUE TO SEEPAGE OR A  NATURAL  FLOOD  EVENT,  SUCH  AS  FROM  HEAVY
        RAINFALL, COASTAL STORM SURGE, TIDAL INUNDATION OR RIVER OVERFLOW?
        YES NO UNKN NA (IF YES, EXPLAIN BELOW)
    ARE  THERE ANY KNOWN MATERIAL DEFECTS IN ANY OF THE FOLLOWING (IF YES,
        EXPLAIN BELOW. USE ADDITIONAL SHEETS IF NECESSARY.):
    40. PLUMBING SYSTEM?            YES NO UNKN NA
    41. SECURITY SYSTEM?            YES NO UNKN NA
    42. CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR?   YES NO UNKN NA
    43. SMOKE DETECTOR?             YES NO UNKN NA
    44. FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM?      YES NO UNKN NA
    45. SUMP PUMP?                  YES NO UNKN NA
    46. FOUNDATION/SLAB?            YES NO UNKN NA
    47. INTERIOR WALLS/CEILINGS?    YES NO UNKN NA
    48. EXTERIOR WALLS OR SIDING?   YES NO UNKN NA
    49. FLOORS?                     YES NO UNKN NA
    50. CHIMNEY/FIREPLACE OR STOVE? YES NO UNKN NA
    51. PATIO/DECK?                 YES NO UNKN NA
    52. DRIVEWAY?                   YES NO UNKN NA
    53. AIR CONDITIONER?            YES NO UNKN NA
    54. HEATING SYSTEM?             YES NO UNKN NA
    55. HOT WATER HEATER?           YES NO UNKN NA
    56. THE PROPERTY IS LOCATED IN THE FOLLOWING SCHOOL DISTRICT      UNKN
       NOTE:  BUYER  IS  ENCOURAGED TO CHECK PUBLIC RECORDS CONCERNING THE
       PROPERTY (E.G. TAX RECORDS AND WETLAND  AND  FEMA'S  CURRENT  FLOOD
       INSURANCE RATE MAPS AND ELEVATION CERTIFICATES)
    THE  SELLER SHOULD USE THIS AREA TO FURTHER EXPLAIN ANY ITEM ABOVE. IF
  NECESSARY, ATTACH ADDITIONAL PAGES  AND  INDICATE  HERE  THE  NUMBER  OF
  ADDITIONAL PAGES ATTACHED.
    ______________________________________________________________
    ______________________________________________________________
    ______________________________________________________________
    ______________________________________________________________
    SELLER'S  CERTIFICATION: SELLER CERTIFIES THAT THE INFORMATION IN THIS
  PROPERTY CONDITION DISCLOSURE STATEMENT IS  TRUE  AND  COMPLETE  TO  THE
  SELLER'S  ACTUAL  KNOWLEDGE  AS  OF  THE DATE SIGNED BY THE SELLER. IF A
  SELLER OF RESIDENTIAL REAL PROPERTY  ACQUIRES  KNOWLEDGE  WHICH  RENDERS
  MATERIALLY INACCURATE A PROPERTY CONDITION DISCLOSURE STATEMENT PROVIDED
  PREVIOUSLY,  THE  SELLER  SHALL  DELIVER  A  REVISED  PROPERTY CONDITION
  DISCLOSURE STATEMENT TO THE BUYER AS SOON AS PRACTICABLE. IN  NO  EVENT,
  HOWEVER,  SHALL  A  SELLER  BE  REQUIRED  TO  PROVIDE A REVISED PROPERTY
  CONDITION DISCLOSURE STATEMENT AFTER THE  TRANSFER  OF  TITLE  FROM  THE
  SELLER TO THE BUYER OR OCCUPANCY BY THE BUYER, WHICHEVER IS EARLIER.
    SELLER__________ DATE___________
    SELLER__________ DATE___________
    BUYER'S  ACKNOWLEDGMENT:  BUYER ACKNOWLEDGES RECEIPT OF A COPY OF THIS
  STATEMENT AND BUYER UNDERSTANDS THAT THIS INFORMATION IS A STATEMENT  OF
  CERTAIN  CONDITIONS AND INFORMATION CONCERNING THE PROPERTY KNOWN TO THE
  SELLER. IT IS NOT A WARRANTY OF ANY KIND BY THE SELLER OR SELLER'S AGENT
  AND IS NOT A SUBSTITUTE FOR ANY HOME, PEST, RADON OR  OTHER  INSPECTIONS
  OR TESTING OF THE PROPERTY OR INSPECTION OF THE PUBLIC RECORDS.
    BUYER__________ DATE__________
    BUYER__________ DATE _________
    * NB Effective March 20, 2024
    3.  Nothing  in  this  article  shall require a seller to undertake or
  provide for any investigation or inspection of his  or  her  residential
  real property or to check any public records.


§ 463. Exemptions. A property condition disclosure statement shall not
  be  required  in  connection  with  any  of  the  following transfers of
  residential real property:
    1. A transfer pursuant to a court order, including,  but  not  limited
  to,  a  transfer order by a probate court during the administration of a
  decedent's estate, a  transfer  pursuant  to  a  writ  of  execution,  a
  transfer  by a trustee in bankruptcy or debtor-in-possession, a transfer
  as a result of the exercise of  the  power  of  eminent  domain,  and  a
  transfer  that  results  from  a  decree  for  specific performance of a
  contract or other agreement between two or more persons;
    2. A transfer to mortgagee or an  affiliate  or  agent  thereof  by  a
  mortgagor  by  deed  in  lieu  of  foreclosure or in satisfaction of the
  mortgage debt;
    3. A transfer to a beneficiary of a deed of trust;
    4. A transfer pursuant to a foreclosure sale that follows a default in
  the satisfaction of an obligation that is secured by a mortgage;
    5. A transfer by a sale under a power of sale that follows  a  default
  in the satisfaction of an obligation that is secured by a mortgage;
    6. A transfer by a mortgagee, or a beneficiary under a mortgage, or an
  affiliate  or  agent  thereof,  who  has  acquired  the residential real
  property at a sale under a mortgage or who has acquired the  residential
  real property by a deed in lieu of foreclosure;
    7.  A transfer by a fiduciary in the course of the administration of a
  descendent's estate, a guardianship, a conservatorship, or a trust;
    8. A transfer from one co-owner to one or more other co-owners;
    9. A transfer made to the  transferor's  spouse  or  to  one  or  more
  persons in the lineal consanguinity of one or more of the transferors;
    10.  A  transfer  between  spouses  or former spouses as a result of a
  decree  of  divorce,  dissolution  of  marriage,  annulment,  or   legal
  separation  or  as a result of property settlement, agreement incidental
  to a decree of divorce, dissolution  of  marriage,  annulment  or  legal
  separation;
    11.  A  transfer  to or from the state, a political subdivision of the
  state, or another governmental entity;
    12. A  transfer  that  involves  newly  constructed  residential  real
  property that previously had not been inhabited;
    13. A transfer by a sheriff; or
    14. A transfer pursuant to a partition action.


§  464.  Revision.  If  a seller of residential real property acquires
  knowledge which  renders  materially  inaccurate  a  property  condition
  disclosure  statement  provided  previously,  the seller shall deliver a
  revised property condition disclosure statement to the buyer as soon  as
  practicable. In no event, however, shall a seller be required to provide
  a  revised property condition disclosure statement after the transfer of
  title from the seller to the buyer or occupancy by the buyer,  whichever
  is earlier.


* §  465.  Remedy.  1. In the event a seller fails to perform the duty
  prescribed in this article to deliver a disclosure  statement  prior  to
  the  signing by the buyer of a binding contract of sale, the buyer shall
  receive upon the transfer of title a  credit  of  five  hundred  dollars
  against the agreed upon purchase price of the residential real property.
    2.  Any  seller who provides a property condition disclosure statement
  or provides or fails to provide a revised property condition  disclosure
  statement  shall  be  liable  only  for a willful failure to perform the
  requirements of this article. For such a  willful  failure,  the  seller
  shall be liable for the actual damages suffered by the buyer in addition
  to any other existing equitable or statutory remedy.
    * NB Effective until March 20, 2024
    * §  465.  Liability.  1.  Nothing  contained in this article shall be
  construed as limiting any existing legal cause of action  or  remedy  at
  law, in statute or in equity.
    2.  Any  seller who provides a property condition disclosure statement
  or provides or fails to provide a revised property condition  disclosure
  statement  shall  be  liable  only  for a willful failure to perform the
  requirements of this article. For such a  willful  failure,  the  seller
  shall be liable for the actual damages suffered by the buyer in addition
  to any other existing equitable or statutory remedy.
    * NB Effective March 20, 2024


ARTICLE 15
                        PROHIBITION AND DISCLOSURE OF
                      PRIVATE TRANSFER FEE OBLIGATIONS
  Section 470. Short title.
          471. Intent.
          472. Definitions.
          473. Prohibition.
          474. Liability for violation.
          475. Disclosure.
          476. Notice requirements for existing transfer fee obligations.


§  470.  Short  title. This article shall be known and may be cited as
  the "private transfer fee obligation act."


 §  471.  Intent.  The  legislature  finds and declares that the public
  policy of this state favors the marketability of real property  and  the
  transferability  of  interests in real property free of title defects or
  unreasonable restraints on alienation. The legislature further finds and
  declares that private  transfer  fee  obligations  violate  this  public
  policy  by  impairing  the  marketability  and  transferability  of real
  property and by constituting an  unreasonable  restraint  on  alienation
  regardless  of  the duration of the obligation to pay a private transfer
  fee, the amount of a private transfer fee, or the method  by  which  any
  private  transfer fee is created or imposed. Thus, the legislature finds
  and declares that a private transfer fee obligation shall not  run  with
  the  title  to  property or otherwise bind subsequent owners of property
  under any common law or equitable principle


§  472.  Definitions.  1. "Transfer" means the sale, gift, conveyance,
  assignment, inheritance, or other transfer of an ownership  interest  in
  real property located in this state.
    2.  "Private transfer fee" means a fee, charge or any portion thereof,
  required by a private transfer fee obligation and payable,  directly  or
  indirectly,  upon  the  transfer  of  an  interest  in real property, or
  payable for the right to make or accept  such  transfer,  regardless  of
  whether  the  fee  or  charge  is  a  fixed amount or is determined as a
  percentage of the value of the property, the purchase  price,  or  other
  consideration  given  for  the  transfer.  The following are not private
  transfer fees for purposes of this section:
    (a) Any consideration payable by the transferee to the transferor  for
  the   interest   in  real  property  being  transferred,  including  any
  subsequent additional consideration for  the  property  payable  by  the
  transferee  based upon any subsequent appreciation, development, or sale
  of the property, provided such additional consideration is payable on  a
  one-time  basis  only  and  the obligation to make such payment does not
  bind successors in title to the  property.  For  the  purposes  of  this
  subparagraph,  an  interest  in  real  property  may  include a separate
  mineral estate and its appurtenant surface access rights.
    (b) Any commission payable to a licensed real estate  broker  for  the
  transfer  of  real  property pursuant to an agreement between the broker
  and  the  transferor  or  the  transferee,  including   any   subsequent
  additional commission for that transfer payable by the transferor or the
  transferee  based upon any subsequent appreciation, development, or sale
  of the property.
    (c) Any interest,  charges,  fees,  or  other  amounts  payable  by  a
  borrower  to  a  lender pursuant to a loan secured by a mortgage against
  real property, including, but not limited to, any  fee  payable  to  the
  lender  for consenting to an assumption of the loan or a transfer of the
  real property subject to the mortgage, any fees or  charges  payable  to
  the  lender  for  estoppel  letters  or  certificates,  and  any  shared
  appreciation interest or profit participation or other consideration and
  payable to the lender in connection with the loan.
    (d) Any rent, reimbursement, charge, fee, or other amount payable by a
  lessee to a lessor under a lease, including, but not limited to, any fee
  payable to the lessor  for  consenting  to  an  assignment,  subletting,
  encumbrance, or transfer of the lease.
    (e)  Any  consideration payable to the holder of an option to purchase
  an interest in real property or the holder of a right of  first  refusal
  or  first  offer  to  purchase an interest in real property for waiving,
  releasing, or not exercising the option or right upon  the  transfer  of
  the property to another person.
    (f) Any tax, fee, charge, assessment, fine, or other amount payable to
  or imposed by a governmental authority.
    (g)  Any  fee,  charge, assessment, fine, or other amount payable to a
  homeowners', condominium, cooperative, mobile home, or property  owners'
  association  pursuant  to  a declaration, covenant, duly adopted by-law,
  proprietary lease or law applicable to such association, including,  but
  not  limited  to,  fees  or  charges  payable  for  estoppel  letters or
  certificates issued by the  association  or  its  authorized  agent.  No
  amount  shall be paid to a homeowners', condominium, cooperative, mobile
  home, or property owners' association for the payment to  the  declarant
  of  the condominium or the creator of a homeowners', cooperative, mobile
  home or property owners' association, or their designee.
    (h) Any fee, charge, assessment, dues, contribution, or  other  amount
  imposed  by  a  declaration  or  covenant  encumbering  a community, and
  payable to a not-for-profit or charitable organization for  the  purpose
  of   supporting   cultural,   educational,   charitable,   recreational,
  environmental, conservation, or other similar activities benefiting  the
  community that is subject to the declaration or covenant.
    (i)  Any  fee, charge, assessment, dues, contribution, or other amount
  pertaining to the purchase or transfer of a club membership relating  to
  real  property  owned  by the member, including, but not limited to, any
  amount determined by reference to the value, purchase  price,  or  other
  consideration given for the transfer of the real property.
    (j)  Any  fee,  charge  or  assessment  payable by the transferee to a
  corporation or company formed pursuant to the  private  housing  finance
  law.
    (k)  Any  fee,  charge  or  assessment  payable by the transferee to a
  corporation or company that has received a loan or subsidy  pursuant  to
  the private housing finance law or general municipal law.
    (l) Any amounts payable to a government entity.
    3. "Private transfer fee obligation" means an obligation arising under
  a  declaration  or covenant recorded against the title to real property,
  or under any other contractual agreement  or  promise,  whether  or  not
  recorded,  that requires or purports to require the payment of a private
  transfer  fee  to  the  declarant  or  other  person  specified  in  the
  declaration,  covenant  or agreement, or to their successors or assigns,
  upon a subsequent transfer of an interest in the real property.


§  473.  Prohibition.  A  private  transfer fee obligation recorded or
  entered into in this state on  or  after  the  effective  date  of  this
  section  does not run with the land and is not binding on or enforceable
  at law or in equity against any owner, purchaser, or  mortgagee  of  any
  interest  in  real  property as an equitable servitude or otherwise. Any
  private transfer fee obligation that is recorded or entered into in this
  state on or after the  effective  date  of  this  section  is  void  and
  unenforceable.  This  section  shall not apply to a private transfer fee
  obligation recorded or entered into prior to the effective date of  this
  section.  This  section  shall  not  be deemed to require that a private
  transfer fee obligation recorded, filed or entered into  in  this  state
  before  the  effective  date  of  this  section  is  presumed  valid and
  enforceable. It is the public policy  of  this  state  that  no  private
  transfer  fee  obligation shall be valid or enforceable whenever entered
  into, recorded or filed. Furthermore, this article  shall  not  validate
  any  private  transfer fee agreement that is contrary to the law of this
  State.


§  474. Liability for violation. Any person who records or enters into
  an agreement imposing a private transfer fee obligation in  their  favor
  or  in  the  favor  of  a  third  party after the effective date of this
  section shall be liable for (1) any and all damages resulting  from  the
  imposition of the transfer fee obligation on the transfer of an interest
  in  the  real property, including, without limitation, the amount of any
  transfer fee paid by a party to the transfer,  and  (2)  all  attorneys'
  fees,  expenses  and  costs  incurred  by  a  party  to  the transfer or
  mortgagee of the real property to recover any transfer fee  paid  or  in
  connection  with an action to quiet title. Where an agent acts on behalf
  of a principal to record or secure a private  transfer  fee  obligation,
  liability shall be assessed to the principal, rather than the agent.


§  475.  Disclosure.  Prior  to  the signing by the buyer of a binding
  contract for the sale of real property, the seller shall furnish to  any
  purchaser  a  written  statement disclosing the existence of any private
  transfer  fee  obligation.  This  written  statement  shall  include   a
  description  of  the  private  transfer  fee  obligation  and  include a
  statement  that  private  transfer  fee  obligations  are   subject   to
  prohibitions under this section.


§  476.  Notice requirements for existing transfer fee obligations. 1.
  For a private transfer fee obligation imposed  prior  to  the  effective
  date of this section, the receiver of the fee shall record, prior to six
  months  after  the  effective  date  of  this  section, against the real
  property subject to the  private  transfer  fee  obligation  a  separate
  document  in  the  county  records in which the real property is located
  that meets all of the following requirements:
    (a) The title of the document shall be "Notice of Private Transfer Fee
  Obligation" in at least 14-point boldface type;
    (b) The names of all current owners of the real  property  subject  to
  the transfer fee, and the legal description and assessor's parcel number
  for the affected real property.
    (c)  The amount, if the fee is a flat amount, or the percentage of the
  sales price constituting the cost of the transfer  fee,  or  such  other
  basis by which the transfer fee is to be calculated;
    (d)  If  the real property is residential property, actual dollar-cost
  examples of the transfer fee for a home  priced  at  two  hundred  fifty
  thousand  dollars  ($250,000), five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000),
  and seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000);
    (e) The date or circumstances under which  the  private  transfer  fee
  obligation expires, if any;
    (f)  The  purpose  for  which  the funds from the private transfer fee
  obligation will be used;
    (g) The name of the person or entity to which funds are to be paid and
  specific contact information regarding where the funds are to be sent;
    (h) The acknowledged signature of the receiver of the fee; and
    (i) The legal description of the real property burdened by the private
  transfer fee obligation.
    2. The person or entity to which the transfer fee is to  be  paid  may
  file  an  amendment to the notice of transfer fee containing new contact
  information, but such amendment must contain the  recording  information
  of  the notice of transfer fee which it amends and the legal description
  of the property burdened by the private transfer fee obligation.
    3. If the receiver of the fee fails to comply fully  with  subdivision
  one of this section, the transferor of any real property burdened by the
  private  transfer  fee obligation may proceed with the conveyance of any
  interest in the real property to any transferee and in so doing shall be
  deemed to have acted in good faith and  shall  not  be  subject  to  any
  obligations  under  the  private transfer fee obligation. In such event,
  the real property thereafter shall be conveyed free and  clear  of  such
  transfer fee and private transfer fee obligation.
    4.  Should the receiver of the fee fail to provide a written statement
  of the transfer fee payable within thirty days of the date of a  written
  request for the same sent to the address shown in the notice of transfer
  fee,  then  the transferor, on recording of the affidavit required under
  subdivision five of this section, may convey any interest  in  the  real
  property to any transferee without payment of the transfer fee and shall
  not be subject to any further obligations under the private transfer fee
  obligation.  In  such event the real property shall be conveyed free and
  clear of the transfer fee and private transfer fee obligation.
    5. An affidavit stating the facts enumerated under subdivision six  of
  this  section  shall  be  recorded in the office of the county clerk and
  recorder in the county in which the real property is situated  prior  to
  or simultaneously with a conveyance pursuant to subdivision four of this
  section   of   real  property  unburdened  by  a  private  transfer  fee
  obligation. An affidavit filed under this subdivision shall  state  that
  the affiant has actual knowledge of, and is competent to testify to, the
  facts  in  the  affidavit and shall include the legal description of the
  real property burdened by the private transfer fee obligation, the  name
  of  the  person  appearing  by  the  record to be the owner of such real
  property at the time of the signing of such affidavit, a  reference  (by
  recording  information)  to  the  instrument  of  record  containing the
  private transfer fee obligation and an acknowledgment that  the  affiant
  is testifying under penalty of perjury.
    6.  When  recorded,  an  affidavit as described in subdivision five of
  this section shall constitute conclusive evidence that:
    (a) A request for the written statement of the transfer fee payable in
  order to obtain a release of the fee imposed by the private transfer fee
  obligation was sent to the address shown in the notification; and
    (b) The entity listed on the notice of transfer fee failed to  provide
  the  written statement of the transfer fee payable within thirty days of
  the date of the notice sent to the address shown in the notification.