§  999-a.  Appendix to article twenty-six. The following provisions of
  the United States Internal Revenue Code of  1986,  with  all  amendments
  enacted  on  or before January first, two thousand fourteen, shall apply
  to the tax imposed by this article, to  the  extent  specified  in  this
  article.
    § 2031. Definition of Gross Estate.
    (a)  General.--The  value of the gross estate of the decedent shall be
  determined by including to the extent provided for  in  this  part,  the
  value  at  the  time  of  his  death  of all property, real or personal,
  tangible or intangible, wherever situated.
    (b) Valuation of unlisted stock and securities.--In the case of  stock
  and  securities  of a corporation the value of which, by reason of their
  not being listed on an exchange and by reason of the  absence  of  sales
  thereof,  cannot be determined with reference to bid and asked prices or
  with reference to sales prices, the value thereof shall be determined by
  taking into consideration, in addition to all other factors,  the  value
  of  stock or securities of corporations engaged in the same or a similar
  line of business which are listed on an exchange.
    (c)  Estate  tax  with  respect  to  land  subject  to   a   qualified
  conservation easement.--
    (1)  In  general.--If  the  executor  makes  the election described in
  paragraph (6), then, except as otherwise provided  in  this  subsection,
  there shall be excluded from the gross estate the lesser of--
    (A)  the  applicable  percentage  of  the  value  of land subject to a
  qualified conservation easement, reduced by the amount of any  deduction
  under section 2055(f) with respect to such land, or
    (B) the exclusion limitation.
    (2)  Applicable  percentage.--For  purposes of paragraph (1), the term
  "applicable percentage" means 40 percent reduced (but not below zero) by
  2 percentage points for each percentage point (or fraction  thereof)  by
  which  the  value of the qualified conservation easement is less than 30
  percent of the value of the land (determined without regard to the value
  of such easement and reduced by the value of  any  retained  development
  right (as defined in paragraph (5)). The values taken into account under
  the  preceding  sentence  shall  be  such  values  as of the date of the
  contribution referred to in paragraph (8)(B).
    (3)  Exclusion  limitation.--For  purposes  of  paragraph   (1),   the
  exclusion limitation is the limitation determined in accordance with the
  following table:
  In the case of estates of decedents dying The exclusion limitation
  during:                                   is:
  1998..................................... 100,000
  1999..................................... 200,000
  2000..................................... 300,000
  2001..................................... 400,000
  2002 or thereafter....................... 500,000
    (4) Treatment of certain indebtedness.--
    (A)  In  general.--The  exclusion  provided in paragraph (1) shall not
  apply to the extent that the land is debt-financed property.
    (B) Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph--
    (i) Debt-financed property.--The term "debt-financed  property"  means
  any  property with respect to which there is an acquisition indebtedness
  (as defined in clause (ii)) on the date of the decedent's death.
    (ii) Acquisition indebtedness.--The  term  "acquisition  indebtedness"
  means, with respect to debt-financed property, the unpaid amount of--
    (I) the indebtedness incurred by the donor in acquiring such property,


   (II) the indebtedness incurred before the acquisition of such property
  if  such  indebtedness  would  not  have  been  incurred  but  for  such
  acquisition,
    (III) the indebtedness incurred after the acquisition of such property
  if  such  indebtedness  would  not  have  been  incurred  but  for  such
  acquisition and the  incurrence  of  such  indebtedness  was  reasonably
  foreseeable at the time of such acquisition, and
    (IV)   the  extension,  renewal,  or  refinancing  of  an  acquisition
  indebtedness.
    (5) Treatment of retained development right.--
    (A) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to  the  value  of  any
  development right retained by the donor in the conveyance of a qualified
  conservation easement.
    (B)  Termination  of  retained  development right.--If every person in
  being who has an interest (whether or not in  possession)  in  the  land
  executes  an  agreement  to  extinguish  permanently  some or all of any
  development rights (as defined in  subparagraph  (D))  retained  by  the
  donor  on or before the date for filing the return of the tax imposed by
  section 2001, then any tax imposed by  section  2001  shall  be  reduced
  accordingly.    Such agreement shall be filed with the return of the tax
  imposed by section 2001. The agreement shall be  in  such  form  as  the
  Secretary shall prescribe.
    (C)  Additional tax.--Any failure to implement the agreement described
  in subparagraph (B) not later than the earlier of--
    (i) the date which is 2 years after the date of the decedent's  death,
  or
    (ii)  the  date  of  the  sale  of  such land subject to the qualified
  conservation easement,
    shall result in the imposition of an additional tax in the  amount  of
  the  tax  which  would  have been due on the retained development rights
  subject to such agreement. Such additional tax shall be due and  payable
  on the last day of the 6th month following such date.
    (D)  Development  right  defined.--For purposes of this paragraph, the
  term "development right" means any right to use the land subject to  the
  qualified  conservation easement in which such right is retained for any
  commercial purpose which is not subordinate to and  directly  supportive
  of  the  use  of  such  land  as a farm for farming purposes (within the
  meaning of section 2032A(e)(5)).
    (6) Election.--The election under this subsection shall be made on  or
  before  the due date (including extensions) for filing the return of tax
  imposed by section 2001 and shall  be  made  on  such  return.  Such  an
  election, once made, shall be irrevocable.
    (7)  Calculation  of  estate tax due.--An executor making the election
  described in paragraph (6) shall, for purposes of calculating the amount
  of tax imposed by section 2001, include the  value  of  any  development
  right  (as  defined  in  paragraph  (5))  retained  by  the donor in the
  conveyance of such qualified conservation easement. The  computation  of
  tax on any retained development right prescribed in this paragraph shall
  be  done  in  such  manner  and  on  such  forms  as the Secretary shall
  prescribe.
    (8) Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection--
    (A) Land subject to a qualified conservation easement.--The term "land
  subject to a qualified conservation easement" means land--
    (i) which is located in the United States or  any  possession  of  the
  United States,
    (ii)  which  was  owned  by the decedent or a member of the decedent's
  family at all times during the 3-year period ending on the date  of  the
  decedent's death, and


   (iii) with respect to which a qualified conservation easement has been
  made  by  an individual described in subparagraph (C), as of the date of
  the election described in paragraph (6).
    (B) Qualified conservation easement.--The term "qualified conservation
  easement"  means  a  qualified  conservation contribution (as defined in
  section 170(h)(1)) of a qualified real property interest (as defined  in
  section  170(h)(2)(C)),  except that clause (iv) of section 170(h)(4)(A)
  shall not apply, and  the  restriction  on  the  use  of  such  interest
  described  in  section  170(h)(2)(C) shall include a prohibition on more
  than a de minimis use for a commercial recreational activity.
    (C)  Individual  described.--An  individual  is  described   in   this
  subparagraph if such individual is--
    (i) the decedent,
    (ii) a member of the decedent's family,
    (iii) the executor of the decedent's estate, or
    (iv)  the  trustee of a trust the corpus of which includes the land to
  be subject to the qualified conservation easement.
    (D) Member of family.--The term  "member  of  the  decedent's  family"
  means  any  member  of the family (as defined in section 2032A(e)(2)) of
  the decedent.
    (9) Treatment of easements granted after death.--In any case in  which
  the  qualified  conservation  easement  is granted after the date of the
  decedent's death and on or before the due  date  (including  extensions)
  for  filing  the  return  of  tax imposed by section 2001, the deduction
  under section 2055(f) with respect to such easement shall be allowed  to
  the  estate but only if no charitable deduction is allowed under chapter
  1 to any person with respect to the grant of such easement.
    (10)  Application  of  this  section  to  interests  in  partnerships,
  corporations,  and trusts.--This section shall apply to an interest in a
  partnership, corporation, or trust if at least 30 percent of the  entity
  is  owned  (directly or indirectly) by the decedent, as determined under
  the rules described in section 2057(e)(3).
    (d) Cross reference.--
    For executor's right to be furnished on request a statement  regarding
  any valuation made by the Secretary within the gross estate, see section
  7517.
    § 2032. Alternate Valuation.
    (a)  General.--The value of the gross estate may be determined, if the
  executor so elects, by valuing all the property included  in  the  gross
  estate as follows:
    (1) In the case of property distributed, sold, exchanged, or otherwise
  disposed  of,  within  6 months after the decedent's death such property
  shall be valued as of the date of distribution, sale, exchange, or other
  disposition.
    (2) In the case of  property  not  distributed,  sold,  exchanged,  or
  otherwise  disposed  of, within 6 months after the decedent's death such
  property shall be valued as of the date 6 months  after  the  decedent's
  death.
    (3)  Any  interest  or  estate which is affected by mere lapse of time
  shall be included at its value as of the time of death (instead  of  the
  later  date)  with  adjustment for any difference in its value as of the
  later date not due to mere lapse of time.
    (b) Special rules.--No deduction under this chapter of any item  shall
  be  allowed  if  allowance  for  such  items  is  in effect given by the
  alternate valuation provided by this  section.  Wherever  in  any  other
  subsection  or section of this chapter reference is made to the value of
  property at the time of the decedent's death, such  reference  shall  be
  deemed  to  refer  to the value of such property used in determining the


 value of the gross estate. In case of an election made by  the  executor
  under this section, then--
    (1)  for  purposes  of  the charitable deduction under section 2055 or
  2106(a)(2), any bequest, legacy, devise, or transfer enumerated therein,
  and
    (2) for the purpose of the marital deduction under section  2056,  any
  interest in property passing to the surviving spouse,
    shall be valued as of the date of the decedent's death with adjustment
  for  any  difference  in  value  (not  due  to mere lapse of time or the
  occurrence or nonoccurrence of a contingency) of the property as of  the
  date  6  months after the decedent's death (substituting, in the case of
  property distributed by the executor or trustee, or sold, exchanged,  or
  otherwise disposed of, during such 6-month period, the date thereof).
    (c)  Election  must decrease gross estate and estate tax.--No election
  may be made under this section with respect to  an  estate  unless  such
  election will decrease--
    (1) the value of the gross estate, and
    (2)  the sum of the tax imposed by this chapter and the tax imposed by
  chapter 13 with respect to property includible in the  decedent's  gross
  estate (reduced by credits allowable against such taxes).
    (d) Election.--
    (1)  In  general.--The  election provided for in this section shall be
  made by the executor on the return of the tax imposed by  this  chapter.
  Such election, once made, shall be irrevocable.
    (2)  Exception.--No  election  may  be made under this section if such
  return is filed more than 1  year  after  the  time  prescribed  by  law
  (including extensions) for filing such return.
    § 2032A. Valuation of Certain Farm, Etc., Real Property.
    (a) Value based on use under which property qualifies.--
    (1) General rule.--If--
    (A)  the decedent was (at the time of his death) a citizen or resident
  of the United States, and
    (B) the executor elects the application of this section and files  the
  agreement referred to in subsection (d)(2),
    then,  for  purposes  of  this  chapter,  the  value of qualified real
  property shall be its value for the use under which it qualifies,  under
  subsection (b), as qualified real property.
    (2)  Limitation  on  aggregate  reduction  in  fair market value.--The
  aggregate decrease in the value of qualified real  property  taken  into
  account  for purposes of this chapter which results from the application
  of paragraph (1) with respect to any decedent shall not exceed $750,000.
    (3) Inflation adjustment.--In the case of estates of  decedents  dying
  in  a  calendar  year  after  1998,  the  $750,000  amount  contained in
  paragraph (2) shall be increased by an amount equal to--
    (A) $750,000, multiplied by
    (B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) for
  such calendar year by substituting "calendar year  1997"  for  "calendar
  year 1992" in subparagraph (B) thereof.
    If  any  amount  as  adjusted  under  the  preceding sentence is not a
  multiple of $10,000, such amount shall be rounded  to  the  next  lowest
  multiple of $10,000.
    (b) Qualified real property.--
    (1)  In  general.--For  purposes  of this section, the term "qualified
  real property" means real property located in the  United  States  which
  was acquired from or passed from the decedent to a qualified heir of the
  decedent  and which, on the date of the decedent's death, was being used
  for a qualified use by the  decedent  or  a  member  of  the  decedent's
  family, but only if--


   (A)  50  percent  or  more  of  the adjusted value of the gross estate
  consists of the adjusted value of real or personal property which--
    (i)  on  the  date  of  the  decedent's  death,  was  being used for a
  qualified use by the decedent or a member of the decedent's family, and
    (ii) was acquired from or passed from the decedent to a qualified heir
  of the decedent.
    (B) 25 percent or more of the  adjusted  value  of  the  gross  estate
  consists  of  the  adjusted  value  of  real  property  which  meets the
  requirements of subparagraphs (A)(ii) and (C),
    (C) during the 8-year period ending on  the  date  of  the  decedent's
  death there have been periods aggregating 5 years or more during which--
    (i)  such  real  property was owned by the decedent or a member of the
  decedent's family and used for a qualified use  by  the  decedent  or  a
  member of the decedent's family, and
    (ii)  there  was material participation by the decedent or a member of
  the decedent's family in the operation of the farm  or  other  business,
  and
    (D)  such  real property is designated in the agreement referred to in
  subsection (d)(2).
    (2) Qualified use.--For purposes of this section, the term  "qualified
  use" means the devotion of the property to any of the following:
    (A) use as a farm for farming purposes, or
    (B)  use  in  a  trade or business other than the trade or business of
  farming.
    (3) Adjusted value.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term "adjusted
  value" means--
    (A) in the case of the gross estate, the value of the gross estate for
  purposes of this chapter (determined without regard  to  this  section),
  reduced  by  any amounts allowable as a deduction under paragraph (4) of
  section 2053(a), or
    (B) in the case of any real or personal property, the  value  of  such
  property for purposes of this chapter (determined without regard to this
  section),  reduced by any amounts allowable as a deduction in respect of
  such property under paragraph (4) of section 2053(a).
    (4) Decedents who are retired or disabled.--
    (A) In  general.--If,  on  the  date  of  the  decedent's  death,  the
  requirements  of  paragraph  (1)(C)(ii) with respect to the decedent for
  any property are not met, and the decedent--
    (i) was receiving old-age  benefits  under  title  II  of  the  Social
  Security Act for a continuous period ending on such date, or
    (ii) was disabled for a continuous period ending on such date,
    then  paragraph  (1)(C)(ii)  shall  be  applied  with  respect to such
  property  by  substituting  "the  date  on  which  the  longer  of  such
  continuous  periods  began"  for  "the  date of the decedent's death" in
  paragraph (1)(C).
    (B) Disabled defined.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), an individual
  shall be disabled if such individual has a mental or physical impairment
  which renders him unable to materially participate in the  operation  of
  the farm or other business.
    (C)   Coordination   with   recapture.--For   purposes  of  subsection
  (c)(6)(B)(i), if the requirements of paragraph (1)(C)(ii) are  met  with
  respect to any decedent by reason of subparagraph (A), the period ending
  on  the  date  on  which  the continuous period taken into account under
  subparagraph (A) began shall be treated as the period immediately before
  the decedent's death.
    (5) Special rules for surviving spouses.--
    (A) In general.--If property is qualified real property  with  respect
  to  a  decedent (hereinafter in this paragraph referred to as the "first


 decedent") and such property was acquired from or passed from the  first
  decedent  to the surviving spouse of the first decedent, for purposes of
  applying this subsection and subsection (c) in the case of the estate of
  such  surviving  spouse, active management of the farm or other business
  by the surviving spouse shall be treated as  material  participation  by
  such surviving spouse in the operation of such farm or business.
    (B)   Special   rule.--For  the  purposes  of  subparagraph  (A),  the
  determination of  whether  property  is  qualified  real  property  with
  respect   to  the  first  decedent  shall  be  made  without  regard  to
  subparagraph (D) of paragraph (1)  and  without  regard  to  whether  an
  election under this section was made.
    (C)  Coordination  with  paragraph (4).--In any case in which to do so
  will enable the requirements of paragraph  (1)(C)(ii)  to  be  met  with
  respect  to  the  surviving  spouse,  this subsection and subsection (c)
  shall be applied by taking into account  any  application  of  paragraph
  (4).
    (c)  Tax  treatment  of dispositions and failures to use for qualified
  use.--
    (1) Imposition of additional estate tax.--If, within  10  years  after
  the decedent's death and before the death of the qualified heir--
    (A)  the  qualified  heir  disposes  of any interest in qualified real
  property (other than by a disposition to a member of his family), or
    (B) the qualified heir  ceases  to  use  for  the  qualified  use  the
  qualified  real  property  which  was  acquired  (or  passed)  from  the
  decedent,
    then, there is hereby imposed an additional estate tax.
    (2) Amount of additional tax.--
    (A) In general.--The amount of the additional tax imposed by paragraph
  (1) with respect to any interest shall be the amount equal to the lesser
  of--
    (i) the adjusted tax difference attributable to such interest, or
    (ii) the excess of the amount realized with respect  to  the  interest
  (or, in any case other than a sale or exchange at arm's length, the fair
  market  value of the interest) over the value of the interest determined
  under subsection (a).
    (B) Adjusted tax difference attributable to interest.--For purposes of
  subparagraph  (A),  the  adjusted  tax  difference  attributable  to  an
  interest  is  the  amount which bears the same ratio to the adjusted tax
  difference with respect to the  estate  (determined  under  subparagraph
  (C)) as--
    (i)  the  excess  of  the  value of such interest for purposes of this
  chapter (determined without regard to subsection (a)) over the value  of
  such interest determined under subsection (a), bears to
    (ii) a similar excess determined for all qualified real property.
    (C)  Adjusted tax difference with respect to the estate.--For purposes
  of subparagraph (B), the term "adjusted tax difference with  respect  to
  the  estate"  means  the  excess  of what would have been the estate tax
  liability but for subsection (a) over  the  estate  tax  liability.  For
  purposes of this subparagraph, the term "estate tax liability" means the
  tax  imposed  by  section  2001 reduced by the credits allowable against
  such tax.
    (D) Partial dispositions.--For purposes of this paragraph,  where  the
  qualified  heir  disposes  of  a portion of the interest acquired by (or
  passing to) such heir (or a predecessor qualified heir) or  there  is  a
  cessation of use of such a portion--
    (i) the value determined under subsection (a) taken into account under
  subparagraph  (A)(ii) with respect to such portion shall be its pro rata
  share of such value of such interest, and


   (ii) the adjusted tax difference attributable to  the  interest  taken
  into account with respect to the transaction involving the second or any
  succeeding  portion shall be reduced by the amount of the tax imposed by
  this  subsection  with  respect  to  all  prior  transactions  involving
  portions of such interest.
    (E)  Special rule for disposition of timber.--In the case of qualified
  woodland to which an election under subsection  (e)(13)(A)  applies,  if
  the  qualified  heir disposes of (or severs) any standing timber on such
  qualified woodland--
    (i) such disposition (or severance) shall be treated as a  disposition
  of a portion of the interest of the qualified heir in such property, and
    (ii)  the  amount  of the additional tax imposed by paragraph (1) with
  respect to such disposition shall be an amount equal to the lesser of--
    (I) the amount realized on such disposition (or,  in  any  case  other
  than  a  sale  or exchange at arm's length, the fair market value of the
  portion of the interest disposed or severed), or
    (II) the amount of additional  tax  determined  under  this  paragraph
  (without  regard  to  this  subparagraph)  if the entire interest of the
  qualified heir in the qualified woodland had been disposed of, less  the
  sum  of  the  amount  of  the additional tax imposed with respect to all
  prior transactions involving such woodland to  which  this  subparagraph
  applied.
    For  purposes of the preceding sentence, the disposition of a right to
  sever shall be treated as the disposition of the  standing  timber.  The
  amount  of  additional  tax  imposed  under paragraph (1) in any case in
  which a qualified heir disposes of his entire interest in the  qualified
  woodland   shall   be  reduced  by  any  amount  determined  under  this
  subparagraph with respect to such woodland.
    (3) Only 1 additional tax imposed with respect to any  1  portion.--In
  the case of an interest acquired from (or passing from) any decedent, if
  subparagraph  (A)  or  (B) of paragraph (1) applies to any portion of an
  interest, subparagraph (B) or (A), as the case may be, of paragraph  (1)
  shall not apply with respect to the same portion of such interest.
    (4)  Due  date.--The  additional  tax imposed by this subsection shall
  become due and payable on the day which is 6 months after  the  date  of
  the disposition or cessation referred to in paragraph (1).
    (5)  Liability  for tax; furnishing of bond.--The qualified heir shall
  be personally liable for the additional tax imposed by  this  subsection
  with  respect  to  his interest unless the heir has furnished bond which
  meets the requirements of subsection (e)(11).
    (6) Cessation of qualified use.--For  purposes  of  paragraph  (1)(B),
  real property shall cease to be used for the qualified use if--
    (A) such property ceases to be used for the qualified use set forth in
  subparagraph  (A)  or  (B) of subsection (b)(2) under which the property
  qualified under subsection (b), or
    (B) during any period  of  8  years  ending  after  the  date  of  the
  decedent's death and before the date of the death of the qualified heir,
  there had been periods aggregating more than 3 years during which--
    (i)  in  the case of periods during which the property was held by the
  decedent, there was no material participation by  the  decedent  or  any
  member of his family in the operation of the farm or other business, and
    (ii)  in the case of periods during which the property was held by any
  qualified heir, there was no material participation  by  such  qualified
  heir  or  any member of his family in the operation of the farm or other
  business.
    (7) Special rules.--
    (A) No tax if use begins within 2 years.--If the  date  on  which  the
  qualified heir begins to use the qualified real property (hereinafter in


 this  subparagraph  referred  to as the commencement date) is before the
  date 2 years after the decedent's death--
    (i)  no  tax  shall  be  imposed  under paragraph (1) by reason of the
  failure by the qualified  heir  to  so  use  such  property  before  the
  commencement date, and
    (ii)  the  10-year period under paragraph (1) shall be extended by the
  period after the decedent's death and before the commencement date.
    (B) Active management by eligible qualified heir treated  as  material
  participation.--For   purposes   of  paragraph  (6)(B)(ii),  the  active
  management of a farm or other business by--
    (i) an eligible qualified heir, or
    (ii) a fiduciary of an eligible qualified  heir  described  in  clause
  (ii) or (iii) of subparagraph (C),
    shall  be treated as material participation by such eligible qualified
  heir in the operation of such farm  or  business.  In  the  case  of  an
  eligible  qualified  heir  described  in  clause (ii), (iii), or (iv) of
  subparagraph (C), the preceding sentence shall apply only during periods
  during which such heir meets the requirements of such clause.
    (C) Eligible qualified heir.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term
  "eligible qualified heir" means a qualified heir who--
    (i) is the surviving spouse of the decedent,
    (ii) has not attained the age of 21,
    (iii) is disabled (within the meaning of subsection (b)(4)(B)), or
    (iv) is a student.
    (D) Student.--For purposes of subparagraph (C), an individual shall be
  treated as a student with respect to periods during any calendar year if
  (and only if) such individual  is  a  student  (within  the  meaning  of
  section 152(f)(2)) for such calendar year.
    (E)  Certain  rents  treated  as  qualified use.--For purposes of this
  subsection, a surviving spouse or  lineal  descendant  of  the  decedent
  shall  not  be  treated  as  failing to use qualified real property in a
  qualified use solely  because  such  spouse  or  descendant  rents  such
  property to a member of the family of such spouse or descendant on a net
  cash  basis.  For  purposes of the preceding sentence, a legally adopted
  child of an individual shall be treated as the child of such  individual
  by blood.
    (8)  Qualified  conservation  contribution  is  not  a disposition.--A
  qualified conservation contribution (as defined in  section  170(h))  by
  gift  or  otherwise  shall  not be deemed a disposition under subsection
  (c)(1)(A).
    (d) Election; agreement.--
    (1) Election.--The election under this section shall be  made  on  the
  return  of  the tax imposed by section 2001. Such election shall be made
  in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulations prescribe. Such  an
  election, once made, shall be irrevocable.
    (2)  Agreement.--The  agreement  referred  to  in  this paragraph is a
  written agreement signed by each person in being  who  has  an  interest
  (whether  or  not  in  possession)  in  any  property designated in such
  agreement consenting to the application of subsection (c)  with  respect
  to such property.
    (3)  Modification  of  election  and  agreement  to be permitted.--The
  Secretary shall prescribe procedures which provide that in any  case  in
  which  the  executor  makes an election under paragraph (1) (and submits
  the agreement referred to in paragraph (2)) within the  time  prescribed
  therefor, but--
    (A)  the  notice  of election, as filed, does not contain all required
  information, or


   (B) signatures of 1  or  more  persons  required  to  enter  into  the
  agreement  described  in paragraph (2) are not included on the agreement
  as filed, or the agreement does not contain all required information,
    the  executor  will have a reasonable period of time (not exceeding 90
  days) after notification of such failures to provide such information or
  signatures.
    (e) Definitions; special rules.--For purposes of this section--
    (1) Qualified heir.--The term "qualified heir" means, with respect  to
  any  property,  a  member  of  the  decedent's  family who acquired such
  property (or to whom such property  passed)  from  the  decedent.  If  a
  qualified  heir  disposes  of any interest in qualified real property to
  any member of his family, such member shall thereafter be treated as the
  qualified heir with respect to such interest.
    (2) Member of family.--The term "member of  the  family"  means,  with
  respect to any individual, only--
    (A) an ancestor of such individual,
    (B) the spouse of such individual,
    (C)  a  lineal  descendant  of  such  individual, of such individual's
  spouse, or of a parent of such individual, or
    (D) the spouse of any lineal descendant described in subparagraph (C).
    For purposes of the preceding sentence, a legally adopted child of  an
  individual shall be treated as the child of such individual by blood.
    (3)  Certain  real  property  included.--In  the case of real property
  which meets the requirements of subparagraph (C) of  subsection  (b)(1),
  residential  buildings  and  related  improvements on such real property
  occupied on a regular basis by the owner or lessee of such real property
  or by persons employed by such  owner  or  lessee  for  the  purpose  of
  operating  or  maintaining such real property, and roads, buildings, and
  other structures and improvements functionally related to the  qualified
  use shall be treated as real property devoted to the qualified use.
    (4)  Farm.--The  term  "farm"  includes  stock, dairy, poultry, fruit,
  furbearing animal, and truck  farms,  plantations,  ranches,  nurseries,
  ranges,  greenhouses  or other similar structures used primarily for the
  raising of agricultural or horticultural commodities, and  orchards  and
  woodlands.
    (5) Farming purposes.--The term "farming purposes" means-
    (A)  cultivating the soil or raising or harvesting any agricultural or
  horticultural  commodity  (including  the  raising,  shearing,  feeding,
  caring for, training, and management of animals) on a farm;
    (B)  handling,  drying,  packing,  grading,  or  storing on a farm any
  agricultural or horticultural commodity in its unmanufactured state, but
  only if the owner, tenant, or operator of the  farm  regularly  produces
  more than one-half of the commodity so treated; and
    (C)(i) the planting, cultivating, caring for, or cutting of trees, or
    (ii) the preparation (other than milling) of trees for market.
    (6)   Material   participation.--Material   participation   shall   be
  determined in a manner similar  to  the  manner  used  for  purposes  of
  paragraph  (1)  of  section  1402(a)  (relating  to  net  earnings  from
  self-employment).
    (7) Method of valuing farms.--
    (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the value  of
  a farm for farming purposes shall be determined by dividing--
    (i)  the excess of the average annual gross cash rental for comparable
  land used for farming purposes and located in the locality of such  farm
  over  the  average  annual  State  and  local real estate taxes for such
  comparable land, by
    (ii) the average annual effective interest rate for  all  new  Federal
  Land Bank loans.


   For   purposes   of   the  preceding  sentence,  each  average  annual
  computation shall be made on the basis of the  5  most  recent  calendar
  years ending before the date of the decedent's death.
    (B) Value based on net share rental in certain cases.--
    (i) In general.--If there is no comparable land from which the average
  annual  gross cash rental may be determined but there is comparable land
  from which the average net share rental may be determined,  subparagraph
  (A)(i)  shall  be  applied  by  substituting  "average  annual net share
  rental" for "average annual gross cash rental".
    (ii) Net share rental.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term  "net
  share rental" means the excess of--
    (I)  the  value  of  the produce received by the lessor of the land on
  which such produce is grown, over
    (II) the cash operating expenses of growing such produce which,  under
  the lease, are paid by the lessor.
    (C)  Exception.--The formula provided by subparagraph (A) shall not be
  used--
    (i) where it is established that there  is  no  comparable  land  from
  which the average annual gross cash rental may be determined, or
    (ii)  where  the  executor  elects  to  have the value of the farm for
  farming purposes determined and that there is no  comparable  land  from
  which  the  average  net  share rental may be determined under paragraph
  (8).
    (8) Method of valuing closely held business  interests,  etc.--In  any
  case  to  which  paragraph  (7)(A) does not apply, the following factors
  shall apply in determining the value of any qualified real property:
    (A) The capitalization of income which the property can be expected to
  yield for farming or closely held business purposes  over  a  reasonable
  period  of  time  under  prudent  management  using traditional cropping
  patterns for the  area,  taking  into  account  soil  capacity,  terrain
  configuration, and similar factors,
    (B)  The  capitalization  of  the  fair  rental  value of the land for
  farmland or closely held business purposes,
    (C) Assessed land values in a State which provides a  differential  or
  use value assessment law for farmland or closely held business,
    (D)  Comparable  sales  of other farm or closely held business land in
  the same geographical area far enough removed  from  a  metropolitan  or
  resort  area  so that nonagricultural use is not a significant factor in
  the sales price, and
    (E) Any other factor which fairly values  the  farm  or  closely  held
  business value of the property.
    (9)  Property acquired from decedent.--Property shall be considered to
  have been acquired from or to have passed from the decedent if--
    (A) such property is so considered under section 1014(b) (relating  to
  basis of property acquired from a decedent),
    (B) such property is acquired by any person from the estate, or
    (C)  such  property  is  acquired  by  any person from a trust (to the
  extent such property is includible in the gross estate of the decedent).
    (10) Community property.--If the decedent and his surviving spouse  at
  any  time  held  qualified  real  property  as  community  property, the
  interest of the surviving spouse in such property shall  be  taken  into
  account  under  this section to the extent necessary to provide a result
  under this section with respect to such  property  which  is  consistent
  with  the  result  which  would have obtained under this section if such
  property had not been community property.
    (11) Bond in lieu of personal liability.--If the qualified heir  makes
  written  application  to  the Secretary for determination of the maximum
  amount of the additional tax which may be imposed by subsection (c) with


 respect to the qualified heir's interest,  the  Secretary  (as  soon  as
  possible,  and  in  any  event  within  1  year after the making of such
  application) shall notify the heir of such maximum amount. The qualified
  heir,  on furnishing a bond in such amount and for such period as may be
  required, shall be discharged from personal liability for any additional
  tax imposed by subsection (c) and shall be  entitled  to  a  receipt  or
  writing showing such discharge.
    (12) Active management.--The term "active management" means the making
  of  the  management  decisions  of  a  business  (other  than  the daily
  operating decisions).
    (13) Special rules for woodlands.--
    (A) In general.--In the case of any qualified woodland with respect to
  which the executor elects to have this subparagraph apply, trees growing
  on such woodland shall not be treated as a crop.
    (B) Qualified woodland.--The term "qualified woodland" means any  real
  property which--
    (i) is used in timber operations, and
    (ii) is an identifiable area of land such as an acre or other area for
  which records are normally maintained in conducting timber operations.
    (C) Timber operations.--The term "timber operations" means--
    (i) the planting, cultivating, caring for, or cutting of trees, or
    (ii) the preparation (other than milling) of trees for market.
    (D) Election.--An election under subparagraph (A) shall be made on the
  return  of  the tax imposed by section 2001. Such election shall be made
  in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulations prescribe. Such  an
  election, once made, shall be irrevocable.
    (14)  Treatment  of  replacement  property acquired in section 1031 or
  1033 transactions.--
    (A) In general.--In the case of any  qualified  replacement  property,
  any  period during which there was ownership, qualified use, or material
  participation with respect to the replaced property by the  decedent  or
  any member of his family shall be treated as a period during which there
  was  such ownership, use, or material participation (as the case may be)
  with respect to the qualified replacement property.
    (B) Limitation.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to the  extent  that
  the  fair  market value of the qualified replacement property (as of the
  date of its acquisition) exceeds the fair market value of  the  replaced
  property (as of the date of its disposition).
    (C) Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph--
    (i)  Qualified  replacement property.--The term "qualified replacement
  property" means any real property which is--
    (I) acquired in an exchange which qualifies under section 1031, or
    (II) the acquisition of which results in the  nonrecognition  of  gain
  under section 1033.
    Such  term  shall  only  include  property  which is used for the same
  qualified use as  the  replaced  property  was  being  used  before  the
  exchange.
    (ii) Replaced property.--The term "replaced property" means--
    (I)  the  property  transferred  in the exchange which qualifies under
  section 1031, or
    (II) the property compulsorily or involuntarily converted (within  the
  meaning of section 1033).
    (f) Statute of limitations.--If qualified real property is disposed of
  or ceases to be used for a qualified use, then--
    (1)  the  statutory  period  for  the assessment of any additional tax
  under subsection (c) attributable to such disposition or cessation shall
  not expire before the expiration of 3 years from the date the  Secretary
  is  notified  (in  such  manner  as  the  Secretary  may  by regulations


 prescribe) of such disposition or cessation (or if later in the case  of
  an  involuntary  conversion  or  exchange to which subsection (h) or (i)
  applies, 3 years  from  the  date  the  Secretary  is  notified  of  the
  replacement  of the converted property or of an intention not to replace
  or of the exchange of property), and
    (2) such additional tax may be assessed before the expiration of  such
  3-year period notwithstanding the provisions of any other law or rule of
  law which would otherwise prevent such assessment.
    (g)  Application  of  this  section  and section 6324B to interests in
  partnerships, corporations, and trusts.--The Secretary  shall  prescribe
  regulations  setting  forth  the application of this section and section
  6324B in the case of an interest in a partnership, corporation, or trust
  which, with respect to the decedent, is an interest in  a  closely  held
  business  (within  the meaning of paragraph (1) of section 6166(b)). For
  purposes of the preceding sentence, an interest in a discretionary trust
  all the beneficiaries of which are qualified heirs shall be treated as a
  present interest.
    (h) Special  rules  for  involuntary  conversions  of  qualified  real
  property.--
    (1) Treatment of converted property.--
    (A)  In general.--If there is an involuntary conversion of an interest
  in qualified real property--
    (i) no tax shall be imposed by subsection (c) on  such  conversion  if
  the  cost  of  the  qualified replacement property equals or exceeds the
  amount realized on such conversion, or
    (ii) if clause (i) does not apply, the amount of the  tax  imposed  by
  subsection  (c)  on such conversion shall be the amount determined under
  subparagraph (B).
    (B) Amount of tax  where  there  is  not  complete  reinvestment.--The
  amount   determined   under   this  subparagraph  with  respect  to  any
  involuntary conversion is the amount of the  tax  which  (but  for  this
  subsection)  would  have  been  imposed on such conversion reduced by an
  amount which--
    (i) bears the same ratio to such tax, as
    (ii) the cost of the  qualified  replacement  property  bears  to  the
  amount realized on the conversion.
    (2)  Treatment  of  replacement  property.--For purposes of subsection
  (c)--
    (A) any qualified replacement property shall be treated  in  the  same
  manner  as  if  it  were  a  portion  of  the interest in qualified real
  property which was involuntarily converted; except that with respect  to
  such  qualified  replacement property the 10-year period under paragraph
  (1) of subsection (c) shall be extended by any period, beyond the 2-year
  period  referred  to  in  section  1033(a)(2)(B)(i),  during  which  the
  qualified heir was allowed to replace the qualified real property,
    (B)  any  tax  imposed by subsection (c) on the involuntary conversion
  shall be treated as a tax imposed on a partial disposition, and
    (C) paragraph (6) of subsection (c) shall be applied--
    (i)  by  not  taking  into  account  periods  after  the   involuntary
  conversion  and  before  the  acquisition  of  the qualified replacement
  property, and
    (ii) by treating material participation with respect to the  converted
  property  as  material  participation  with  respect  to  the  qualified
  replacement property.
    (3) Definitions and special rules.--For purposes of this subsection--
    (A) Involuntary conversion.--The term "involuntary conversion" means a
  compulsory or involuntary conversion within the meaning of section 1033.


   (B) Qualified replacement property.--The term  "qualified  replacement
  property" means--
    (i)  in  the  case  of  an involuntary conversion described in section
  1033(a)(1), any real property into which the qualified real property  is
  converted, or
    (ii)  in  the  case  of an involuntary conversion described in section
  1033(a)(2), any real property purchased by the qualified heir during the
  period specified in section 1033(a)(2)(B) for purposes of replacing  the
  qualified real property.
    Such term only includes property which is to be used for the qualified
  use  set  forth  in  subparagraph  (A) or (B) of subsection (b)(2) under
  which the qualified real property qualified under subsection (a).
    (4) Certain rules made applicable.--The rules of the last sentence  of
  section 1033(a)(2)(A) shall apply for purposes of paragraph (3)(B)(ii).
    (i) Exchanges of qualified real property.--
    (1) Treatment of property exchanged.--
    (A)  Exchanges solely for qualified exchange property.--If an interest
  in qualified real property  is  exchanged  solely  for  an  interest  in
  qualified  exchange  property  in  a  transaction  which qualifies under
  section 1031, no tax shall be imposed by subsection  (c)  by  reason  of
  such exchange.
    (B)  Exchanges  where  other  property  received.--If  an  interest in
  qualified real property  is  exchanged  for  an  interest  in  qualified
  exchange  property  and  other property in a transaction which qualifies
  under section 1031, the amount of the tax imposed by subsection  (c)  by
  reason  of  such exchange shall be the amount of tax which (but for this
  subparagraph) would have been imposed on such exchange under  subsection
  (c)(1), reduced by an amount which--
    (i) bears the same ratio to such tax, as
    (ii) the fair market value of the qualified exchange property bears to
  the fair market value of the qualified real property exchanged.
    For  purposes  of  clause  (ii) of the preceding sentence, fair market
  value shall be determined as of the time of the exchange.
    (2)  Treatment  of  qualified  exchange  property.--For  purposes   of
  subsection (c)--
    (A)  any  interest  in qualified exchange property shall be treated in
  the same manner as if it were a portion of  the  interest  in  qualified
  real property which was exchanged,
    (B)  any tax imposed by subsection (c) by reason of the exchange shall
  be treated as a tax imposed on a partial disposition, and
    (C) paragraph (6) of subsection  (c)  shall  be  applied  by  treating
  material  participation  with  respect  to  the  exchanged  property  as
  material participation with respect to the qualified exchange property.
    (3) Qualified exchange property.--For purposes of this subsection, the
  term "qualified exchange property" means real property which  is  to  be
  used  for  the  qualified  use  set  forth in subparagraph (A) or (B) of
  subsection (b)(2) under  which  the  real  property  exchanged  therefor
  originally qualified under subsection (a).
    §  2033.  Property in Which the Decedent had an Interest. The value of
  the gross estate shall include the value of all property to  the  extent
  of the interest therein of the decedent at the time of his death.
    §  2034.  Dower  or  Curtesy  Interests. The value of the gross estate
  shall include the value of all property to the extent  of  any  interest
  therein  of the surviving spouse, existing at the time of the decedent's
  death as dower or curtesy, or by virtue of a statute creating an  estate
  in lieu of dower or curtesy.


   §  2035.  Adjustments  for  Certain  Gifts  Made Within Three Years of
  Decedent's  Death.  (a)  Inclusion  of   certain   property   in   gross
  estate.--If--
    (1)  the  decedent  made  a  transfer  (by  trust  or otherwise) of an
  interest in any property, or relinquished a power with  respect  to  any
  property,  during the 3-year period ending on the date of the decedent's
  death, and
    (2) the value of such property (or an  interest  therein)  would  have
  been  included  in the decedent's gross estate under section 2036, 2037,
  2038, or 2042 if such transferred interest  or  relinquished  power  had
  been retained by the decedent on the date of his death,
    the  value of the gross estate shall include the value of any property
  (or interest therein) which would have been so included.
    (b) Inclusion of  gift  tax  on  gifts  made  during  3  years  before
  decedent's  death.--The  amount  of the gross estate (determined without
  regard to this subsection) shall be increased by the amount of  any  tax
  paid  under chapter 12 by the decedent or his estate on any gift made by
  the decedent or his spouse during the 3-year period ending on  the  date
  of the decedent's death.
    (c) Other rules relating to transfers within 3 years of death.--
    (1) In general.--For purposes of--
    (A)  section  303(b) (relating to distributions in redemption of stock
  to pay death taxes),
    (B) section 2032A (relating to special  valuation  of  certain  farms,
  etc., real property), and
    (C) subchapter C of chapter 64 (relating to lien for taxes),
    the  value of the gross estate shall include the value of all property
  to the extent of any interest therein of which the decedent has  at  any
  time  made  a  transfer, by trust or otherwise, during the 3-year period
  ending on the date of the decedent's death.
    (2) Coordination with section 6166.--An estate  shall  be  treated  as
  meeting  the  35 percent of adjusted gross estate requirement of section
  6166(a)(1) only if the estate  meets  such  requirement  both  with  and
  without the application of subsection (a).
    (3) Marital and small transfers.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any
  transfer (other than a transfer with respect to a life insurance policy)
  made  during  a  calendar  year  to  any  donee  if the decedent was not
  required by section 6019 (other than by reason of  section  6019(2))  to
  file any gift tax return for such year with respect to transfers to such
  donee.
    (d)  Exception.--Subsection  (a)  and  paragraph (1) of subsection (c)
  shall not apply  to  any  bona  fide  sale  for  an  adequate  and  full
  consideration in money or money's worth.
    (e)   Treatment  of  certain  transfers  from  revocable  trusts.--For
  purposes of this section and section 2038, any transfer from any portion
  of a trust during any period that such portion was treated under section
  676 as owned by the decedent  by  reason  of  a  power  in  the  grantor
  (determined  without  regard  to  section  672(e)) shall be treated as a
  transfer made directly by the decedent.
    § 2036. Transfers with Retained Life Estate.  (a)  General  rule.--The
  value of the gross estate shall include the value of all property to the
  extent  of  any  interest  therein of which the decedent has at any time
  made a transfer (except in case of a bona fide sale for an adequate  and
  full  consideration  in  money or money's worth), by trust or otherwise,
  under which he  has  retained  for  his  life  or  for  any  period  not
  ascertainable  without  reference  to  his death or for any period which
  does not in fact end before his death--


   (1) the possession or enjoyment of, or the right to the  income  from,
  the property, or
    (2)  the  right,  either  alone  or in conjunction with any person, to
  designate the persons who shall possess or enjoy  the  property  or  the
  income therefrom.
    (b) Voting rights.--
    (1)  In  general.--For purposes of subsection (a)(1), the retention of
  the right to  vote  (directly  or  indirectly)  shares  of  stock  of  a
  controlled  corporation  shall  be  considered  to be a retention of the
  enjoyment of transferred property.
    (2)  Controlled  corporation.--For  purposes  of  paragraph   (1),   a
  corporation shall be treated as a controlled corporation if, at any time
  after  the  transfer of the property and during the 3-year period ending
  on the date of the  decedent's  death,  the  decedent  owned  (with  the
  application  of  section  318),  or  had  the  right (either alone or in
  conjunction with any person) to  vote,  stock  possessing  at  least  20
  percent of the total combined voting power of all classes of stock.
    (3)  Coordination with section 2035.--For purposes of applying section
  2035 with respect to paragraph (1), the relinquishment or  cessation  of
  voting  rights  shall  be  treated as a transfer of property made by the
  decedent.
    (c) Limitation on application of general rule.--This section shall not
  apply to a transfer made before March 4, 1931; nor to  a  transfer  made
  after  March  3,  1931,  and  before  June  7, 1932, unless the property
  transferred would have been includible in the decedent's gross estate by
  reason of the amendatory language of the joint resolution  of  March  3,
  1931 (46 Stat. 1516).
    § 2037. Transfers Taking Effect at Death. (a) General rule.--The value
  of  the  gross  estate  shall  include  the value of all property to the
  extent of any interest therein of which the decedent  has  at  any  time
  after  September 7, 1916, made a transfer (except in case of a bona fide
  sale for an adequate and full consideration in money or money's  worth),
  by trust or otherwise, if--
    (1)  possession or enjoyment of the property can, through ownership of
  such interest, be obtained only by surviving the decedent, and
    (2) the decedent has retained a reversionary interest in the  property
  (but in the case of a transfer made before October 8, 1949, only if such
  reversionary  interest  arose  by the express terms of the instrument of
  transfer), and the  value  of  such  reversionary  interest  immediately
  before  the death of the decedent exceeds 5 percent of the value of such
  property.
    (b)  Special  rules.--For  purposes  of   this   section,   the   term
  "reversionary interest" includes a possibility that property transferred
  by the decedent--
    (1) may return to him or his estate, or
    (2) may be subject to a power of disposition by him,
    but  such  term  does  not include a possibility that the income alone
  from such property may return to him or become subject  to  a  power  of
  disposition  by  him.  The  value of a reversionary interest immediately
  before the death of the decedent shall be determined (without regard  to
  the  fact  of  the  decedent's  death)  by  usual  methods of valuation,
  including the use of tables of mortality and actuarial principles, under
  regulations prescribed by the Secretary. In determining the value  of  a
  possibility  that  property  may be subject to a power of disposition by
  the decedent,  such  possibility  shall  be  valued  as  if  it  were  a
  possibility that such property may return to the decedent or his estate.
  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing, an interest so transferred shall not be
  included in the decedent's gross estate under this section if possession


 or enjoyment of the property could have been obtained by any beneficiary
  during the decedent's life through the exercise of a  general  power  of
  appointment  (as  defined in section 2041) which in fact was exercisable
  immediately before the decedent's death.
    §  2038.  Revocable Transfers. (a) In general.--The value of the gross
  estate shall include the value of all property--
    (1) Transfers after June 22, 1936.--To  the  extent  of  any  interest
  therein of which the decedent has at any time made a transfer (except in
  case of a bona fide sale for an adequate and full consideration in money
  or  money's  worth),  by trust or otherwise, where the enjoyment thereof
  was subject at the date of his death to any change through the  exercise
  of  a  power (in whatever capacity exercisable) by the decedent alone or
  by the decedent in conjunction with any other person (without regard  to
  when  or  from  what source the decedent acquired such power), to alter,
  amend, revoke, or terminate, or where any  such  power  is  relinquished
  during the 3-year period ending on the date of the decedent's death.
    (2)  Transfers  on  or  before  June  22,  1936.--To the extent of any
  interest therein of which the decedent has at any time made  a  transfer
  (except  in  case  of  a  bona  fide  sale  for  an  adequate  and  full
  consideration in money or money's worth), by trust or  otherwise,  where
  the enjoyment thereof was subject at the date of his death to any change
  through  the  exercise  of  a  power, either by the decedent alone or in
  conjunction with any person, to alter, amend, or revoke,  or  where  the
  decedent  relinquished any such power during the 3-year period ending on
  the date of the decedent's death. Except in the case of  transfers  made
  after  June 22, 1936, no interest of the decedent of which he has made a
  transfer shall be included in  the  gross  estate  under  paragraph  (1)
  unless it is includible under this paragraph.
    (b)  Date  of  existence  of power.--For purposes of this section, the
  power to alter, amend, revoke, or terminate shall be considered to exist
  on the date of the decedent's death even  though  the  exercise  of  the
  power  is  subject  to  a  precedent giving of notice or even though the
  alteration, amendment, revocation, or termination takes effect  only  on
  the  expiration  of  a  stated  period  after the exercise of the power,
  whether or not on or before the date of the decedent's death notice  has
  been  given  or  the  power  has  been  exercised.  In such cases proper
  adjustment shall be made representing the  interests  which  would  have
  been  excluded  from  the  power if the decedent had lived, and for such
  purpose, if the notice has not been given or  the  power  has  not  been
  exercised  on  or  before  the  date  of his death, such notice shall be
  considered to have been given, or the power exercised, on  the  date  of
  his death.
    §  2039.  Annuities.  (a) General.--The gross estate shall include the
  value of an annuity or other payment receivable by  any  beneficiary  by
  reason of surviving the decedent under any form of contract or agreement
  entered into after March 3, 1931 (other than as insurance under policies
  on  the  life of the decedent), if, under such contract or agreement, an
  annuity or other payment was payable to the decedent,  or  the  decedent
  possessed  the right to receive such annuity or payment, either alone or
  in conjunction  with  another  for  his  life  or  for  any  period  not
  ascertainable  without  reference  to  his death or for any period which
  does not in fact end before his death.
    (b) Amount includible.--Subsection (a) shall apply to only  such  part
  of  the  value  of  the  annuity  or other payment receivable under such
  contract or agreement as is proportionate to that part of  the  purchase
  price  therefor  contributed  by  the  decedent.  For  purposes  of this
  section, any contribution by the decedent's employer or former  employer
  to  the  purchase price of such contract or agreement (whether or not to


 an employee's  trust  or  fund  forming  part  of  a  pension,  annuity,
  retirement,  bonus  or  profit  sharing  plan) shall be considered to be
  contributed by the decedent if made by reason of his employment.
    §  2040.  Joint  Interests.  (a) General rule.--The value of the gross
  estate shall include the value of all property  to  the  extent  of  the
  interest therein held as joint tenants with right of survivorship by the
  decedent  and  any  other  person,  or as tenants by the entirety by the
  decedent and spouse, or deposited,  with  any  person  carrying  on  the
  banking  business,  in  their  joint  names and payable to either or the
  survivor, except such part thereof as may be shown  to  have  originally
  belonged  to  such  other  person  and  never  to  have been received or
  acquired by the latter from the decedent for less than an  adequate  and
  full  consideration in money or money's worth: Provided, That where such
  property or any part thereof, or part of the  consideration  with  which
  such  property  was acquired, is shown to have been at any time acquired
  by such other person from the decedent for less  than  an  adequate  and
  full  consideration  in  money or money's worth, there shall be excepted
  only such part of the value of such property as is proportionate to  the
  consideration  furnished  by  such  other person: Provided further, That
  where any property has  been  acquired  by  gift,  bequest,  devise,  or
  inheritance,  as  a  tenancy by the entirety by the decedent and spouse,
  then to the extent of one-half  of  the  value  thereof,  or,  where  so
  acquired  by  the  decedent  and  any other person as joint tenants with
  right of survivorship and their interests are not otherwise specified or
  fixed by law, then to the extent of the value of a fractional part to be
  determined by dividing the value of the property by the number of  joint
  tenants with right of survivorship.
    (b) Certain joint interests of husband and wife.--
    (1)  Interests  of spouse excluded from gross estate.--Notwithstanding
  subsection (a), in the case of any qualified joint interest,  the  value
  included  in the gross estate with respect to such interest by reason of
  this section is one-half of the value of such qualified joint interest.
    (2) Qualified joint interest defined.--For purposes of paragraph  (1),
  the  term "qualified joint interest" means any interest in property held
  by the decedent and the decedent's spouse as--
    (A) tenants by the entirety, or
    (B) joint tenants with right of survivorship, but only if the decedent
  and the spouse of the decedent are the only joint tenants.
    § 2041. Powers of Appointment. (a) In general.--The value of the gross
  estate shall include the value of all property--
    (1) Powers of appointment created on or before October  21,  1942.--To
  the  extent  of  any  property  with respect to which a general power of
  appointment created on or before October 21, 1942, is exercised  by  the
  decedent--
    (A) by will, or
    (B)  by  a  disposition  which  is  of  such  nature that if it were a
  transfer of property owned by  the  decedent,  such  property  would  be
  includible  in  the decedent's gross estate under sections 2035 to 2038,
  inclusive;
    but the failure to exercise such a power or the  complete  release  of
  such a power shall not be deemed an exercise thereof. If a general power
  of appointment created on or before October 21, 1942, has been partially
  released  so  that  it  is no longer a general power of appointment, the
  exercise of such power shall not be deemed  to  be  the  exercise  of  a
  general power of appointment if--
    (i) such partial release occurred before November 1, 1951, or


   (ii)  the  donee of such power was under a legal disability to release
  such power on October 21, 1942, and such partial  release  occurred  not
  later than 6 months after the termination of such legal disability.
    (2)  Powers  created  after  October  21,  1942.--To the extent of any
  property with respect to which the decedent has at the time of his death
  a general power of appointment created after October 21, 1942,  or  with
  respect to which the decedent has at any time exercised or released such
  a  power of appointment by a disposition which is of such nature that if
  it were a transfer of property owned  by  the  decedent,  such  property
  would  be  includible in the decedent's gross estate under sections 2035
  to 2038, inclusive. For purposes of this paragraph  (2),  the  power  of
  appointment  shall  be considered to exist on the date of the decedent's
  death even though the exercise of the power is subject  to  a  precedent
  giving  of  notice or even though the exercise of the power takes effect
  only on the expiration of a stated period after its exercise, whether or
  not on or before the date of the decedent's death notice has been  given
  or the power has been exercised.
    (3)  Creation of another power in certain cases.--To the extent of any
  property with respect to which the decedent--
    (A) by will, or
    (B) by a disposition which is  of  such  nature  that  if  it  were  a
  transfer  of  property  owned  by  the  decedent  such property would be
  includible in the decedent's gross estate under section 2035,  2036,  or
  2037,
    exercises  a  power  of appointment created after October 21, 1942, by
  creating another power of appointment which under the  applicable  local
  law can be validly exercised so as to postpone the vesting of any estate
  or interest in such property, or suspend the absolute ownership or power
  of  alienation  of  such  property,  for  a period ascertainable without
  regard to the date of the creation of the first power.
    (b) Definitions.--For purposes of subsection (a)--
    (1)  General  power  of  appointment.--The  term  "general  power   of
  appointment"  means  a  power  which  is  exercisable  in  favor  of the
  decedent, his estate, his creditors, or the  creditors  of  his  estate;
  except that--
    (A)  A  power  to  consume,  invade,  or  appropriate property for the
  benefit of the decedent which is limited by  an  ascertainable  standard
  relating  to  the  health,  education,  support,  or  maintenance of the
  decedent shall not be deemed a general power of appointment.
    (B) A power of appointment created on  or  before  October  21,  1942,
  which  is  exercisable  by the decedent only in conjunction with another
  person shall not be deemed a general power of appointment.
    (C) In the case of a power of appointment created  after  October  21,
  1942,  which  is  exercisable  by  the decedent only in conjunction with
  another person--
    (i) If the  power  is  not  exercisable  by  the  decedent  except  in
  conjunction  with  the  creator  of  the  power--such power shall not be
  deemed a general power of appointment.
    (ii) If the power  is  not  exercisable  by  the  decedent  except  in
  conjunction with a person having a substantial interest in the property,
  subject to the power, which is adverse to exercise of the power in favor
  of  the  decedent--such  power  shall  not  be deemed a general power of
  appointment. For the purposes of this clause a  person  who,  after  the
  death  of the decedent, may be possessed of a power of appointment (with
  respect to the property subject to the decedent's power)  which  he  may
  exercise  in  his own favor shall be deemed as having an interest in the
  property and such interest shall be deemed adverse to such  exercise  of
  the decedent's power.


   (iii)  If (after the application of clauses (i) and (ii)) the power is
  a general power of appointment and is exercisable in favor of such other
  person--such power shall be deemed a general power of  appointment  only
  in  respect  of a fractional part of the property subject to such power,
  such part to be determined by dividing the value of such property by the
  number  of  such  persons (including the decedent) in favor of whom such
  power is exercisable.
    For purposes of clauses (ii) and (iii), a power shall be deemed to  be
  exercisable  in  favor of a person if it is exercisable in favor of such
  person, his estate, his creditors, or the creditors of his estate.
    (2) Lapse of power.--The lapse of a power of appointment created after
  October 21, 1942, during the life of the individual possessing the power
  shall be considered a release of  such  power.  The  preceding  sentence
  shall apply with respect to the lapse of powers during any calendar year
  only to the extent that the property, which could have been appointed by
  exercise  of  such lapsed powers, exceeded in value, at the time of such
  lapse, the greater of the following amounts:
    (A) $5,000, or
    (B) 5 percent of the aggregate value, at the time of  such  lapse,  of
  the  assets  out of which, or the proceeds of which, the exercise of the
  lapsed powers could have been satisfied.
    (3) Date of creation of power.--For purposes of this section, a  power
  of appointment created by a will executed on or before October 21, 1942,
  shall be considered a power created on or before such date if the person
  executing such will dies before July 1, 1949, without having republished
  such will, by codicil or otherwise, after October 21, 1942.
    §  2042.  Proceeds  of  Life  Insurance. The value of the gross estate
  shall include the value of all property--
    (1)  Receivable  by  the  executor.--To  the  extent  of  the   amount
  receivable  by  the  executor as insurance under policies on the life of
  the decedent.
    (2) Receivable by other beneficiaries.--To the extent  of  the  amount
  receivable by all other beneficiaries as insurance under policies on the
  life of the decedent with respect to which the decedent possessed at his
  death  any of the incidents of ownership, exercisable either alone or in
  conjunction with  any  other  person.  For  purposes  of  the  preceding
  sentence,  the  term  "incident  of  ownership"  includes a reversionary
  interest (whether arising by the express terms of the  policy  or  other
  instrument   or  by  operation  of  law)  only  if  the  value  of  such
  reversionary interest exceeded 5 percent of  the  value  of  the  policy
  immediately before the death of the decedent. As used in this paragraph,
  the term "reversionary interest" includes a possibility that the policy,
  or the proceeds of the policy, may return to the decedent or his estate,
  or  may  be  subject  to  a  power of disposition by him. The value of a
  reversionary interest at any time shall be determined (without regard to
  the fact of  the  decedent's  death)  by  usual  methods  of  valuation,
  including  the  use  of  tables  of  mortality and actuarial principles,
  pursuant to regulations prescribed by the Secretary. In determining  the
  value  of  a  possibility  that  the  policy  or proceeds thereof may be
  subject to a power of disposition  by  the  decedent,  such  possibility
  shall be valued as if it were a possibility that such policy or proceeds
  may return to the decedent or his estate.
    §  2043. Transfers for Insufficient Consideration. (a) In general.--If
  any  one  of  the  transfers,  trusts,  interests,  rights,  or   powers
  enumerated  and  described  in  sections  2035  to  2038, inclusive, and
  section  2041  is  made,  created,  exercised,  or  relinquished  for  a
  consideration in money or money's worth, but is not a bona fide sale for
  an  adequate  and  full  consideration  in money or money's worth, there


 shall be included in the gross estate only the excess of the fair market
  value at the time of death of the property otherwise to be  included  on
  account  of  such  transaction,  over  the  value  of  the consideration
  received therefor by the decedent.
    (b) Marital rights not treated as consideration.--
    (1)  In  general.--For  purposes  of this chapter, a relinquishment or
  promised relinquishment of dower or curtesy, or of  a  statutory  estate
  created  in  lieu of dower or curtesy, or of other marital rights in the
  decedent's property or estate, shall not be considered to any  extent  a
  consideration "in money or money's worth".
    (2)  Exception.--For  purposes  of section 2053 (relating to expenses,
  indebtedness, and taxes), a transfer of  property  which  satisfies  the
  requirements  of  paragraph  (1)  of  section  2516 (relating to certain
  property settlements) shall be considered to be made for an adequate and
  full consideration in money or money's worth.
    § 2044. Certain Property for Which Marital  Deduction  Was  Previously
  Allowed.  (a) General rule.--The value of the gross estate shall include
  the value of any property to which this section  applies  in  which  the
  decedent had a qualifying income interest for life.
    (b)  Property  to which this section applies.--This section applies to
  any property if--
    (1) a deduction was allowed with  respect  to  the  transfer  of  such
  property to the decedent--
    (A) under section 2056 by reason of subsection (b)(7) thereof, or
    (B) under section 2523 by reason of subsection (f) thereof, and
    (2)  section  2519  (relating to dispositions of certain life estates)
  did not apply with respect to a disposition by the decedent of  part  or
  all of such property.
    (c)  Property treated as having passed from decedent.--For purposes of
  this chapter and chapter 13, property includible in the gross estate  of
  the  decedent  under subsection (a) shall be treated as property passing
  from the decedent.
    § 2045. Prior Interests. Except as otherwise specifically provided  by
  law,  sections  2034  to  2042, inclusive, shall apply to the transfers,
  trusts,  estates,  interests,  rights,  powers,  and  relinquishment  of
  powers,  as  severally  enumerated and described therein, whenever made,
  created, arising, existing, exercised, or relinquished.
    § 2046. Disclaimers. For  provisions  relating  to  the  effect  of  a
  qualified disclaimer for purposes of this chapter, see section 2518.
    §  2053.  Expenses,  indebtedness,  and  taxes. (a) General rule.--For
  purposes of the tax imposed by section 2001, the value  of  the  taxable
  estate  shall  be  determined  by  deducting from the value of the gross
  estate such amounts--
    (1) for funeral expenses,
    (2) for administration expenses,
    (3) for claims against the estate, and
    (4) for unpaid mortgages  on,  or  any  indebtedness  in  respect  of,
  property   where   the   value   of  the  decedent's  interest  therein,
  undiminished by such mortgage or indebtedness, is included in the  value
  of the gross estate,
    as  are  allowable  by the laws of the jurisdiction, whether within or
  without the United States, under which the estate is being administered.
    (b) Other administration  expenses.--Subject  to  the  limitations  in
  paragraph  (1) of subsection (c), there shall be deducted in determining
  the  taxable  estate   amounts   representing   expenses   incurred   in
  administering  property  not  subject to claims which is included in the
  gross estate to the same extent such amounts would  be  allowable  as  a
  deduction  under subsection (a) if such property were subject to claims,


 and such amounts are  paid  before  the  expiration  of  the  period  of
  limitation for assessment provided in section 6501.
    (c) Limitations.--
    (1) Limitations applicable to subsections (a) and (b).--
    (A)  Consideration  for claims.--The deduction allowed by this section
  in the case of claims against  the  estate,  unpaid  mortgages,  or  any
  indebtedness  shall,  when founded on a promise or agreement, be limited
  to the extent that they were contracted bona fide and  for  an  adequate
  and  full  consideration  in  money or money's worth; except that in any
  case in which any such claim is founded on a promise or agreement of the
  decedent to make a contribution or gift to or for the use of  any  donee
  described  in  section  2055  for  the  purposes  specified therein, the
  deduction for such claims shall not be so limited, but shall be  limited
  to  the  extent  that it would be allowable as a deduction under section
  2055 if such promise or agreement constituted a bequest.
    (B) Certain taxes.--Any income taxes  on  income  received  after  the
  death  of  the decedent, or property taxes not accrued before his death,
  or any estate, succession, legacy, or inheritance taxes,  shall  not  be
  deductible under this section.
    (C)  Certain  claims  by  remaindermen.--No deduction shall be allowed
  under this section for a claim against  the  estate  by  a  remainderman
  relating to any property described in section 2044.
    (D)  Section  6166 interest.--No deduction shall be allowed under this
  section for any interest  payable  under  section  6601  on  any  unpaid
  portion  of  the tax imposed by section 2001 for the period during which
  an extension of time for payment of such tax is in effect under  section
  6166.
    (2) Limitations applicable only to subsection (a).--In the case of the
  amounts  described  in  subsection  (a),  there  shall be disallowed the
  amount by which the deductions specified therein exceed  the  value,  at
  the  time of the decedent's death, of property subject to claims, except
  to the extent that such deductions represent  amounts  paid  before  the
  date prescribed for the filing of the estate tax return. For purposes of
  this  section,  the  term  "property  subject  to claims" means property
  includible in the gross estate of the decedent which, or the  avails  of
  which, would under the applicable law, bear the burden of the payment of
  such  deductions  in  the final adjustment and settlement of the estate,
  except that the value of the property shall be reduced by the amount  of
  the deduction under section 2054 attributable to such property.
    (d) Certain foreign death taxes.--
    (1)   In   general.--Notwithstanding   the  provisions  of  subsection
  (c)(1)(B), for purposes of the tax imposed by section 2001, the value of
  the taxable estate may be determined, if the executor so  elects  before
  the  expiration  of  the period of limitation for assessment provided in
  section 6501, by deducting from the value of the gross estate the amount
  (as  determined  in  accordance  with  regulations  prescribed  by   the
  Secretary) of any estate, succession, legacy, or inheritance tax imposed
  by  and actually paid to any foreign country, in respect of any property
  situated within such foreign country and included in the gross estate of
  a citizen or resident of the United  States,  upon  a  transfer  by  the
  decedent  for public, charitable, or religious uses described in section
  2055. The determination under this paragraph of the country within which
  property is  situated  shall  be  made  in  accordance  with  the  rules
  applicable  under  subchapter B (sec. 2101 and following) in determining
  whether property is situated within or without the  United  States.  Any
  election  under  this  paragraph  shall  be exercised in accordance with
  regulations prescribed by the Secretary.


   (2) Condition for  allowance  of  deduction.--No  deduction  shall  be
  allowed  under  paragraph  (1) for a foreign death tax specified therein
  unless the decrease in the tax imposed by  section  2001  which  results
  from  the  deduction provided in paragraph (1) will inure solely for the
  benefit of the public, charitable, or religious transferees described in
  section 2055 or section 2106(a)(2). In any case where the tax imposed by
  section  2001  is  equitably  apportioned  among  all the transferees of
  property included in the gross  estate,  including  those  described  in
  sections  2055  and  2106(a)(2)  (taking  into  account  any exemptions,
  credits, or deductions allowed by this  chapter),  in  determining  such
  decrease,  there shall be disregarded any decrease in the Federal estate
  tax which any transferees other than those described  in  sections  2055
  and 2106(a)(2) are required to pay.
    (3)  Effect  on credit for foreign death taxes of deduction under this
  subsection.--
    (A) Election.--An election under this subsection  shall  be  deemed  a
  waiver  of  the right to claim a credit, against the Federal estate tax,
  under a death tax convention with any foreign country  for  any  tax  or
  portion  thereof  in  respect  of  which a deduction is taken under this
  subsection.
    (B) Cross reference.--
    See section 2011(d) for the effect of a  deduction  taken  under  this
  paragraph on the credit for foreign death taxes.
    (e) Marital rights.--
    For  provisions  treating certain relinquishments of marital rights as
  consideration in money or money's worth, see section 2043(b)(2).
    § 2054. Losses. For purposes of the tax imposed by section  2001,  the
  value  of  the  taxable estate shall be determined by deducting from the
  value of the gross estate  losses  incurred  during  the  settlement  of
  estates  arising from fires, storms, shipwrecks, or other casualties, or
  from theft, when such losses are not compensated  for  by  insurance  or
  otherwise.
    § 2055. Transfers for public, charitable, and religious uses.
    (a)  In general.--For purposes of the tax imposed by section 2001, the
  value of the taxable estate shall be determined by  deducting  from  the
  value of the gross estate the amount of all bequests, legacies, devises,
  or transfers--
    (1)  to  or for the use of the United States, any State, any political
  subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia, for exclusively public
  purposes;
    (2) to or for the  use  of  any  corporation  organized  and  operated
  exclusively   for   religious,   charitable,  scientific,  literary,  or
  educational purposes, including the encouragement of art, or  to  foster
  national  or  international  amateur  sports competition (but only if no
  part of its activities involve the provision of athletic  facilities  or
  equipment),  and  the  prevention  of cruelty to children or animals, no
  part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of  any  private
  stockholder  or  individual, which is not disqualified for tax exemption
  under  section  501(c)(3)  by  reason   of   attempting   to   influence
  legislation,  and  which  does  not  participate  in,  or  intervene  in
  (including the publishing or distributing of statements), any  political
  campaign  on  behalf  of  (or in opposition to) any candidate for public
  office;
    (3) to a trustee or  trustees,  or  a  fraternal  society,  order,  or
  association   operating  under  the  lodge  system,  but  only  if  such
  contributions or gifts are to be used by such trustee or trustees, or by
  such  fraternal  society,  order,  or   association,   exclusively   for
  religious, charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or


 for  the  prevention  of  cruelty  to  children  or animals, such trust,
  fraternal society, order, or association would not be  disqualified  for
  tax  exemption  under  section  501(c)(3)  by  reason  of  attempting to
  influence  legislation,  and such trustee or trustees, or such fraternal
  society, order, or association, does not participate in, or intervene in
  (including the publishing or distributing of statements), any  political
  campaign  on  behalf  of  (or in opposition to) any candidate for public
  office;
    (4) to or for the use of any veterans'  organization  incorporated  by
  Act  of  Congress,  or of its departments or local chapters or posts, no
  part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of  any  private
  shareholder or individual; or
    (5)  to an employee stock ownership plan if such transfer qualifies as
  a qualified gratuitous transfer of qualified employer securities  within
  the meaning of section 664(g).
    For  purposes  of this subsection, the complete termination before the
  date prescribed for the filing of the estate tax return of  a  power  to
  consume,   invade,  or  appropriate  property  for  the  benefit  of  an
  individual before such power has been exercised by reason of  the  death
  of  such  individual  or  for  any  other reason shall be considered and
  deemed to be a qualified disclaimer with the same full force and  effect
  as  though  he had filed such qualified disclaimer. Rules similar to the
  rules of section 501(j) shall apply for purposes of paragraph (2).
    (b) Powers of  appointment.--Property  includible  in  the  decedent's
  gross  estate  under  section  2041  (relating to powers of appointment)
  received by a donee described in this section  shall,  for  purposes  of
  this section, be considered a bequest of such decedent.
    (c)  Death  taxes  payable  out  of  bequests.--If  the tax imposed by
  section 2001, or any estate, succession, legacy, or  inheritance  taxes,
  are,  either  by  the  terms of the will, by the law of the jurisdiction
  under  which  the  estate  is  administered,  or  by  the  law  of   the
  jurisdiction  imposing  the  particular tax, payable in whole or in part
  out of the bequests, legacies, or  devises  otherwise  deductible  under
  this section, then the amount deductible under this section shall be the
  amount  of  such bequests, legacies, or devises reduced by the amount of
  such taxes.
    (d) Limitation on deduction.--The amount of the deduction  under  this
  section  for  any transfer shall not exceed the value of the transferred
  property required to be included in the gross estate.
    (e) Disallowance of deductions in certain cases.--
    (1) No deduction shall be allowed under this section for a transfer to
  or for the use of an organization or trust described in  section  508(d)
  or 4948(c)(4) subject to the conditions specified in such sections.
    (2) Where an interest in property (other than an interest described in
  section  170(f)(3)(B))  passes  or  has  passed  from  the decedent to a
  person, or for a use, described  in  subsection  (a),  and  an  interest
  (other than an interest which is extinguished upon the decedent's death)
  in the same property passes or has passed (for less than an adequate and
  full  consideration  in  money  or money's worth) from the decedent to a
  person, or for a use, not described  in  subsection  (a),  no  deduction
  shall be allowed under this section for the interest which passes or has
  passed  to  the  person,  or  for  the  use, described in subsection (a)
  unless--
    (A) in the case of a remainder interest, such interest is in  a  trust
  which  is a charitable remainder annuity trust or a charitable remainder
  unitrust (described in section 664) or a pooled income  fund  (described
  in section 642(c)(5)), or


   (B) in the case of any other interest, such interest is in the form of
  a  guaranteed annuity or is a fixed percentage distributed yearly of the
  fair market value of the property (to be determined yearly).
    (3) Reformations to comply with paragraph (2).--
    (A)  In general.--A deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) in
  respect of any qualified reformation.
    (B) Qualified reformation.--For purposes of this paragraph,  the  term
  "qualified  reformation"  means  a  change  of a governing instrument by
  reformation, amendment,  construction,  or  otherwise  which  changes  a
  reformable interest into a qualified interest but only if--
    (i) any difference between--
    (I)  the  actuarial value (determined as of the date of the decedent's
  death) of the qualified interest, and
    (II)  the  actuarial  value  (as  so  determined)  of  the  reformable
  interest,
    does not exceed 5 percent of the actuarial value (as so determined) of
  the reformable interest,
    (ii) in the case of--
    (I) a charitable remainder interest, the nonremainder interest (before
  and after the qualified reformation) terminated at the same time, or
    (II)  any  other  interest,  the reformable interest and the qualified
  interest are for the same period, and
    (iii) such change is effective as of the date of the decedent's death.
    A nonremainder interest (before reformation) for a term  of  years  in
  excess  of  20  years  shall  be  treated as satisfying subclause (I) of
  clause (ii) if such interest (after reformation) is for  a  term  of  20
  years.
    (C) Reformable interest.--For purposes of this paragraph--
    (i) In general.--The term "reformable interest" means any interest for
  which a deduction would be allowable under subsection (a) at the time of
  the decedent's death but for paragraph (2).
    (ii)  Beneficiary's  interest  must  be  fixed.--The  term "reformable
  interest" does not include any interest  unless,  before  the  remainder
  vests  in possession, all payments to persons other than an organization
  described in subsection (a) are expressed  either  in  specified  dollar
  amounts  or a fixed percentage of the fair market value of the property.
  For purposes of determining whether all such payments are expressed as a
  fixed percentage of the fair  market  value  of  the  property,  section
  664(d)(3) shall be taken into account.
    (iii)  Special  rule where timely commencement of reformation.--Clause
  (ii) shall not apply  to  any  interest  if  a  judicial  proceeding  is
  commenced  to  change  such interest into a qualified interest not later
  than the 90th day after--
    (I) if an estate tax return is required to be filed, the last date
  (including extensions) for filing such return, or
    (II) if no estate tax return is required to be filed,  the  last  date
  (including  extensions)  for  filing  the  income tax return for the 1st
  taxable year for which such a return is required  to  be  filed  by  the
  trust.
    (iv)  Special  rule for will executed before January 1, 1979, etc.--In
  the case of any interest passing under a will executed before January 1,
  1979, or under a trust created before such date, clause (ii)  shall  not
  apply.
    (D)  Qualified  interest.--For  purposes  of  this paragraph, the term
  "qualified  interest"  means  an  interest  for  which  a  deduction  is
  allowable under subsection (a).


   (E)  Limitation.--The  deduction referred to in subparagraph (A) shall
  not exceed the amount of the deduction which would have  been  allowable
  for the reformable interest but for paragraph (2).
    (F)  Special rule where income beneficiary dies.--If (by reason of the
  death of any individual, or by termination or distribution of a trust in
  accordance with the terms of the trust instrument) by the due  date  for
  filing  the  estate  tax  return  (including  any  extension  thereof) a
  reformable interest is in a wholly charitable trust or  passes  directly
  to  a person or for a use described in subsection (a), a deduction shall
  be  allowed  for  such  reformable  interest  as  if  it  had  met   the
  requirements  of  paragraph (2) on the date of the decedent's death. For
  purposes of the preceding sentence, the term "wholly  charitable  trust"
  means a charitable trust which, upon the allowance of a deduction, would
  be described in section 4947(a)(1).
    (G)  Statute  of limitations.--The period for assessing any deficiency
  of any tax attributable to the application of this paragraph  shall  not
  expire  before  the date 1 year after the date on which the Secretary is
  notified  that  such  reformation  (or  other  proceeding  pursuant   to
  subparagraph (J)1 has occurred.
    (H)  Regulations.--The  Secretary  shall prescribe such regulations as
  may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this paragraph,  including
  regulations  providing  such  adjustments  in  the  application  of  the
  provisions of section 508 (relating to special rules relating to section
  501(c)(3) organizations), subchapter J  (relating  to  estates,  trusts,
  beneficiaries,  and  decedents),  and  chapter  42  (relating to private
  foundations) as may be necessary by reason of the qualified reformation.
    (I) Reformations permitted in case of remainder interests in residence
  or farm,  pooled  income  funds,  etc.--The  Secretary  shall  prescribe
  regulations   (consistent   with   the  provisions  of  this  paragraph)
  permitting reformations in the case of any failure--
    (i) to meet the requirements  of  section  170(f)(3)(B)  (relating  to
  remainder interests in personal residence or farm, etc.), or
    (ii) to meet the requirements of section 642(c)(5).
    (J)  Void  or  reformed  trust  in  cases  of  insufficient  remainder
  interests.--In the case of a trust  that  would  qualify  (or  could  be
  reformed  to  qualify  pursuant  to subparagraph (B)) but for failure to
  satisfy the requirement of paragraph (1)(D) or (2)(D) of section 664(d),
  such trust may be--
    (i) declared null and void ab initio, or
    (ii) changed by reformation, amendment,  or  otherwise  to  meet  such
  requirement by reducing the payout rate or the duration (or both) of any
  noncharitable  beneficiary's interest to the extent necessary to satisfy
  such requirement,
    pursuant to a proceeding that is commenced within the period  required
  in  subparagraph  (C)(iii).  In  a  case  described  in  clause  (i), no
  deduction shall be allowed under this title  for  any  transfer  to  the
  trust  and  any  transactions  entered  into by the trust prior to being
  declared void shall be treated as entered into by the transferor.
    (4) Works of art and their copyrights treated as  separate  properties
  in certain cases.--
    (A)  In general.--In the case of a qualified contribution of a work of
  art, the work of art and the copyright on such  work  of  art  shall  be
  treated as separate properties for purposes of paragraph (2).
    (B)  Work  of  art  defined.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term
  "work of art" means any tangible personal property with respect to which
  there is a copyright under Federal law.
    (C) Qualified contribution defined.--For purposes of  this  paragraph,
  the  term  "qualified  contribution" means any transfer of property to a


 qualified organization if the use of the property by the organization is
  related to the purpose  or  function  constituting  the  basis  for  its
  exemption under section 501.
    (D)  Qualified  organization defined.--For purposes of this paragraph,
  the term "qualified organization" means any  organization  described  in
  section 501(c)(3) other than a private foundation (as defined in section
  509).  For  purposes  of  the  preceding  sentence,  a private operating
  foundation (as defined in section 4942(j)(3)) shall not be treated as  a
  private foundation.
    (5)  Contributions  to  donor  advised  funds.--A  deduction otherwise
  allowed under subsection (a) for any contribution  to  a  donor  advised
  fund (as defined in section 4966(d)(2)) shall only be allowed if--
    (A)  the  sponsoring  organization  (as defined in section 4966(d)(1))
  with respect to such donor advised fund is not--
    (i) described in paragraph (3) or (4) of subsection (a), or
    (ii) a  type  III  supporting  organization  (as  defined  in  section
  4943(f)(5)(A))   which   is  not  a  functionally  integrated  type  III
  supporting organization (as defined in section 4943(f)(5)(B)), and
    (B) the taxpayer  obtains  a  contemporaneous  written  acknowledgment
  (determined  under  rules  similar to the rules of section 170(f)(8)(C))
  from the sponsoring organization (as so defined) of such  donor  advised
  fund  that such organization has exclusive legal control over the assets
  contributed.
    (f) Special rule  for  irrevocable  transfers  of  easements  in  real
  property.--A  deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) in respect
  of any transfer of a qualified real property  interest  (as  defined  in
  section  170(h)(2)(C))  which  meets  the requirements of section 170(h)
  (without regard to paragraph (4)(A) thereof).
    (g) Cross references.--
    (1) For option as to time for valuation for purpose of deduction under
  this section, see section 2032.
    (2) For treatment of certain organizations providing child  care,  see
  section 501(k).
    (3)  For  exemption  of  gifts  and  bequests to or for the benefit of
  Library of Congress, see section 5 of the  Act  of  March  3,  1925,  as
  amended (2 U.S.C. 161).
    (4)  For  treatment of gifts and bequests for the benefit of the Naval
  Historical Center as gifts or bequests to or for the use of  the  United
  States, see section 7222 of Title 10, United States Code.
    (5)  For  treatment  of  gifts  and  bequests to or for the benefit of
  National Park Foundation as gifts or bequests to or for the use  of  the
  United  States, see section 8 of the Act of December 18, 1967 (16 U.S.C.
  191).
    (6) For treatment of gifts,  devises,  or  bequests  accepted  by  the
  Secretary  of  State,  the  Director  of the International Communication
  Agency, or the Director of the United States  International  Development
  Cooperation  Agency  as gifts, devises, or bequests to or for the use of
  the United  States,  see  section  25  of  the  State  Department  Basic
  Authorities Act of 1956.
    (7)  For  treatment  of  gifts  or  bequests  of money accepted by the
  Attorney General for credit to "Commissary Funds,  Federal  Prisons"  as
  gifts  or  bequests  to or for the use of the United States, see section
  4043 of Title 18, United States Code.
    (8) For payment  of  tax  on  gifts  and  bequests  of  United  States
  obligations  to  the  United  States,  see  section 3113(e) of Title 31,
  United States Code.


   (9) For treatment of gifts and  bequests  for  benefit  of  the  Naval
  Academy as gifts or bequests to or for the use of the United States, see
  section 6973 of Title 10, United States Code.
    (10)  For  treatment  of  gifts  and bequests for benefit of the Naval
  Academy Museum as gifts or bequests to or for  the  use  of  the  United
  States, see section 6974 of Title 10, United States Code.
    (11) For exemption of gifts and bequests received by National Archives
  Trust Fund Board, see section 2308 of Title 44, United States Code.
    (12)  For  treatment of gifts and bequests to or for the use of Indian
  tribal governments (or their subdivisions), see section 7871.
    § 2056. Bequests, etc., to surviving spouse. (a) Allowance of  marital
  deduction.--For  purposes  of the tax imposed by section 2001, the value
  of the taxable estate shall, except as limited  by  subsection  (b),  be
  determined  by  deducting  from  the value of the gross estate an amount
  equal to the value of any interest  in  property  which  passes  or  has
  passed from the decedent to his surviving spouse, but only to the extent
  that  such  interest  is  included in determining the value of the gross
  estate.
    (b) Limitation  in  the  case  of  life  estate  or  other  terminable
  interest.--
    (1)  General  rule.--Where, on the lapse of time, on the occurrence of
  an event or contingency, or on the failure of an event or contingency to
  occur, an interest passing to the surviving  spouse  will  terminate  or
  fail,  no  deduction shall be allowed under this section with respect to
  such interest--
    (A) if an interest in such property passes or  has  passed  (for  less
  than  an adequate and full consideration in money or money's worth) from
  the decedent to any person other than  such  surviving  spouse  (or  the
  estate of such spouse); and
    (B) if by reason of such passing such person (or his heirs or assigns)
  may possess or enjoy any part of such property after such termination or
  failure of the interest so passing to the surviving spouse;
    and  no deduction shall be allowed with respect to such interest (even
  if such deduction is not disallowed under subparagraphs (A) and (B))--
    (C) if such interest is to  be  acquired  for  the  surviving  spouse,
  pursuant  to  directions  of  the  decedent,  by  his executor or by the
  trustee of a trust.
    For purposes of this paragraph, an interest shall not be considered as
  an interest which will terminate  or  fail  merely  because  it  is  the
  ownership  of  a  bond,  note,  or  similar  contractual obligation, the
  discharge of which would not have the effect of an annuity for  life  or
  for a term.
    (2)  Interest  in  unidentified assets.--Where the assets (included in
  the decedent's gross estate) out of which, or the proceeds of which,  an
  interest  passing  to  the  surviving  spouse may be satisfied include a
  particular asset or assets with respect to which no deduction  would  be
  allowed if such asset or assets passed from the decedent to such spouse,
  then  the  value  of  such  interest  passing  to such spouse shall, for
  purposes of subsection (a), be reduced by the aggregate  value  of  such
  particular assets.
    (3)   Interest   of   spouse   conditional  on  survival  for  limited
  period.--For purposes of this subsection, an  interest  passing  to  the
  surviving  spouse  shall  not  be  considered  as an interest which will
  terminate or fail on the death of such spouse if--
    (A) such death will cause a termination or failure  of  such  interest
  only  if  it  occurs  within  a  period not exceeding 6 months after the
  decedent's death, or only if it occurs as a result of a common  disaster


 resulting in the death of the decedent and the surviving spouse, or only
  if it occurs in the case of either such event; and
    (B) such termination or failure does not in fact occur.
    (4) Valuation of interest passing to surviving spouse.--In determining
  for  purposes  of  subsection  (a) the value of any interest in property
  passing to the surviving spouse for which a deduction is allowed by this
  section--
    (A) there shall be taken into account the effect which the tax imposed
  by section 2001, or any estate, succession, legacy, or inheritance  tax,
  has on the net value to the surviving spouse of such interest; and
    (B)  where  such  interest or property is encumbered in any manner, or
  where the surviving spouse incurs any obligation imposed by the decedent
  with respect to the  passing  of  such  interest,  such  encumbrance  or
  obligation  shall  be  taken  into  account in the same manner as if the
  amount of a gift to such spouse of such interest were being determined.
    (5) Life estate with power of appointment in surviving spouse.--In the
  case of an interest in  property  passing  from  the  decedent,  if  his
  surviving  spouse is entitled for life to all the income from the entire
  interest, or all the income from a  specific  portion  thereof,  payable
  annually  or  at  more  frequent  intervals, with power in the surviving
  spouse  to  appoint  the  entire  interest,  or  such  specific  portion
  (exercisable in favor of such surviving spouse, or of the estate of such
  surviving spouse, or in favor of either, whether or not in each case the
  power is exercisable in favor of others), and with no power in any other
  person to appoint any part of the interest, or such specific portion, to
  any person other than the surviving spouse--
    (A)  the  interest  or  such  portion  thereof  so  passing shall, for
  purposes of subsection (a), be considered as passing  to  the  surviving
  spouse, and
    (B)  no  part  of  the  interest  so  passing  shall,  for purposes of
  paragraph (1)(A), be considered as passing to any person other than  the
  surviving spouse.
    This  paragraph shall apply only if such power in the surviving spouse
  to appoint the  entire  interest,  or  such  specific  portion  thereof,
  whether  exercisable  by  will  or  during  life, is exercisable by such
  spouse alone and in all events.
    (6) Life insurance or annuity payments with power  of  appointment  in
  surviving  spouse.--In  the case of an interest in property passing from
  the decedent consisting of proceeds under a life  insurance,  endowment,
  or  annuity  contract,  if under the terms of the contract such proceeds
  are payable in installments or are held by the  insurer  subject  to  an
  agreement  to  pay  interest  thereon  (whether  the  proceeds,  on  the
  termination of any interest payments, are payable in a lump  sum  or  in
  annual  or more frequent installments), and such installment or interest
  payments are payable annually or at more frequent intervals,  commencing
  not later than 13 months after the decedent's death, and all amounts, or
  a  specific  portion of all such amounts, payable during the life of the
  surviving spouse are payable only to such spouse, and  such  spouse  has
  the  power  to  appoint  all  amounts, or such specific portion, payable
  under such contract (exercisable in favor of such surviving  spouse,  or
  of  the  estate of such surviving spouse, or in favor of either, whether
  or not in each case the power is exercisable in favor of  others),  with
  no power in any other person to appoint such amounts to any person other
  than the surviving spouse--
    (A)  such amounts shall, for purposes of subsection (a), be considered
  as passing to the surviving spouse, and
    (B) no part of such amounts shall, for purposes of  paragraph  (1)(A),
  be considered as passing to any person other than the surviving spouse.


   This  paragraph  shall apply only if, under the terms of the contract,
  such power in the surviving spouse  to  appoint  such  amounts,  whether
  exercisable  by will or during life, is exercisable by such spouse alone
  and in all events.
    (7) Election with respect to life estate for surviving spouse.--
    (A)   In  general.--In  the  case  of  qualified  terminable  interest
  property--
    (i) for purposes of subsection (a), such property shall be treated  as
  passing to the surviving spouse, and
    (ii)  for purposes of paragraph (1)(A), no part of such property shall
  be treated as passing to any person other than the surviving spouse.
    (B) Qualified terminable interest property defined.--For  purposes  of
  this paragraph--
    (i)  In  general.--The  term  "qualified terminable interest property"
  means property--
    (I) which passes from the decedent,
    (II) in which the surviving spouse has a  qualifying  income  interest
  for life, and
    (III) to which an election under this paragraph applies.
    (ii)  Qualifying income interest for life.--The surviving spouse has a
  qualifying income interest for life if--
    (I) the surviving spouse is  entitled  to  all  the  income  from  the
  property,  payable  annually  or  at  more  frequent intervals, or has a
  usufruct interest for life in the property, and
    (II) no person has a power to appoint any part of the property to  any
  person other than the surviving spouse.
    Subclause (II) shall not apply to a power exercisable only at or after
  the   death   of  the  surviving  spouse.  To  the  extent  provided  in
  regulations, an annuity shall be treated  in  a  manner  similar  to  an
  income  interest  in  property  (regardless of whether the property from
  which the annuity is payable can be separately identified).
    (iii)  Property  includes  interest  therein.--The   term   "property"
  includes an interest in property.
    (iv)  Specific  portion  treated  as  separate  property.--A  specific
  portion of property shall be treated as separate property.
    (v) Election.--An election under this paragraph with  respect  to  any
  property  shall  be made by the executor on the return of tax imposed by
  section 2001. Such an election, once made, shall be irrevocable.
    (C) Treatment of  survivor  annuities.--In  the  case  of  an  annuity
  included  in the gross estate of the decedent under section 2039 (or, in
  the case of an interest  in  an  annuity  arising  under  the  community
  property  laws  of a State, included in the gross estate of the decedent
  under section 2033) where only the surviving spouse  has  the  right  to
  receive payments before the death of such surviving spouse--
    (i)  the  interest  of  such  surviving  spouse  shall be treated as a
  qualifying income interest for life, and
    (ii) the executor shall be treated as having made  an  election  under
  this  subsection  with  respect  to  such  annuity  unless  the executor
  otherwise elects on the return of tax imposed by section 2001.
    An election under clause (ii), once made, shall be irrevocable.
    (8) Special rule for charitable remainder trusts.--
    (A) In general.--If the surviving spouse of the decedent is  the  only
  beneficiary  of  a  qualified  charitable  remainder  trust who is not a
  charitable beneficiary nor an ESOP beneficiary, paragraph (1) shall  not
  apply  to any interest in such trust which passes or has passed from the
  decedent to such surviving spouse.
    (B) Definitions.--For purposes of subparagraph (A)--


   (i) Charitable beneficiary.--The term "charitable  beneficiary"  means
  any beneficiary which is an organization described in section 170(c).
    (ii)   ESOP   beneficiary.--The  term  "ESOP  beneficiary"  means  any
  beneficiary which is an employee stock ownership  plan  (as  defined  in
  section  4975(e)(7))  that  holds  a  remainder  interest  in  qualified
  employer securities (as defined in section 664(g)(4)) to be  transferred
  to  such  plan in a qualified gratuitous transfer (as defined in section
  664(g)(1)).
    (iii)  Qualified  charitable  remainder  trust.--The  term  "qualified
  charitable  remainder  trust" means a charitable remainder annuity trust
  or a charitable remainder unitrust (described in section 664).
    (9) Denial of double deduction.--Nothing in this section or any  other
  provision  of  this  chapter  shall  allow  the value of any interest in
  property to be deducted under this chapter more than once  with  respect
  to the same decedent.
    (10)  Specific  portion.--For  purposes  of  paragraphs  (5), (6), and
  (7)(B)(iv),  the  term  "specific  portion"  only  includes  a   portion
  determined on a fractional or percentage basis.
    (c) Definition.--For purposes of this section, an interest in property
  shall  be  considered  as passing from the decedent to any person if and
  only if--
    (1) such interest is bequeathed or  devised  to  such  person  by  the
  decedent;
    (2) such interest is inherited by such person from the decedent;
    (3)  such  interest  is  the  dower  or curtesy interest (or statutory
  interest in lieu thereof) of such person  as  surviving  spouse  of  the
  decedent;
    (4)  such interest has been transferred to such person by the decedent
  at any time;
    (5) such interest was, at the time of the decedent's  death,  held  by
  such  person and the decedent (or by them and any other person) in joint
  ownership with right of survivorship;
    (6) the decedent had a power (either alone or in conjunction with  any
  person)  to  appoint  such  interest and if he appoints or has appointed
  such interest to such person, or if such person takes such  interest  in
  default on the release or nonexercise of such power; or
    (7) such interest consists of proceeds of insurance on the life of the
  decedent receivable by such person.
    Except as provided in paragraph (5) or (6) of subsection (b), where at
  the  time  of  the  decedent's death it is not possible to ascertain the
  particular person or persons to whom an interest in  property  may  pass
  from  the  decedent,  such interest shall, for purposes of subparagraphs
  (A) and (B) of subsection (b)(1), be  considered  as  passing  from  the
  decedent to a person other than the surviving spouse.
    § 2103. Definition of Gross Estate. For the purpose of the tax imposed
  by  section  2101,  the  value  of  the  gross  estate of every decedent
  nonresident not a citizen of the United States shall be that part of his
  gross estate (determined as provided in section 2031) which at the  time
  of his death is situated in the United States.
    §   2104.   Property   Within   the   United   States.  (a)  Stock  in
  corporation.--For purposes of this subchapter shares of stock owned  and
  held by a nonresident not a citizen of the United States shall be deemed
  property  within  the  United  States  only  if  issued  by  a  domestic
  corporation.
    (b) Revocable transfers and transfers within 3  years  of  death.--For
  purposes of this subchapter, any property of which the decedent has made
  a  transfer,  by trust or otherwise, within the meaning of sections 2035
  to 2038, inclusive, shall be deemed to be situated in the United States,


 if so situated either at the time of the transfer or at the time of  the
  decedent's death.
    (c)   Debt   obligations.--For   purposes  of  this  subchapter,  debt
  obligations of-
    (1) a United States person, or
    (2) the United States, a State or any political  subdivision  thereof,
  or the District of Columbia,
    owned  and  held  by  a nonresident not a citizen of the United States
  shall be deemed property within  the  United  States.  With  respect  to
  estates  of  decedents  dying  after  December 31, 1969, deposits with a
  domestic branch of a foreign corporation, if such branch is  engaged  in
  the commercial banking business, shall, for purposes of this subchapter,
  be  deemed  property within the United States. This subsection shall not
  apply to a debt obligation to which section 2105(b) applies.
    § 2105. Property Without the  United  States.  (a)  Proceeds  of  life
  insurance.--For  purposes  of  this subchapter, the amount receivable as
  insurance on the life of a nonresident  not  a  citizen  of  the  United
  States shall not be deemed property within the United States.
    (b) Bank deposits and certain other debt obligations.--For purposes of
  this  subchapter,  the following shall not be deemed property within the
  United States--
    (1) amounts described in section 871(i)(3), if  any  interest  thereon
  would  not  be  subject  to tax by reason of section 871(i)(1) were such
  interest received by the decedent at the time of his death,
    (2) deposits with a  foreign  branch  of  a  domestic  corporation  or
  domestic  partnership,  if  such  branch  is  engaged  in the commercial
  banking business,
    (3) debt obligations,  if,  without  regard  to  whether  a  statement
  meeting  the  requirements  of  section 871(h)(5) has been received, any
  interest thereon would be eligible for  the  exemption  from  tax  under
  section  871(h)(1)  were  such  interest received by the decedent at the
  time of his death, and
    (4) obligations which would be original issue discount obligations  as
  defined in section 871(g)(1) but for subparagraph (B)(i) thereof, if any
  interest  thereon  (were  such  interest received by the decedent at the
  time of his death) would not be effectively connected with  the  conduct
  of a trade or business within the United States.
    Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, if any portion of the interest
  on  an obligation referred to in paragraph (3) would not be eligible for
  the exemption  referred  to  in  paragraph  (3)  by  reason  of  section
  871(h)(4)  if  the interest were received by the decedent at the time of
  his death, then an  appropriate  portion  (as  determined  in  a  manner
  prescribed by the Secretary) of the value (as determined for purposes of
  this  chapter)  of  such debt obligation shall be deemed property within
  the United States.
    (c) Works of  art  on  loan  for  exhibition.--For  purposes  of  this
  subchapter,  works  of  art  owned by a nonresident not a citizen of the
  United States shall not be deemed property within the United  States  if
  such works of art are--
    (1) imported into the United States solely for exhibition purposes,
    (2)  loaned  for such purposes, to a public gallery or museum, no part
  of the net earnings of which  inures  to  the  benefit  of  any  private
  stockholder or individual, and
    (3)  at  the time of the death of the owner, on exhibition, or enroute
  to or from exhibition, in such a public gallery or museum.
    § 2503. (a) General Definition - The term "taxable  gifts"  means  the
  total  amount  of  gifts  made during the calendar year, less deductions
  provided in subchapter C (section 2522 and following).


   (b) Exclusions from gifts. (1)  In  general.--In  the  case  of  gifts
  (other than gifts of future interests in property) made to any person by
  the  donor  during the calendar year, the first $10,000 of such gifts to
  such person shall not, for purposes of subsection (a),  be  included  in
  the  total amount of gifts made during such year. Where there has been a
  transfer  to  any  person  of  a  present  interest  in  property,   the
  possibility  that  such  interest may be diminished by the exercise of a
  power shall be disregarded in applying this subsection, if  no  part  of
  such interest will at any time pass to any other person.
    (2)  Inflation  adjustment.--In  the  case of gifts made in a calendar
  year after 1998, the $10,000 amount contained in paragraph (1) shall  be
  increased by an amount equal to--
    (A) $10,000, multiplied by
    (B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) for
  such  calendar  year  by substituting "calendar year 1997" for "calendar
  year 1992" in subparagraph (B) thereof.
    If any amount as adjusted  under  the  preceding  sentence  is  not  a
  multiple  of  $1,000,  such  amount  shall be rounded to the next lowest
  multiple of $1,000.
    (c) Transfer for the benefit of minor. -- No part  of  a  gift  to  an
  individual  who has not attained the age of 21 years on the date of such
  transfer shall be considered a gift of a future interest in property for
  purposes of subsection (b) if the property and the income therefrom-
    (1) may be expended by, or for the benefit of, the  donee  before  his
  attaining the age of 21 years, and
    (2) will to the extent not so expended-
    (A) pass to the donee on his attaining the age of 21 years, and
    (B)  in the event the donee dies before attaining the age of 21 years,
  be payable to the estate of the donee or  as  he  may  appoint  under  a
  general power of appointment as defined in section 2514(c).
    {(d)  Repealed.  Pub. L. 97-34, title III, § 311(h)(5), Aug. 13, 1981,
  95 Stat. 282}
    (e) Exclusion  for  certain  transfers  for  educational  expenses  or
  medical  expenses.  (1)  In general. Any qualified transfer shall not be
  treated as a transfer of property by gift for purposes of this chapter.
    (2) Qualified transfer. For purposes  of  this  subsection,  the  term
  "qualified transfer" means any amount paid on behalf of an individual-
    (A)  as  tuition  to  an educational organization described in section
  170(b)(1)(A)(ii) for the education or training of such individual, or
    (B) to any person who provides medical care  (as  defined  in  section
  213(d))  with  respect  to  such  individual as payment for such medical
  care.
    (f) Waiver of certain pension rights. If any individual waives, before
  the death of a participant, any  survivor  benefit,  or  right  to  such
  benefit,  under  section  401(a)(11)  or  417,  such waiver shall not be
  treated as a transfer of property by gift for purposes of this chapter.
    (g) Treatment of certain  loans  of  artworks.  (1)  In  general.  For
  purposes of this subtitle, any loan of a qualified work of art shall not
  be  treated  as  a transfer (and the value of such qualified work of art
  shall be determined as if such loan had not been made) if-
    (A) such loan is to an organization described in section 501(c)(3) and
  exempt from tax under section 501(c) (other than a private  foundation),
  and
    (B)  the  use  of  such  work  by  such organization is related to the
  purpose or function constituting  the  basis  for  its  exemption  under
  section 501.
    (2) Definitions. For purposes of this section-


   (A)  Qualified work of art. The term "qualified work of art" means any
  archaeological, historic, or creative tangible personal property.
    (B)  Private foundation. The term "private foundation" has the meaning
  given such term by section 509, except that such term shall not  include
  any private operating foundation (as defined in section 4942(j)(3)).
    §  2511.  Transfers  in general. (a) Scope. Subject to the limitations
  contained in this chapter, the tax imposed by section 2501  shall  apply
  whether  the  transfer  is  in  trust  or otherwise, whether the gift is
  direct or indirect, and  whether  the  property  is  real  or  personal,
  tangible  or  intangible; but in the case of a nonresident not a citizen
  of the United States, shall apply to a transfer only if the property  is
  situated within the United States.
    (b)  Intangible property. For purposes of this chapter, in the case of
  a nonresident not a citizen of the United States who  is  excepted  from
  the application of section 2501(a)(2)-
    (1) shares of stock issued by a domestic corporation, and
    (2) debt obligations of-
  --(A) a United States person, or
  --(B)  the  United States, a State or any political subdivision thereof,
  or the District of Columbia,
  --which are owned and held by such nonresident shall  be  deemed  to  be
  property situated within the United States.
    §  2512.  Valuation of gifts. (a) If the gift is made in property, the
  value thereof at the date of the gift shall be considered the amount  of
  the gift.
    (b)  Where  property is transferred for less than an adequate and full
  consideration in money or money's worth, then the amount  by  which  the
  value  of  the property exceeded the value of the consideration shall be
  deemed a gift, and shall be included in computing the  amount  of  gifts
  made during the calendar year.
    § 2513. Gift by husband or wife to third party. (a) Considered as made
  one-half  by  each.  (1)  In  general.  A gift made by one spouse to any
  person other than his spouse shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be
  considered as made one-half by him and one-half by his spouse, but  only
  if  at  the time of the gift each spouse is a citizen or resident of the
  United States. This paragraph shall not apply with respect to a gift  by
  a  spouse  of  an  interest  in  property  if he creates in his spouse a
  general power of appointment, as defined in section 2514(c),  over  such
  interest.   For  purposes  of  this  section,  an  individual  shall  be
  considered as the spouse of another individual only if he is married  to
  such  individual at the time of the gift and does not remarry during the
  remainder of the calendar year.
    (2) Consent of both spouses. Paragraph (1) shall apply  only  if  both
  spouses have signified (under the regulations provided for in subsection
  (b))  their  consent  to the application of paragraph (1) in the case of
  all such gifts made during the calendar year by either while married  to
  the other.
    (b) Manner and time of signifying consent. (1) Manner. A consent under
  this  section  shall  be  signified  in such manner as is provided under
  regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
    (2) Time. Such consent may be so signified at any time after the close
  of the calendar year  in  which  the  gift  was  made,  subject  to  the
  following limitations-
  --(A)  The  consent  may  not  be  signified after the 15th day of April
  following the close of such year, unless before such 15th day no  return
  has been filed for such year by either spouse, in which case the consent
  may  not  be  signified  after a return for such year is filed by either
  spouse.


 --(B) The consent may not be signified after a notice of deficiency with
  respect to the tax for such year has  been  sent  to  either  spouse  in
  accordance with section 6212(a).
    (c)   Revocation  of  consent.  Revocation  of  a  consent  previously
  signified shall be made in such manner as in provided under  regulations
  prescribed  by  the  Secretary,  but  the  right  to  revoke  a  consent
  previously signified with respect to a calendar year-
    (1) shall not exist after the 15th day of April following the close of
  such year if the consent was signified on or before such 15th day; and
    (2) shall not exist if the consent was not signified until after  such
  15th day.
    (d)  Joint  and  several liability for tax. If the consent required by
  subsection (a)(2) is signified with  respect  to  a  gift  made  in  any
  calendar  year,  the liability with respect to the entire tax imposed by
  this chapter of each spouse for such year shall be joint and several.
    § 2514. Powers of appointment. (a) Powers created on or before October
  21, 1942. An exercise of a general power of appointment  created  on  or
  before  October  21, 1942, shall be deemed a transfer of property by the
  individual possessing such power; but the failure  to  exercise  such  a
  power  or  the  complete  release of such a power shall not be deemed an
  exercise thereof. If a general power of appointment created on or before
  October 21, 1942, has been partially released so that it is no longer  a
  general  power  of  appointment,  the  subsequent exercise of such power
  shall not be deemed to be the exercise of a general power of appointment
  if-
    (1) such partial release occurred before November 1, 1951, or
    (2) the donee of such power was under a legal  disability  to  release
  such  power  on  October 21, 1942, and such partial release occurred not
  later than six months after the termination of such legal disability.
    (b) Powers created after October 21, 1942. The exercise or release  of
  a  general power of appointment created after October 21, 1942, shall be
  deemed a transfer of property by the individual possessing such power.
    (c) Definition of general power of appointment. For purposes  of  this
  section,  the term "general power of appointment" means a power which is
  exercisable in favor of the individual possessing the  power  (hereafter
  in  this  subsection  referred  to  as the "possessor"), his estate, his
  creditors, or the creditors of his estate; except that-
    (1) A power to  consume,  invade,  or  appropriate  property  for  the
  benefit  of  the possessor which is limited by an ascertainable standard
  relating to the  health,  education,  support,  or  maintenance  of  the
  possessor shall not be deemed a general power of appointment.
    (2)  A  power  of  appointment  created on or before October 21, 1942,
  which is exercisable by the possessor only in conjunction  with  another
  person shall not be deemed a general power of appointment.
    (3)  In  the  case of a power of appointment created after October 21,
  1942, which is exercisable by the possessor  only  in  conjunction  with
  another person-
  --(A)  if  the  power  is  not  exercisable  by  the possessor except in
  conjunction with the creator of the power-such power shall not be deemed
  a general power of appointment;
  --(B) if the power  is  not  exercisable  by  the  possessor  except  in
  conjunction with a person having a substantial interest, in the property
  subject to the power, which is adverse to exercise of the power in favor
  of  the  possessor-such  power  shall  not  be deemed a general power of
  appointment. For the purposes of this subparagraph a person  who,  after
  the  death  of the possessor, may be possessed of a power of appointment
  (with respect to the property subject to the possessor's power) which he
  may exercise in his own favor shall be deemed as having an  interest  in


 the  property and such interest shall be deemed adverse to such exercise
  of the possessor's power;
  --(C)  if (after the application of subparagraphs (A) and (B)) the power
  is a general power of appointment and is exercisable in  favor  of  such
  other  person-such  power shall be deemed a general power of appointment
  only in respect of a fractional part of the  property  subject  to  such
  power, such part to be determined by dividing the value of such property
  by the number of such persons (including the possessor) in favor of whom
  such power is exercisable.
  --For  purposes of subparagraphs (B) and (C), a power shall be deemed to
  be exercisable in favor of a person if it is  exercisable  in  favor  of
  such person, his estate, his creditors, or the creditors of his estate.
    (d)  Creation  of  another  power  in  certain  cases.  If  a power of
  appointment created after October 21, 1942,  is  exercised  by  creating
  another  power of appointment which, under the applicable local law, can
  be validly exercised so as to postpone the  vesting  of  any  estate  or
  interest  in  the  property  which  was  subject  to the first power, or
  suspend the absolute ownership or power of alienation of such  property,
  for a period ascertainable without regard to the date of the creation of
  the  first  power, such exercise of the first power shall, to the extent
  of the property subject to the second power, be  deemed  a  transfer  of
  property by the individual possessing such power.
    (e)  Lapse of power. The lapse of a power of appointment created after
  October 21, 1942, during the life of the individual possessing the power
  shall be considered a release of such power. The rule of  the  preceding
  sentence  shall  apply  with  respect  to the lapse of powers during any
  calendar year only to the extent that the property which could have been
  appointed by exercise of such lapsed powers exceeds in value the greater
  of the following amounts:
    (1) $5,000, or
    (2) 5 percent of the aggregate value of the assets out  of  which,  or
  the  proceeds  of  which,  the  exercise  of  the lapsed powers could be
  satisfied.
    (f) Date of creation of power. For purposes of this section a power of
  appointment created by a will executed on or before  October  21,  1942,
  shall be considered a power created on or before such date if the person
  executing such will dies before July 1, 1949, without having republished
  such will, by codicil or otherwise, after October 21, 1942.
    §  2516.  Certain property settlements. Where a husband and wife enter
  into a written agreement relative to their marital and  property  rights
  and divorce occurs within the 3-year period beginning on the date 1 year
  before  such agreement is entered into (whether or not such agreement is
  approved by the divorce decree), any transfers of property or  interests
  in property made pursuant to such agreement-
    (1)  to  either spouse in settlement of his or her marital or property
  rights, or
    (2) to provide a reasonable allowance for the support of issue of  the
  marriage during minority,
    --shall  be  deemed  to  be  transfers  made  for  a full and adequate
  consideration in money or money's worth.
    § 2518.  Disclaimers.  (a)  General  Rule.  -  For  purposes  of  this
  subtitle,  if  a person makes a qualified disclaimer with respect to any
  interest in property, this subtitle shall apply  with  respect  to  such
  interest as if the interest had never been transferred to such person.
    (b)  Qualified  Disclaimer  Defined. - For purposes of subsection (a),
  the term "qualified disclaimer" means  an  irrevocable  and  unqualified
  refusal by a person to accept an interest in property but only if -
    (1) such refusal is in writing,


   (2)  such  writing  is received by the transferor of the interest, his
  legal representative, or the holder of the legal title to  the  property
  to  which the interest relates not later than the date which is 9 months
  after the later of -
    (A)  the  date  on  which  the  transfer creating the interest in such
  person is made, or
    (B) the day on which such person attains age 21,
    (3) such person has not accepted the interest or any of its  benefits,
  and
    (4)  as  a  result  of  such  refusal, the interest passes without any
  direction on the part of the person making  the  disclaimer  and  passes
  either -
    (A) to the spouse of the decedent, or
    (B) to a person other than the person making the disclaimer.
    (c) Other rules. For purposes of subsection (a)-
    (1)  Disclaimer  of  undivided  portion of interest. A disclaimer with
  respect  to  an  undivided  portion  of  an  interest  which  meets  the
  requirements  of  the preceding sentence shall be treated as a qualified
  disclaimer of such portion of the interest.
    (2) Powers. A power with respect to property shall be  treated  as  an
  interest in such property.
    (3)  Certain  transfers  treated as disclaimers. A written transfer of
  the transferor's entire interest in the property-
    (A) which meets requirements similar to the requirements of paragraphs
  (2) and (3) of subsection (b), and
    (B) which is to a person  or  persons  who  would  have  received  the
  property  had  the  transferor  made  a qualified disclaimer (within the
  meaning of subsection (b)),
    --shall be treated as a qualified disclaimer.
    § 2519. Dispositions of certain life estates. (a) General rule
    --For purposes of this chapter and chapter 11, any disposition of  all
  or  part  of  a  qualifying  income interest for life in any property to
  which this section applies  shall  be  treated  as  a  transfer  of  all
  interests in such property other than the qualifying income interest.
    (b) Property to which this subsection applies. This section applies to
  any  property if a deduction was allowed with respect to the transfer of
  such property to the donor-
    (1) under section 2056 by reason of subsection (b)(7) thereof, or
    (2) under section 2523 by reason of subsection (f) thereof.
    (c) Cross reference
  --For right of recovery for gift tax in the case of property treated  as
  transferred under this section, see section 2207A(b).
    §  2522.  Charitable  and similar gifts. (a) Citizens or residents. In
  computing taxable gifts for the calendar year, there shall be allowed as
  a deduction in the case of a citizen or resident the amount of all gifts
  made during such year to or for the use of-
    (1) the  United  States,  any  State,  or  any  political  subdivision
  thereof, or the District of Columbia, for exclusively public purposes;
    (2)  a corporation, or trust, or community chest, fund, or foundation,
  organized  and   operated   exclusively   for   religious,   charitable,
  scientific,  literary, or educational purposes, or to foster national or
  international amateur sports competition (but only if  no  part  of  its
  activities  involve  the provision of athletic facilities or equipment),
  including the encouragement of art and  the  prevention  of  cruelty  to
  children  or animals, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the
  benefit  of  any  private  shareholder  or  individual,  which  is   not
  disqualified  for  tax  exemption  under  section 501(c)(3) by reason of
  attempting to influence legislation, and which does not participate  in,


 or   intervene   in   (including   the  publishing  or  distributing  of
  statements), any political campaign on behalf of (or in  opposition  to)
  any candidate for public office;
    (3)  a  fraternal  society, order, or association, operating under the
  lodge system, but only if such gifts are  to  be  used  exclusively  for
  religious,  charitable,  scientific,  literary, or educational purposes,
  including the encouragement of art and  the  prevention  of  cruelty  to
  children or animals;
    (4)  posts  or  organizations  of  war veterans, or auxiliary units or
  societies  of  any  such  posts  or  organizations,   if   such   posts,
  organizations, units, or societies are organized in the United States or
  any  of its possessions, and if no part of their net earnings insures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
    Rules similar to the rules of section 501(j) shall apply for  purposes
  of paragraph (2).
    (b)  Nonresidents.  In  the case of a nonresident not a citizen of the
  United States, there shall be allowed as a deduction the amount  of  all
  gifts made during such year to or for the use of-
    (1)  the  United  States,  any  State,  or  any  political subdivision
  thereof, or the District of Columbia, for exclusively public purposes;
    (2) a domestic corporation  organized  and  operated  exclusively  for
  religious,  charitable,  scientific,  literary, or educational purposes,
  including the encouragement of art and  the  prevention  of  cruelty  to
  children  or animals, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the
  benefit  of  any  private  shareholder  or  individual,  which  is   not
  disqualified  for  tax  exemption  under  section 501(c)(3) by reason of
  attempting to influence legislation, and which does not participate  in,
  or   intervene   in   (including   the  publishing  or  distributing  of
  statements), any political campaign on behalf of (or in  opposition  to)
  any candidate for public office;
    (3)  a  trust,  or community chest, fund, or foundation, organized and
  operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, literary, or
  educational  purposes,  including  the  encouragement  of  art  and  the
  prevention of cruelty to children or animals, no substantial part of the
  activities  of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise attempting,
  to  influence  legislation,  and  which  does  not  participate  in,  or
  intervene  in  (including the publishing or distributing of statements),
  any political campaign on behalf of (or in opposition to) any  candidate
  for  public  office;  but  only  if such gifts are to be used within the
  United States exclusively for such purposes;
    (4) a fraternal society, order, or association,  operating  under  the
  lodge  system,  but  only if such gifts are to be used within the United
  States exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific,  literary,  or
  educational  purposes,  including  the  encouragement  of  art  and  the
  prevention of cruelty to children or animals;
    (5) posts or organizations of war  veterans,  or  auxiliary  units  or
  societies   of   any   such  posts  or  organizations,  if  such  posts,
  organizations, units, or societies are organized in the United States or
  any of its possessions, and if no part of their net earnings  inures  to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
    (c)  Disallowance  of  deductions  in  certain cases. (1) No deduction
  shall be allowed under this section for a gift to of 1 for the use of an
  organization or trust described in section 508(d) or 4948(c)(4)  subject
  to the conditions specified in such sections.
    (2)  Where  a  donor  transfers an interest in property (other than an
  interest described in section 170(f)(3)(B)) to a person, or for  a  use,
  described  in subsection (a) or (b) and an interest in the same property
  is retained by the donor, or is transferred or has been transferred (for


 less than an adequate and full consideration in money or money's  worth)
  from  the  donor  to a person, or for a use, not described in subsection
  (a) or (b), no deduction shall be allowed under  this  section  for  the
  interest  which  is,  or  has been transferred to the person, or for the
  use, described in subsection (a) or (b), unless-
    (A) in the case of a remainder interest, such interest is in  a  trust
  which  is a charitable remainder annuity trust or a charitable remainder
  unitrust (described in section 664) or a pooled income  fund  (described
  in section 642(c)(5)), or
    (B) in the case of any other interest, such interest is in the form of
  a  guaranteed annuity or is a fixed percentage distributed yearly of the
  fair market value of the property (to be determined yearly).
    (3) Rules similar to the rules of section 2055(e)(4) shall  apply  for
  purposes of paragraph (2).
    (4)  Reformations  to  comply  with paragraph (2). (A) In general -- A
  deduction shall be allowed  under  subsection  (a)  in  respect  of  any
  qualified reformation (within the meaning of section 2055(e)(3)(B)).
    (B)  Rules  similar  to section 2055(e)(3) to apply -- For purposes of
  this paragraph, rules similar to the rules of section  2055(e)(3)  shall
  apply.
    (5)  Contributions  to  donor  advised  funds.  A  deduction otherwise
  allowed under subsection (a) for any contribution  to  a  donor  advised
  fund (as defined in section 4966(d)(2)) shall only be allowed if-
  --(A)  the  sponsoring  organization  (as defined in section 4966(d)(1))
  with respect to such donor advised fund is not-
  --(i) described in paragraph (3) or (4) of subsection (a), or
  --(ii) a  type  III  supporting  organization  (as  defined  in  section
  4943(f)(5)(A))   which   is  not  a  functionally  integrated  type  III
  supporting organization (as defined in section 4943(f)(5)(B)), and
  --(B) the taxpayer  obtains  a  contemporaneous  written  acknowledgment
  (determined  under  rules  similar to the rules of section 170(f)(8)(C))
  from the sponsoring organization (as so defined) of such  donor  advised
  fund  that such organization has exclusive legal control over the assets
  contributed.
    (d) Special rule  for  irrevocable  transfers  of  easements  in  real
  property.  A  deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) in respect
  of any transfer of a qualified real property  interest  (as  defined  in
  section  170(h)(2)(C))  which  meets  the requirements of section 170(h)
  (without regard to paragraph (4)(A) thereof).
    (e) Special rules for fractional gifts
    (1) Denial of deduction in certain cases
    (A) In general
  --No deduction shall be allowed  for  a  contribution  of  an  undivided
  portion  of  a  taxpayer's entire interest in tangible personal property
  unless all interests in the property are held  immediately  before  such
  contribution by-
  --(i) the taxpayer, or
  --(ii) the taxpayer and the donee.
    (B) Exceptions
  --The   Secretary   may,   by  regulation,  provide  for  exceptions  to
  subparagraph (A) in cases where all persons who hold an interest in  the
  property  make proportional contributions of an undivided portion of the
  entire interest held by such persons.
    (2) Recapture of deduction in certain cases; addition to tax
    (A) In general. The Secretary shall provide for the  recapture  of  an
  amount equal to any deduction allowed under this section (plus interest)
  with respect to any contribution of an undivided portion of a taxpayer's
  entire interest in tangible personal property-


 --(i)  in  any  case  in  which the donor does not contribute all of the
  remaining interests in such property to the donee (or, if such donee  is
  no longer in existence, to any person described in section 170(c)) on or
  before the earlier of-
  --(I) the date that is 10 years after the date of the initial fractional
  contribution, or
  --(II) the date of the death of the donor, and
  --(ii)  in  any  case  in  which  the  donee  has not, during the period
  beginning on the date of the initial fractional contribution and  ending
  on the date described in clause (i)-
  --(I) had substantial physical possession of the property, and
  --(II)  used  the  property  in  a  use which is related to a purpose or
  function constituting the basis for the organizations'  exemption  under
  section 501.
    (B)  Addition  to  tax.  The  tax  imposed  under this chapter for any
  taxable year for which there is a recapture under subparagraph (A) shall
  be increased by 10 percent of the amount so recaptured.
    (C) Initial fractional contribution. For purposes of  this  paragraph,
  the  term  "initial  fractional contribution" means, with respect to any
  donor, the first gift of an undivided  portion  of  the  donor's  entire
  interest  in  any  tangible  personal  property for which a deduction is
  allowed under subsection (a) or (b).
    (f) Cross references
  --(1) For treatment of certain organizations providing child  care,  see
  section 501(k).
  --(2) For exemption of certain gifts to or for the benefit of the United
  States  and  for rules of construction with respect to certain bequests,
  see section 2055(f).
  --(3) For treatment of  gifts  to  or  for  the  use  of  Indian  tribal
  governments (or their subdivisions), see section 7871.
    §  2523.  Gift  to  spouse  (a)  Allowance of deduction. Where a donor
  transfers during the calendar year by gift an interest in property to  a
  donee  who at the time of the gift is the donor's spouse, there shall be
  allowed as a deduction in computing taxable gifts for the calendar  year
  an amount with respect to such interest equal to its value.
    (b)  Life  estate or other terminable interest. Where, on the lapse of
  time, on the occurrence of an event or contingency, or on the failure of
  an event or contingency to  occur,  such  interest  transferred  to  the
  spouse  will  terminate  or  fail,  no  deduction  shall be allowed with
  respect to such interest-
    (1) if the donor retains in himself, or transfers or  has  transferred
  (for  less  than  an adequate and full consideration in money or money's
  worth) to any person other than such donee spouse (or the estate of such
  spouse), an interest  in  such  property,  and  if  by  reason  of  such
  retention or transfer the donor (or his heirs or assigns) or such person
  (or his heirs or assigns) may possess or enjoy any part of such property
  after  such  termination  or  failure of the interest transferred to the
  donee spouse; or
    (2) if the donor immediately after the transfer to  the  donee  spouse
  has  a  power  to  appoint  an  interest  in  such property which he can
  exercise (either alone or in conjunction with any person) in such manner
  that the appointee may possess or enjoy any part of such property  after
  such  termination  or  failure  of the interest transferred to the donee
  spouse.  For purposes of this paragraph, the donor shall  be  considered
  as  having immediately after the transfer to the donee spouse such power
  to appoint even though such power cannot be exercised  until  after  the
  lapse of time, upon the occurrence of an event or contingency, or on the
  failure of an event or contingency to occur.


   An  exercise  or  release at any time by the donor, either alone or in
  conjunction with any person, of  a  power  to  appoint  an  interest  in
  property,  even  though not otherwise a transfer, shall, for purposes of
  paragraph (1), be considered as a transfer by him. Except as provided in
  subsection  (e),  where  at the time of the transfer it is impossible to
  ascertain the particular person or persons  who  may  receive  from  the
  donor  an  interest  in  property  so  transferred by him, such interest
  shall, for purposes of paragraph (1), be considered as transferred to  a
  person other than the donee spouse.
    (c) Interest in unidentified assets. Where the assets out of which, or
  the  proceeds of which, the interest transferred to the donee spouse may
  be satisfied include a particular asset or assets with respect to  which
  no  deduction  would be allowed if such asset or assets were transferred
  from  the  donor  to  such  spouse,  then  the  value  of  the  interest
  transferred  to  such  spouse  shall, for purposes of subsection (a), be
  reduced by the aggregate value of such particular assets.
    (d) Joint interests. If the  interest  is  transferred  to  the  donee
  spouse as sole joint tenant with the donor or as tenant by the entirety,
  the  interest of the donor in the property which exists solely by reason
  of the possibility that the donor may survive the donee spouse, or  that
  there  may occur a severance of the tenancy, shall not be considered for
  purposes of subsection (b) as an  interest  retained  by  the  donor  in
  himself.
    (e)  Life  estate with power of appointment in donee spouse. Where the
  donor transfers an interest in property, if by such transfer his  spouse
  is  entitled  for life to all of the income from the entire interest, or
  all the income from a specific portion thereof, payable annually  or  at
  more  frequent  intervals, with power in the donee spouse to appoint the
  entire interest, or such specific portion (exercisable in favor of  such
  donee  spouse,  or  of  the  estate of such donee spouse, or in favor of
  either, whether or not in each case the power is exercisable in favor of
  others), and with no power in any other person to appoint  any  part  of
  such  interest,  or  such  portion,  to  any person other than the donee
  spouse-
    (1) the interest, or such portion, so transferred shall, for  purposes
  of subsection (a) be considered as transferred to the donee spouse, and
    (2)  no  part  of the interest, or such portion, so transferred shall,
  for purposes of subsection (b)(1), be  considered  as  retained  in  the
  donor or transferred to any person other than the donee spouse.
    This  subsection  shall apply only if, by such transfer, such power in
  the donee spouse to appoint  the  interest,  or  such  portion,  whether
  exercisable  by will or during life, is exercisable by such spouse alone
  and in all events. For purposes of this subsection, the  term  "specific
  portion"   only  includes  a  portion  determined  on  a  fractional  or
  percentage basis.
    (f) Election with respect to life estate  for  donee  spouse.  (1)  In
  general
    In the case of qualified terminable interest property-
    (A)  for purposes of subsection (a), such property shall be treated as
  transferred to the donee spouse, and
    (B) for purposes of subsection (b)(1), no part of such property  shall
  be  considered  as  retained  in  the donor or transferred to any person
  other than the donee spouse.
    (2) Qualified terminable  interest  property.  For  purposes  of  this
  subsection,  the term "qualified terminable interest property" means any
  property-
    (A) which is transferred by the donor spouse,


   (B) in which the donee spouse has a  qualifying  income  interest  for
  life, and
    (C) to which an election under this subsection applies.
    (3)  Certain  rules  made applicable. For purposes of this subsection,
  rules similar to the rules of clauses (ii), (iii), and (iv)  of  section
  2056(b)(7)(B)  shall  apply  and  the rules of section 2056(b)(10) shall
  apply.
    (4) Election. (A) Time and manner. An election under  this  subsection
  with  respect  to  any  property  shall  be  made  on or before the date
  prescribed by section 6075(b) for filing a gift tax return with  respect
  to the transfer (determined without regard to section 6019(2)) and shall
  be made in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulations prescribe.
    (B)  Election  irrevocable.  An  election  under this subsection, once
  made, shall be irrevocable.
    (5) Treatment of interest retained by donor spouse. (A) In general. In
  the case of any qualified terminable interest property-
    (i) such property shall not be includible in the gross estate  of  the
  donor spouse, and
    (ii)  any  subsequent  transfer  by the donor spouse of an interest in
  such property shall not be treated as a transfer for  purposes  of  this
  chapter.
    (B)  Subparagraph  (A)  not  to  apply after transfer by donee spouse.
  Subparagraph (A) shall not apply with respect to any property after  the
  donee  spouse  is  treated  as  having  transferred  such property under
  section 2519, or such property is includible in the donee spouse's gross
  estate under section 2044.
    (6) Treatment of joint and survivor annuities. In the case of a  joint
  and  survivor  annuity where only the donor spouse and donee spouse have
  the right to receive payments before the death of  the  last  spouse  to
  die-
  --(A)  the  donee  spouse's  interest  shall  be treated as a qualifying
  income interest for life,
  --(B) the donor spouse shall be treated as having made an election under
  this subsection with respect to such annuity  unless  the  donor  spouse
  otherwise elects on or before the date specified in paragraph (4)(A),
  --(C)  paragraph  (5)  and  section  2519  shall  not apply to the donor
  spouse's interest in the annuity, and
  --(D) if the donee spouse dies before the donor spouse, no amount  shall
  be includible in the gross estate of the donee spouse under section 2044
  with respect to such annuity.
    An election under subparagraph (B), once made, shall be irrevocable.
    (g)  Special rule for charitable remainder trusts. (1) In general. If,
  after  the  transfer,  the  donee  spouse  is  the  only   noncharitable
  beneficiary  (other  than the donor) of a qualified charitable remainder
  trust, subsection (b) shall not apply to  the  interest  in  such  trust
  which is transferred to the donee spouse.
    (2)   Definitions.   For   purposes   of   paragraph   (1),  the  term
  "noncharitable beneficiary" and "qualified charitable  remainder  trust"
  have the meanings given to such terms by section 2056(b)(8)(B).
    (h)  Denial  of double deduction. Nothing in this section or any other
  provision of this chapter shall allow  the  value  of  any  interest  in
  property  to  be deducted under this chapter more than once with respect
  to the same donor.
    § 2524. Extent of deductions. The deductions provided in sections 2522
  and 2523 shall be allowed only to the  extent  that  the  gifts  therein
  specified  are  included  in  the  amount  of  gifts  against which such
  deductions are applied.


   § 2701. Special valuation  rules  in  case  of  transfers  of  certain
  interests  in  corporations or partnerships. (a) Valuation rules. (1) In
  general. Solely for purposes of determining whether  a  transfer  of  an
  interest  in  a  corporation or partnership to (or for the benefit of) a
  member  of  the  transferor's  family  is  a gift (and the value of such
  transfer), the value of any right-
  --(A) which is described  in  subparagraph  (A)  or  (B)  of  subsection
  (b)(1), and
  --(B)  which is with respect to any applicable retained interest that is
  held by the transferor or an applicable family member immediately  after
  the transfer,
    --shall  be  determined  under paragraph (3). This paragraph shall not
  apply to the transfer of any interest for which  market  quotations  are
  readily  available  (as  of  the  date  of  transfer)  on an established
  securities market.
    (2) Exceptions for marketable retained interests, etc.  Paragraph  (1)
  shall  not  apply  to  any  right with respect to an applicable retained
  interest if-
  --(A) market quotations are readily available (as of  the  date  of  the
  transfer) for such interest on an established securities market,
  --(B) such interest is of the same class as the transferred interest, or
  --(C)  such  interest  is  proportionally  the  same  as the transferred
  interest, without regard to nonlapsing differences in voting power  (or,
  for a partnership, nonlapsing differences with respect to management and
  limitations on liability).
  --Subparagraph  (C)  shall not apply to any interest in a partnership if
  the transferor or an applicable family member has the right to alter the
  liability of the transferee  of  the  transferred  property.  Except  as
  provided  by the Secretary, any difference described in subparagraph (C)
  which lapses by reason of any Federal or State law shall be treated as a
  nonlapsing difference for purposes of such subparagraph.
    (3) Valuation of  rights  to  which  paragraph  (1)  applies.  (A)  In
  general.   The value of any right described in paragraph (1), other than
  a distribution right which consists of a right to  receive  a  qualified
  payment, shall be treated as being zero.
    (B) Valuation of certain qualified payments. If-
  --(i)  any  applicable  retained  interest  confers a distribution right
  which consists of the right to a qualified payment, and
  --(ii) there are 1 or more liquidation, put, call, or conversion  rights
  with  respect  to  such  interest, the value of all such rights shall be
  determined as if each liquidation, put, call, or conversion  right  were
  exercised  in  the manner resulting in the lowest value being determined
  for all such rights.
    (C) Valuation of qualified payments where no liquidation, etc. rights.
  In the case of an applicable retained interest  which  is  described  in
  subparagraph  (B)(i)  but  not  subparagraph  (B)(ii),  the value of the
  distribution right shall be determined without regard to this section.
    (4) Minimum valuation of junior equity. (A) In general. In the case of
  a transfer described in paragraph (1) of a junior equity interest  in  a
  corporation or partnership, such interest shall in no event be valued at
  an  amount  less  than  the value which would be determined if the total
  value of all of the junior equity interests in the entity were equal  to
  10 percent of the sum of-
  --(i)  the  total  value  of all of the equity interests in such entity,
  plus
  --(ii) the total amount of indebtedness of such entity to the transferor
  (or an applicable family member).
    (B) Definitions. For purposes of this paragraph-


   (i) Junior equity interest. The term "junior  equity  interest"  means
  common  stock or, in the case of a partnership, any partnership interest
  under which the rights as to income  and  capital  (or,  to  the  extent
  provided  in regulations, the rights as to either income or capital) are
  junior to the rights of all other classes of equity interests.
    (ii)  Equity  interest.  The term "equity interest" means stock or any
  interest as a partner, as the case may be.
    (b) Applicable retained interests. For purposes of this section-
    (1) In general. The term  "applicable  retained  interest"  means  any
  interest in an entity with respect to which there is-
  --(A) a distribution right, but only if, immediately before the transfer
  described  in  subsection  (a)(1),  the transferor and applicable family
  members hold (after application of subsection  (e)(3))  control  of  the
  entity, or
  --(B) a liquidation, put, call, or conversion right.
    (2) Control. For purposes of paragraph (1)-
    (A)  Corporations.  In  the  case of a corporation, the term "control"
  means the holding of at least 50 percent (by vote or value) of the stock
  of the corporation.
    (B) Partnerships. In the case of a  partnership,  the  term  "control"
  means-
  --(i)  the  holding  of  at  least  50 percent of the capital or profits
  interests in the partnership, or
  --(ii) in the case of a limited partnership, the holding of any interest
  as a general partner.
    (C) Applicable family member. For purposes  of  this  subsection,  the
  term  "applicable  family  member" includes any lineal descendant of any
  parent of the transferor or the transferor's spouse.
    (c) Distribution and other rights; qualified payments. For purposes of
  this section-
    (1) Distribution right. (A) In general. The term "distribution  right"
  means-
  --(i)  a  right  to distributions from a corporation with respect to its
  stock, and
  --(ii) a right to distributions from a partnership  with  respect  to  a
  partner's interest in the partnership.
    (B) Exceptions. The term "distribution right" does not include-
  --(i)  a  right  to  distributions with respect to any interest which is
  junior to the rights of the transferred interest,
  --(ii) any liquidation, put, call, or conversion right, or
  --(iii) any right to receive any guaranteed payment described in section
  707(c) of a fixed amount.
    (2) Liquidation, etc. rights. (A) In general. The  term  "liquidation,
  put,  call,  or  conversion  right" means any liquidation, put, call, or
  conversion right, or any similar right, the exercise or  nonexercise  of
  which affects the value of the transferred interest.
    (B) Exception for fixed rights. (i) In general. The term "liquidation,
  put, call, or conversion right" does not include any right which must be
  exercised at a specific time and at a specific amount.
    (ii)  Treatment  of  certain  rights.  If  a  right  is  assumed to be
  exercised in a particular manner under subsection (a)(3)(B), such  right
  shall be treated as so exercised for purposes of clause (i).
    (C)  Exception  for  certain rights to convert. The term "liquidation,
  put, call, or conversion right" does not include any right which-
  --(i) is a right to convert into a fixed number (or a fixed  percentage)
  of shares of the same class of stock in a corporation as the transferred
  stock  in such corporation under subsection (a)(1) (or stock which would
  be of the same class but for nonlapsing differences in voting power),


 --(ii) is nonlapsing,
  --(iii)   is   subject   to   proportionate   adjustments   for  splits,
  combinations, reclassifications, and  similar  changes  in  the  capital
  stock, and
  --(iv)  is  subject  to  adjustments  similar  to  the adjustments under
  subsection (d) for accumulated but unpaid distributions.
  --A rule similar to the rule of the preceding sentence shall  apply  for
  partnerships.
    (3) Qualified payment. (A) In general. Except as otherwise provided in
  this  paragraph, the term "qualified payment" means any dividend payable
  on  a  periodic  basis  under  any  cumulative  preferred  stock  (or  a
  comparable  payment  under  any partnership interest) to the extent that
  such dividend (or comparable payment) is determined at a fixed rate.
    (B) Treatment of variable rate payments. For purposes of  subparagraph
  (A),  a  payment shall be treated as fixed as to rate if such payment is
  determined at a rate which bears a fixed  relationship  to  a  specified
  market interest rate.
    (C)  Elections.  (i) In general. Payments under any interest held by a
  transferor which (without regard to  this  subparagraph)  are  qualified
  payments  shall  be  treated as qualified payments unless the transferor
  elects not to  treat  such  payments  as  qualified  payments.  Payments
  described  in  the  preceding  sentence  which are held by an applicable
  family member shall be treated as qualified payments only if such member
  elects to treat such payments as qualified payments.
    (ii) Election  to  have  interest  treated  as  qualified  payment.  A
  transferor  or  applicable  family member holding any distribution right
  which (without regard to this subparagraph) is not a  qualified  payment
  may  elect to treat such right as a qualified payment, to be paid in the
  amounts and at the times  specified  in  such  election.  The  preceding
  sentence  shall  apply  only to the extent that the amounts and times so
  specified are not inconsistent  with  the  underlying  legal  instrument
  giving rise to such right.
    (iii) Elections irrevocable. Any election under this subparagraph with
  respect to an interest shall, once made, be irrevocable.
    (d) Transfer tax treatment of cumulative but unpaid distributions. (1)
  In  general.  If a taxable event occurs with respect to any distribution
  right to which subsection (a)(3)(B) or (C) applied, the following  shall
  be increased by the amount determined under paragraph (2):
  --(A)  The  taxable  estate  of  the transferor in the case of a taxable
  event described in paragraph (3)(A)(i).
  --(B) The taxable gifts of the transferor for the calendar year in which
  the taxable event occurs in the case of a  taxable  event  described  in
  paragraph (3)(A)(ii) or (iii).
    (2)  Amount  of  increase.  (A) In general. The amount of the increase
  determined under this paragraph shall be the excess (if any) of-
  --(i) the value of the qualified  payments  payable  during  the  period
  beginning on the date of the transfer under subsection (a)(1) and ending
  on the date of the taxable event determined as if-
  --(I) all such payments were paid on the date payment was due, and
  --(II)  all  such  payments  were reinvested by the transferor as of the
  date of  payment  at  a  yield  equal  to  the  discount  rate  used  in
  determining  the  value of the applicable retained interest described in
  subsection (a)(1), over
    (ii) the value of such payments paid during such period computed under
  clause (i) on the basis of the time when  such  payments  were  actually
  paid.


   (B)  Limitation  on  amount of increase. (i) In general. The amount of
  the increase under subparagraph (A)  shall  not  exceed  the  applicable
  percentage of the excess (if any) of-
  --(I)  the value (determined as of the date of the taxable event) of all
  equity interests in the  entity  which  are  junior  to  the  applicable
  retained interest, over
  --(II)  the  value  of  such interests (determined as of the date of the
  transfer to which subsection (a)(1) applied).
    (ii) Applicable percentage. For purposes of clause (i), the applicable
  percentage is the percentage determined by dividing-
  --(I) the number of shares in the corporation held (as of  the  date  of
  the  taxable  event)  by  the  transferor  which are applicable retained
  interests of the same class, by
  --(II) the total number of shares in such corporation (as of such  date)
  which are of the same class as the class described in subclause (I).
  --A similar percentage shall be determined in the case of interests in a
  partnership.
    (iii)  Definition. For purposes of this subparagraph, the term "equity
  interest" has the meaning given such term by subsection (a)(4)(B).
    (C) Grace period. For purposes of subparagraph (A), any payment of any
  distribution during the 4-year period beginning on its due date shall be
  treated as having been made on such due date.
    (3) Taxable events. For purposes of this subsection-
    (A) In general. The term "taxable event" means any of the following:
  --(i) The death of the transferor if the  applicable  retained  interest
  conferring  the  distribution  right  is includible in the estate of the
  transferor.
  --(ii) The transfer of such applicable retained interest.
  --(iii) At the election of the taxpayer, the payment  of  any  qualified
  payment  after  the  period described in paragraph (2)(C), but only with
  respect to such payment.
    (B) Exception where spouse is transferee. (i) Deathtime transfers
  --Subparagraph (A)(i) shall not apply to any interest includible in  the
  gross  estate  of  the  transferor  if  a deduction with respect to such
  interest is allowable under section 2056 or 2106(a)(3).
    (ii) Lifetime transfers. A transfer to the spouse  of  the  transferor
  shall  not  be  treated as a taxable event under subparagraph (A)(ii) if
  such transfer does not result in a taxable gift by reason of-
  --(I) any deduction allowed under section 2523, or the  exclusion  under
  section 2503(b), or
  --(II) consideration for the transfer provided by the spouse.
    (iii)  Spouse  succeeds to treatment of transferor. If an event is not
  treated  as  a  taxable  event  by  reason  of  this  subparagraph,  the
  transferee  spouse  or  surviving  spouse  (as the case may be) shall be
  treated in the same manner as the transferor in applying this subsection
  with respect to the interest involved.
    (4) Special rules for applicable family  members.  (A)  Family  member
  treated  in  same manner as transferor. For purposes of this subsection,
  an applicable family member shall be treated in the same manner  as  the
  transferor  with  respect  to  any  distribution  right retained by such
  family member to which subsection (a)(3)(B) or (C) applied.
    (B) Transfer to applicable family member. In the  case  of  a  taxable
  event  described  in  paragraph  (3)(A)(ii) involving the transfer of an
  applicable retained interest to an applicable family member (other  than
  the  spouse  of  the  transferor), the applicable family member shall be
  treated in the same manner as the transferor in applying this subsection
  to distributions accumulating with respect to such interest  after  such
  taxable event.


   (C)  Transfer to transferors. In the case of a taxable event described
  in paragraph (3)(A)(ii) involving a transfer of an  applicable  retained
  interest  from  an  applicable  family  member  to  a  transferor,  this
  subsection shall continue to apply to the transferor during  any  period
  the transferor holds such interest.
    (5)  Transfer to include termination. For purposes of this subsection,
  any termination of an interest shall be treated as a transfer.
    (e) Other definitions and rules. For purposes of this section-
    (1) Member of the family. The term "member of the family" means,  with
  respect to any transferor-
  --(A) the transferor's spouse,
  --(B)  a lineal descendant of the transferor or the transferor's spouse,
  and
  --(C) the spouse of any such descendant.
    (2) Applicable family member.  The  term  "applicable  family  member"
  means, with respect to any transferor-
  --(A) the transferor's spouse,
  --(B) an ancestor of the transferor or the transferor's spouse, and
  --(C) the spouse of any such ancestor.
    (3)  Attribution  of  indirect  holdings  and transfers. An individual
  shall be treated as holding any interest to the extent such interest  is
  held  indirectly  by such individual through a corporation, partnership,
  trust, or other entity. If any individual  is  treated  as  holding  any
  interest by reason of the preceding sentence, any transfer which results
  in  such  interest  being  treated  as no longer held by such individual
  shall be treated as a transfer of such interest.
    (4) Effect of adoption. A relationship  by  legal  adoption  shall  be
  treated as a relationship by blood.
    (5)  Certain  changes  treated  as  transfers.  Except  as provided in
  regulations,   a   contribution   to   capital    or    a    redemption,
  recapitalization,  or  other  change  in  the  capital  structure  of  a
  corporation or partnership shall be treated as a transfer of an interest
  in such entity to which this section  applies  if  the  taxpayer  or  an
  applicable family member-
  --(A)  receives  an applicable retained interest in such entity pursuant
  to such transaction, or
  --(B)  under  regulations,  otherwise  holds,  immediately  after   such
  transaction, an applicable retained interest in such entity.
  --This  paragraph  shall  not  apply  to  any  transaction (other than a
  contribution to capital) if the interests in  the  entity  held  by  the
  transferor,  applicable  family members, and members of the transferor's
  family before and after the transaction are substantially identical.
    (6) Adjustments. Under regulations prescribed  by  the  Secretary,  if
  there  is  any subsequent transfer, or inclusion in the gross estate, of
  any applicable retained interest which was valued  under  the  rules  of
  subsection  (a),  appropriate  adjustments shall be made for purposes of
  chapter 11, 12, or 13 to reflect the increase in the amount of any prior
  taxable gift made by the  transferor  or  decedent  by  reason  of  such
  valuation or to reflect the application of subsection (d).
    (7)  Treatment  as separate interests. The Secretary may by regulation
  provide that any applicable retained interest shall be treated as  2  or
  more separate interests for purposes of this section.
    §  2702.  Special valuation rules in case of transfers of interests in
  trusts. (a) Valuation rules. (1) In  general.  Solely  for  purposes  of
  determining  whether  a  transfer of an interest in trust to (or for the
  benefit of) a member of the transferor's family is a gift (and the value
  of such transfer), the value of any interest in such trust  retained  by


 the  transferor  or  any applicable family member (as defined in section
  2701(e)(2)) shall be determined as provided in paragraph (2).
    (2)  Valuation of retained interests. (A) In general. The value of any
  retained interest which is not a qualified interest shall be treated  as
  being zero.
    (B)  Valuation  of  qualified  interest.  The  value  of  any retained
  interest which is a qualified interest shall be determined under section
  7520.
    (3) Exceptions. (A) In general. This subsection shall not apply to any
  transfer-
  --(i) if such transfer is an incomplete gift,
  --(ii) if such transfer involves the transfer of an  interest  in  trust
  all  the  property  in  which  consists  of  a residence to be used as a
  personal residence by persons holding term interests in such trust, or
  --(iii) to the extent that regulations provide that such transfer is not
  inconsistent with the purposes of this section.
    (B) Incomplete gift.  For  purposes  of  subparagraph  (A),  the  term
  "incomplete  gift"  means  any  transfer which would not be treated as a
  gift whether or not consideration was received for such transfer.
    (b) Qualified  interest.  For  purposes  of  this  section,  the  term
  "qualified interest" means-
    (1)  any interest which consists of the right to receive fixed amounts
  payable not less frequently than annually,
    (2) any interest which consists of the right to receive amounts  which
  are payable not less frequently than annually and are a fixed percentage
  of  the  fair  market  value  of  the  property in the trust (determined
  annually), and
    (3) any noncontingent remainder interest if all of the other interests
  in the trust consist of interests described in paragraph (1) or (2).
    (c) Certain property treated as held in trust. For  purposes  of  this
  section-  (1)  In  general. The transfer of an interest in property with
  respect to which there is 1 or more term interests shall be treated as a
  transfer of an interest in a trust.
    (2) Joint purchases. If 2 or more members of the same  family  acquire
  interests  in  any  property  described  in  paragraph  (1)  in the same
  transaction (or a  series  of  related  transactions),  the  person  (or
  persons)  acquiring the term interests in such property shall be treated
  as having acquired the entire property and then transferred to the other
  persons the interests acquired by such other persons in the  transaction
  (or  series  of transactions). Such transfer shall be treated as made in
  exchange for the consideration (if any) provided by such  other  persons
  for the acquisition of their interests in such property.
    (3) Term interest. The term "term interest" means-
    (A) a life interest in property, or
    (B) an interest in property for a term of years.
    (4)  Valuation  rule for certain term interests. If the nonexercise of
  rights under a term interest in  tangible  property  would  not  have  a
  substantial  effect  on  the valuation of the remainder interest in such
  property-
    (A) subparagraph (A) of subsection (a)(2) shall not apply to such term
  interest, and
    (B)  the  value  of  such  term  interest  for  purposes  of  applying
  subsection  (a)(1)  shall  be  the  amount  which the holder of the term
  interest establishes as the amount for which such interest could be sold
  to an unrelated third party.
    (d) Treatment of transfers of interests in portion of  trust.  In  the
  case  of a transfer of an income or remainder interest with respect to a


 specified portion of the property in a trust, only such portion shall be
  taken into account in applying this section to such transfer.
    (e)  Member  of  the  family.  For  purposes of this section, the term
  "member of the family" shall have the meaning given such term by section
  2704(c)(2).
    § 2703. Certain rights and restrictions disregarded
    (a) General rule. For purposes of this  subtitle,  the  value  of  any
  property shall be determined without regard to-
    (1)  any  option,  agreement,  or  other  right  to acquire or use the
  property at a price less than the fair  market  value  of  the  property
  (without regard to such option, agreement, or right), or
    (2) any restriction on the right to sell or use such property.
    (b)  Exceptions.  Subsection  (a)  shall  not  apply  to  any  option,
  agreement, right, or restriction  which  meets  each  of  the  following
  requirements:
    (1) It is a bona fide business arrangement.
    (2)  It  is  not  a device to transfer such property to members of the
  decedent's family for less than full and adequate consideration in money
  or money's worth.
    (3) Its terms are comparable to similar arrangements entered  into  by
  persons in an arms' length transaction
    §  2704.  Treatment  of  certain  lapsing rights and restrictions. (a)
  Treatment of lapsed voting or liquidation rights. (1)  In  general.  For
  purposes of this subtitle, if-
  --(A)  there  is  a  lapse  of  any  voting  or  liquidation  right in a
  corporation or partnership, and
  --(B) the individual holding such right immediately before the lapse and
  members of such individual's family hold,  both  before  and  after  the
  lapse, control of the entity,
    such  lapse shall be treated as a transfer by such individual by gift,
  or a transfer which is includible in the gross estate of  the  decedent,
  whichever is applicable, in the amount determined under paragraph (2).
    (2)  Amount  of  transfer.  For  purposes of paragraph (1), the amount
  determined under this paragraph is the excess (if any) of-
  --(A) the value of all interests in the entity held  by  the  individual
  described  in  paragraph (1) immediately before the lapse (determined as
  if the voting and liquidation rights were nonlapsing), over
  --(B) the value of such interests immediately after the lapse.
    (3) Similar rights.  The  Secretary  may  by  regulations  apply  this
  subsection to rights similar to voting and liquidation rights.
    (b)  Certain  restrictions on liquidation disregarded. (1) In general.
  For purposes of this subtitle, if-
  --(A) there is a transfer of an interest in a corporation or partnership
  to (or for the benefit of) a member of the transferor's family, and
  --(B) the transferor  and  members  of  the  transferor's  family  hold,
  immediately before the transfer, control of the entity,
    --any  applicable  restriction shall be disregarded in determining the
  value of the transferred interest.
    (2) Applicable restriction. For purposes of this subsection, the  term
  "applicable restriction" means any restriction-
    (A)  which  effectively  limits  the  ability  of  the  corporation or
  partnership to liquidate, and
    (B) with respect to which either of the following applies:
  --(i) The restriction lapses, in whole or in part,  after  the  transfer
  referred to in paragraph (1).
  --(ii)  The  transferor or any member of the transferor's family, either
  alone or collectively, has the right after such transfer to  remove,  in
  whole or in part, the restriction.


   (3) Exceptions. The term "applicable restriction" shall not include-
  --(A)  any  commercially  reasonable restriction which arises as part of
  any financing by the corporation or partnership with a person who is not
  related to the transferor or transferee, or a member of  the  family  of
  either, or
  --(B) any restriction imposed, or required to be imposed, by any Federal
  or State law.
    (4)  Other restrictions. The Secretary may by regulations provide that
  other restrictions shall be disregarded in determining the value of  the
  transfer  of any interest in a corporation or partnership to a member of
  the transferor's family if such restriction has the effect  of  reducing
  the  value of the transferred interest for purposes of this subtitle but
  does not ultimately reduce the value of such interest to the transferee.
    (c) Definitions and special rules. For purposes of this section-
    (1) Control. The term "control" has the meaning  given  such  term  by
  section 2701(b)(2).
    (2)  Member of the family. The term "member of the family" means, with
  respect to any individual-
    (A) such individual's spouse,
    (B) any ancestor or lineal  descendant  of  such  individual  or  such
  individual's spouse,
    (C) any brother or sister of the individual, and
    (D) any spouse of any individual described in subparagraph (B) or
  (C).
    (3)  Attribution.  The  rule  of  section  2701(e)(3)  shall apply for
  purposes of determining the interests held by any individual.
    § 7872. Treatment of loans with below-market interest rates
    (a) Treatment of gift loans and demand  loans.  (1)  In  general.  For
  purposes  of  this  title, in the case of any below-market loan to which
  this section applies and which is a gift loan  or  a  demand  loan,  the
  forgone interest shall be treated as-
  --(A) transferred from the lender to the borrower, and
  --(B) retransferred by the borrower to the lender as interest.
    (2)  Time  when  transfers  made.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  in
  regulations  prescribed  by  the   Secretary,   any   forgone   interest
  attributable  to  periods  during  any calendar year shall be treated as
  transferred (and retransferred) under paragraph (1) on the last  day  of
  such calendar year.
    (b)  Treatment  of  other  below-market  loans.  (1)  In  general. For
  purposes of this title, in the case of any below-market  loan  to  which
  this  section applies and to which subsection (a)(1) does not apply, the
  lender shall be treated as having transferred on the date the  loan  was
  made  (or,  if  later, on the first day on which this section applies to
  such loan), and the borrower shall be treated as having received on such
  date, cash in an amount equal to the excess of-
  --(A) the amount loaned, over
  --(B) the present value of all payments which are required  to  be  made
  under the terms of the loan.
    (2) Obligation treated as having original issue discount. For purposes
  of this title-
    (A)  In  general. Any below-market loan to which paragraph (1) applies
  shall be treated as having original issue discount in an amount equal to
  the excess described in paragraph (1).
    (B) Amount in addition to other original issue discount. Any  original
  issue  discount  which  a  loan  is  treated  as  having  by  reason  of
  subparagraph (A) shall be  in  addition  to  any  other  original  issue
  discount on such loan (determined without regard to subparagraph (A)).


   (c)  Below-market  loans  to  which  section  applies. (1) In general.
  Except as otherwise provided in this subsection and subsection (g), this
  section shall apply to-
    (A) Gifts. Any below-market loan which is a gift loan.
    (B)  Compensation-related  loans.  Any  below-market  loan directly or
  indirectly between-
  --(i) an employer and an employee, or
  --(ii) an independent contractor and a person for whom such  independent
  contractor provides services.
    (C)  Corporation-shareholder  loans. Any below-market loan directly or
  indirectly  between  a  corporation  and   any   shareholder   of   such
  corporation.
    (D)  Tax  avoidance  loans.  Any  below-market loan 1 of the principal
  purposes of the interest arrangements of which is the avoidance  of  any
  Federal tax.
    (E)  Other  below-market loans. To the extent provided in regulations,
  any below-market loan which is not described in subparagraph  (A),  (B),
  (C), or (F) if the interest arrangements of such loan have a significant
  effect on any Federal tax liability of the lender or the borrower.
    (F)  Loans  to  qualified  continuing care facilities. Any loan to any
  qualified  continuing  care  facility  pursuant  to  a  continuing  care
  contract.
    (2)  $10,000  de minimis exception for gift loans between individuals.
  (A)  In  general.  In  the  case  of  any  gift  loan  directly  between
  individuals,  this  section  shall  not  apply  to  any day on which the
  aggregate outstanding amount of loans between such individuals does  not
  exceed $10,000.
    (B)  De  minimis  exception  not  to  apply  to  loans attributable to
  acquisition of income-producing assets.
  --Subparagraph  (A)  shall  not  apply  to  any   gift   loan   directly
  attributable to the purchase or carrying of income-producing assets.
    (C)  Cross  reference.  For  limitation  on amount treated as interest
  where loans do not exceed $100,000, see subsection (d)(1).
    (3)  $10,000  de  minimis  exception  for   compensation-related   and
  corporate-shareholder  loans.  (A)  In  general. In the case of any loan
  described in subparagraph (B) or (C)  of  paragraph  (1),  this  section
  shall  not apply to any day on which the aggregate outstanding amount of
  loans between the borrower and lender does not exceed $10,000.
    (B) Exception not to apply  where  1  of  principal  purposes  is  tax
  avoidance.  Subparagraph  (A)  shall  not apply to any loan the interest
  arrangements of  which  have  as  1  of  their  principal  purposes  the
  avoidance of any Federal tax.
    (d)  Special  rules for gift loans. (1) Limitation on interest accrual
  for purposes of income taxes where loans do not exceed $100,000. (A)  In
  general. For purposes of subtitle A, in the case of a gift loan directly
  between individuals, the amount treated as retransferred by the borrower
  to  the  lender  as  of  the  close  of  any  year  shall not exceed the
  borrower's net investment income for such year.
    (B) Limitation not to apply where  1  of  principal  purposes  is  tax
  avoidance.  Subparagraph  (A)  shall  not apply to any loan the interest
  arrangements of  which  have  as  1  of  their  principal  purposes  the
  avoidance of any Federal tax.
    (C) Special rule where more than 1 gift loan outstanding. For purposes
  of  subparagraph  (A),  in  any case in which a borrower has outstanding
  more than 1 gift loan, the net investment income of such borrower  shall
  be  allocated  among  such loans in proportion to the respective amounts
  which would be treated as retransferred by the borrower  without  regard
  to this paragraph.


   (D)  Limitation  not  to  apply where aggregate amount of loans exceed
  $100,000. This paragraph shall not apply to any loan made by a lender to
  a borrower for any day on which  the  aggregate  outstanding  amount  of
  loans between the borrower and lender exceeds $100,000.
    (E) Net investment income. For purposes of this paragraph-
    (i) In general. The term "net investment income" has the meaning given
  such term by section 163(d)(4).
    (ii) De minimis rule. If the net investment income of any borrower for
  any  year  does  not  exceed  $1,000,  the net investment income of such
  borrower for such year shall be treated as zero.
    (iii) Additional amounts treated as interest. In determining  the  net
  investment  income  of  a person for any year, any amount which would be
  included in the gross income of such person for such year by  reason  of
  section 1272 if such section applied to all deferred payment obligations
  shall be treated as interest received by such person for such year.
    (iv)   Deferred   payment  obligations.  The  term  "deferred  payment
  obligation" includes any market discount  bond,  short-term  obligation,
  United States savings bond, annuity, or similar obligation.
    (2) Special rule for gift tax. In the case of any gift loan which is a
  term  loan,  subsection  (b)(1) (and not subsection (a)) shall apply for
  purposes of chapter 12.
    (e)  Definitions  of  below-market  loan  and  forgone  interest.  For
  purposes of this section-
    (1) Below-market loan. The term "below-market loan" means any loan if-
  --(A) in the case of a demand loan, interest is payable on the loan at a
  rate less than the applicable Federal rate, or
  --(B)  in the case of a term loan, the amount loaned exceeds the present
  value of all payments due under the loan.
    (2) Forgone interest. The term "forgone interest" means, with  respect
  to any period during which the loan is outstanding, the excess of-
  --(A)  the  amount of interest which would have been payable on the loan
  for the period if interest accrued on the loan at the applicable Federal
  rate and were payable annually on the  day  referred  to  in  subsection
  (a)(2), over
  --(B)  any  interest  payable  on  the  loan  properly allocable to such
  period.
    (f) Other definitions and special rules. For purposes of this section-
    (1)  Present  value.  The  present  value  of  any  payment  shall  be
  determined  in  the  manner  provided  by  regulations prescribed by the
  Secretary-
  --(A) as of the date of the loan, and
  --(B) by using a discount rate equal to the applicable Federal rate.
    (2) Applicable Federal rate. (A) Term loans. In the case of  any  term
  loan,  the  applicable Federal rate shall be the applicable Federal rate
  in effect under section 1274(d) (as of the day on  which  the  loan  was
  made), compounded semiannually.
    (B) Demand loans. In the case of a demand loan, the applicable Federal
  rate  shall  be  the  Federal  short-term  rate  in effect under section
  1274(d) for the period for which the amount of forgone interest is being
  determined, compounded semiannually.
    (3) Gift loan. The term "gift loan" means any below-market loan  where
  the forgoing of interest is in the nature of a gift.
    (4)  Amount loaned. The term "amount loaned" means the amount received
  by the borrower.
    (5) Demand loan. The term  "demand  loan"  means  any  loan  which  is
  payable  in full at any time on the demand of the lender. Such term also
  includes (for purposes other than  determining  the  applicable  Federal
  rate  under  paragraph  (2))  any  loan  if the benefits of the interest


 arrangements of such loan are not transferable and  are  conditioned  on
  the  future performance of substantial services by an individual. To the
  extent provided in regulations, such term also includes any loan with an
  indefinite maturity.
    (6)  Term  loan.  The  term  "term loan" means any loan which is not a
  demand loan.
    (7) Husband and wife treated as 1 person. A husband and wife shall  be
  treated as 1 person.
    (8)  Loans to which section 483, 643(i), or 1274 applies. This section
  shall not apply to any loan  to  which  section  483,  643(i),  or  1274
  applies.
    (9)  No withholding. No amount shall be withheld under chapter 24 with
  respect to-
  --(A)  any  amount  treated  as  transferred  or   retransferred   under
  subsection (a), and
  --(B) any amount treated as received under subsection (b).
    (10)  Special rule for term loans. If this section applies to any term
  loan on any day, this section shall  continue  to  apply  to  such  loan
  notwithstanding paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (c). In the case of
  a  gift  loan,  the  preceding sentence shall only apply for purposes of
  chapter 12.
    (11) Time for  determining  rate  applicable  to  employee  relocation
  loans.  (A) In general. In the case of any term loan made by an employer
  to  an  employee  the  proceeds  of  which  are  used by the employee to
  purchase a principal residence (within the meaning of section 121),  the
  determination  of  the  applicable  Federal rate shall be made as of the
  date the written contract to purchase such residence was entered into.
    (B) Paragraph only to apply to cases to  which  section  217  applies.
  Subparagraph  (A)  shall  only  apply  to  the  purchase  of a principal
  residence in connection with the commencement of work by an employee  or
  a  change in the principal place of work of an employee to which section
  217 applies.
    (g)  Exception  for  certain  loans  to  qualified   continuing   care
  facilities.    (1)  In  general.  This  section  shall not apply for any
  calendar year to any below-market loan made by a lender to  a  qualified
  continuing  care  facility pursuant to a continuing care contract if the
  lender (or the lender's spouse) attains age 65 before the close of  such
  year.
    (2)  $90,000  limit. Paragraph (1) shall apply only to the extent that
  the aggregate outstanding amount of any loan  to  which  such  paragraph
  applies (determined without regard to this paragraph), when added to the
  aggregate  outstanding  amount  of  all other previous loans between the
  lender (or the  lender's  spouse)  and  any  qualified  continuing  care
  facility to which paragraph (1) applies, does not exceed $90,000.
    (3)  Continuing  care contract. For purposes of this section, the term
  "continuing  care  contract"  means  a  written  contract   between   an
  individual and a qualified continuing care facility under which-
  --(A)  the  individual  or  individual's  spouse  may  use  a  qualified
  continuing care facility for their life or lives,
  --(B) the individual or individual's spouse-
  --(i) will first-
  --(I) reside in a separate,  independent  living  unit  with  additional
  facilities  outside  such  unit  for  the  providing  of meals and other
  personal care, and
  --(II) not require long-term nursing care, and
  --(ii) then will be provided long-term and skilled nursing care  as  the
  health of such individual or individual's spouse requires, and


 --(C)  no  additional substantial payment is required if such individual
  or individual's spouse requires  increased  personal  care  services  or
  long-term and skilled nursing care.
    (4)  Qualified  continuing care facility. (A) In general. For purposes
  of this section, the term "qualified continuing care facility"  means  1
  or more facilities-
  --(i)  which  are  designed  to  provide  services under continuing care
  contracts, and
  --(ii) substantially all of  the  residents  of  which  are  covered  by
  continuing care contracts.
    (B)  Substantially  all  facilities  must  be  owned  or  operated  by
  borrower.  A facility shall not be treated  as  a  qualified  continuing
  care  facility  unless  substantially  all  facilities which are used to
  provide services which are required to be provided  under  a  continuing
  care contract are owned or operated by the borrower.
    (C)  Nursing  homes  excluded.  The  term  "qualified  continuing care
  facility" shall not include any facility which is of  a  type  which  is
  traditionally considered a nursing home.
    (5)  Adjustment of limit for inflation. (A) In general. In the case of
  any loan made during any calendar year after 1986 to which paragraph (1)
  applies, the dollar amount in paragraph (2) shall be  increased  by  the
  inflation  adjustment  for  such  calendar  year. Any increase under the
  preceding sentence shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $100 (or,
  if such increase is a multiple of $50, such increase shall be  increased
  to the nearest multiple of $100).
    (B)  Inflation  adjustment.  For  purposes  of  subparagraph  (A), the
  inflation adjustment for any calendar year is the percentage (if any) by
  which-
  --(i) the CPI for the preceding calendar year exceeds
  --(ii) the CPI for calendar year 1985.
    1. For purposes of the preceding sentence, the CPI  for  any  calendar
  year  is  the average of the Consumer Price Index as of the close of the
  12-month period ending on September 30 of such calendar year.
    (6) Suspension of application. Paragraph (1) shall not apply  for  any
  calendar year to which subsection (h) applies.
    (h)  Exception  for loans to qualified continuing care facilities. (1)
  In general. This section shall not apply for any calendar  year  to  any
  below-market  loan owed by a facility which on the last day of such year
  is a qualified continuing care facility, if such loan was made  pursuant
  to a continuing care contract and if the lender (or the lender's spouse)
  attains age 62 before the close of such year.
    (2)  Continuing  care contract. For purposes of this section, the term
  "continuing  care  contract"  means  a  written  contract   between   an
  individual and a qualified continuing care facility under which-
  --(A)  the  individual  or  individual's  spouse  may  use  a  qualified
  continuing care facility for their life or lives,
  --(B) the individual  or  individual's  spouse  will  be  provided  with
  housing,   as   appropriate   for  the  health  of  such  individual  or
  individual's spouse-
  --(i) in an independent living  unit  (which  has  additional  available
  facilities  outside  such  unit  for  the  provision  of meals and other
  personal care), and
  --(ii) in an assisted living facility  or  a  nursing  facility,  as  is
  available in the continuing care facility, and
  --(C)  the  individual  or individual's spouse will be provided assisted
  living or nursing care as the health of such individual or  individual's
  spouse requires, and as is available in the continuing care facility.


 --The Secretary shall issue guidance which limits such term to contracts
  which  provide  only  facilities,  care,  and services described in this
  paragraph.
    (3)  Qualified  continuing care facility. (A) In general. For purposes
  of this section, the term "qualified continuing care facility"  means  1
  or more facilities-
  --(i)  which  are  designed  to  provide  services under continuing care
  contracts,
  --(ii) which include an independent living unit, plus an assisted living
  or nursing facility, or both, and
  --(iii) substantially all of the independent living  unit  residents  of
  which are covered by continuing care contracts.
    (B)  Nursing  homes  excluded.  The  term  "qualified  continuing care
  facility" shall not include any facility which is of  a  type  which  is
  traditionally considered a nursing home.
    (i)  Regulations.  (1)  In general. The Secretary shall prescribe such
  regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes
  of this section, including-
  --(A) regulations providing that where, by reason of  varying  rates  of
  interest,   conditional   interest   payments,   waivers   of  interest,
  disposition of the lender's or borrower's interest in the loan, or other
  circumstances, the provisions of this  section  do  not  carry  out  the
  purposes  of this section, adjustments to the provisions of this section
  will be made to the extent necessary to carry out the purposes  of  this
  section,
  --(B)  regulations for the purpose of assuring that the positions of the
  borrower  and  lender  are  consistent  as  to   the   application   (or
  nonapplication) of this section, and
  --(C)  regulations  exempting  from  the application of this section any
  class of  transactions  the  interest  arrangements  of  which  have  no
  significant  effect  on  any  Federal tax liability of the lender or the
  borrower.
    (2) Estate tax  coordination.  Under  regulations  prescribed  by  the
  Secretary,  any  loan  which is made with donative intent and which is a
  term loan shall be taken into account for purposes of chapter  11  in  a
  manner consistent with the provisions of subsection (b).
    §  6166.  Extension  of  Time  for  Payment of Estate Tax Where Estate
  Consists Largely of  Interest  in  Closely  Held  Business.  (a)  5-year
  deferral; 10-year installment payment.--
    (1)  In  general.--If  the  value  of  an  interest  in a closely held
  business which is included in determining the gross estate of a decedent
  who was (at the date of his death) a citizen or resident of  the  United
  States exceeds 35 percent of the adjusted gross estate, the executor may
  elect to pay part or all of the tax imposed by section 2001 in 2 or more
  (but not exceeding 10) equal installments.
    (2)  Limitation.--The  maximum  amount  of  tax  which  may be paid in
  installments under this subsection shall be an amount  which  bears  the
  same  ratio  to  the tax imposed by section 2001 (reduced by the credits
  against such tax) as--
    (A) the closely held business amount, bears to
    (B) the amount of the adjusted gross estate.
    (3) Date for payment of installments.--If an election  is  made  under
  paragraph (1), the first installment shall be paid on or before the date
  selected  by  the executor which is not more than 5 years after the date
  prescribed  by  section  6151(a)  for  payment  of  the  tax,  and  each
  succeeding  installment  shall  be paid on or before the date which is 1
  year after the date prescribed by this  paragraph  for  payment  of  the
  preceding installment.


   (b) Definitions and special rules.--
    (1)  Interest in closely held business.--For purposes of this section,
  the term "interest in a closely held business" means--
    (A) an interest as a proprietor in a trade or business carried on as a
  proprietorship;
    (B) an interest as a partner in a partnership carrying on a  trade  or
  business, if--
    (i)  20  percent  or  more  of  the  total  capital  interest  in such
  partnership is included in determining the gross estate of the decedent,
  or
    (ii) such partnership had 45 or fewer partners; or
    (C) stock in a corporation carrying on a trade or business if--
    (i) 20  percent  or  more  in  value  of  the  voting  stock  of  such
  corporation is included in determining the gross estate of the decedent,
  or
    (ii) such corporation had 45 or fewer shareholders.
    (2) Rules for applying paragraph (1).--For purposes of paragraph (1)--
    (A)  Time  for  testing.--Determinations  shall be made as of the time
  immediately before the decedent's death.
    (B)  Certain  interests  held  by  husband  and  wife.--Stock   or   a
  partnership interest which--
    (i)  is  community  property of a husband and wife (or the income from
  which is community income) under the applicable community  property  law
  of a State, or
    (ii)  is  held  by a husband and wife as joint tenants, tenants by the
  entirety, or tenants in  common,  shall  be  treated  as  owned  by  one
  shareholder or one partner, as the case may be.
    (C) Indirect ownership.--Property owned, directly or indirectly, by or
  for  a corporation, partnership, estate, or trust shall be considered as
  being owned proportionately by or for  its  shareholders,  partners,  or
  beneficiaries. For purposes of the preceding sentence, a person shall be
  treated  as a beneficiary of any trust only if such person has a present
  interest in the trust.
    (D) Certain interests held by members of decedent's family.--All stock
  and all partnership interests held by the decedent or by any  member  of
  his family (within the meaning of section 267(c)(4)) shall be treated as
  owned by the decedent.
    (3)  Farmhouses  and certain other structures taken into account.--For
  purposes of the 35-percent requirement of subsection (a)(1), an interest
  in a closely held business which is the business of farming includes  an
  interest  in  residential buildings and related improvements on the farm
  which are occupied on a regular basis by the owner or lessee of the farm
  or by persons employed by such owner or lessee for purposes of operating
  or maintaining the farm.
    (4) Value.--For  purposes  of  this  section,  value  shall  be  value
  determined for purposes of chapter 11 (relating to estate tax).
    (5)  Closely  held business amount.--For purposes of this section, the
  term "closely held business amount" means the value of the interest in a
  closely held business which qualifies under subsection (a)(1).
    (6) Adjusted gross estate.--For purposes of this  section,  the  term,
  "adjusted  gross  estate" means the value of the gross estate reduced by
  the sum of the amounts allowable as a deduction under  section  2053  or
  2054.  Such  sum  shall  be  determined  on  the  basis of the facts and
  circumstances in existence on the date (including extensions) for filing
  the return of tax imposed by section 2001 (or, if earlier, the  date  on
  which such return is filed).
    (7) Partnership interests and stock which is not readily tradable.--


   (A) In general.--If the executor elects the benefits of this paragraph
  (at  such  time and in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulations
  prescribe), then--
    (i)  for  purposes  of  paragraph (1)(B)(i) or (1)(C)(i) (whichever is
  appropriate) and for purposes of subsection (c), any capital interest in
  a partnership  and  any  non-readily-tradable  stock  which  (after  the
  application  of paragraph (2)) is treated as owned by the decedent shall
  be treated as included in determining the value of the decedent's  gross
  estate,
    (ii) the executor shall be treated as having selected under subsection
  (a)(3) the date prescribed by section 6151(a), and
    (iii)  for purposes of applying section 6601(j), the 2-percent portion
  (as defined in such section) shall be treated as being zero.
    (B)  Non-readily-tradable  stock  defined.--For   purposes   of   this
  paragraph,  the term "non-readily-tradable stock" means stock for which,
  at the time of the decedent's death, there was  no  market  on  a  stock
  exchange or in an over-the-counter market.
    (8)  Stock  in  holding  company  treated as business company stock in
  certain cases.--
    (A)  In  general.--If  the  executor  elects  the  benefits  of   this
  paragraph, then--
    (i)  Holding  company  stock  treated  as business company stock.--For
  purposes of this section, the  portion  of  the  stock  of  any  holding
  company which represents direct ownership (or indirect ownership through
  1 or more other holding companies) by such company in a business company
  shall be deemed to be stock in such business company.
    (ii)  5-year  deferral for principal not to apply.--The executor shall
  be  treated  as  having  selected  under  subsection  (a)(3)  the   date
  prescribed by section 6151(a).
    (iii)  2-percent interest rate not to apply.--For purposes of applying
  section 6601(j), the 2-percent portion  (as  defined  in  such  section)
  shall be treated as being zero.
    (B) All stock must be non-readily-tradable stock.--
    (i)  In general.--No stock shall be taken into account for purposes of
  applying this paragraph unless it is non-readily-tradable stock
    (within the meaning of paragraph (7)(B)).
    (ii)  Special  application  where  only  holding  company   stock   is
  non-readily-tradable  stock.--If  the requirements of clause (i) are not
  met, but all of the stock of each holding company taken into account  is
  non-readily-tradable,  then  this  paragraph shall apply, but subsection
  (a)(1) shall be applied by substituting "5" for "10".
    (C)   Application   of   voting   stock   requirement   of   paragraph
  (1)(C)(i).--For  purposes  of clause (i) of paragraph (1)(C), the deemed
  stock resulting from  the  application  of  subparagraph  (A)  shall  be
  treated  as  voting stock to the extent that voting stock in the holding
  company owns directly (or through the voting stock of 1  or  more  other
  holding companies) voting stock in the business company.
    (D) Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph--
    (i) Holding company.--The term "holding company" means any corporation
  holding stock in another corporation.
    (ii)   Business   company.--The  term  "business  company"  means  any
  corporation carrying on a trade or business.
    (9) Deferral not available for passive assets.--
    (A) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a)(1) and determining the
  closely held business amount (but not for purposes of  subsection  (g)),
  the  value  of any interest in a closely held business shall not include
  the value of that portion of such  interest  which  is  attributable  to
  passive assets held by the business.


   (B) Passive asset defined.--For purposes of this paragraph--
    (i)  In  general.--The term "passive asset" means any asset other than
  an asset used in carrying on a trade or business.
    (ii)  Stock  treated  as  passive  asset.--The  term  "passive  asset"
  includes any stock in another corporation unless--
    (I)  such  stock  is  treated  as held by the decedent by reason of an
  election under paragraph (8), and
    (II) such stock qualified under subsection (a)(1).
    (iii) Exception for active corporations.--If--
    (I) a corporation owns 20 percent or more in value of the voting stock
  of another corporation, or  such  other  corporation  has  45  or  fewer
  shareholders, and
    (II)  80  percent  or  more  of  the  value of the assets of each such
  corporation is attributable to assets used in carrying  on  a  trade  or
  business,  then  such corporations shall be treated as 1 corporation for
  purposes of clause (ii). For purposes of applying subclause (II) to  the
  corporation holding the stock of the other corporation, such stock shall
  not be taken into account.
    (10) Stock in qualifying lending and finance business treated as stock
  in an active trade or business company.--
    (A)   In  general.--If  the  executor  elects  the  benefits  of  this
  paragraph, then--
    (i) Stock in qualifying lending and finance business treated as  stock
  in  an  active trade or business company.--For purposes of this section,
  any asset used in a qualifying lending and  finance  business  shall  be
  treated as an asset which is used in carrying on a trade or business.
    (ii)  5-year  deferral for principal not to apply.--The executor shall
  be  treated  as  having  selected  under  subsection  (a)(3)  the   date
  prescribed by section 6151(a).
    (iii)   5   equal  installments  allowed.--For  purposes  of  applying
  subsection
    (a)(1), "5" shall be substituted for "10".
    (B) Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph--
    (i) Qualifying lending and  finance  business.--The  term  "qualifying
  lending and finance business" means a lending and finance business, if--
    (I)  based  on  all the facts and circumstances immediately before the
  date of the  decedent's  death,  there  was  substantial  activity  with
  respect to the lending and finance business, or
    (II)  during  at least 3 of the 5 taxable years ending before the date
  of the decedent's death, such business had at least 1 full-time employee
  substantially all of whose services were the active management  of  such
  business,  10  full-time,  nonowner employees substantially all of whose
  services were directly related to such business, and $5,000,000 in gross
  receipts from activities described in clause (ii).
    (ii) Lending and finance  business.--The  term  "lending  and  finance
  business" means a trade or business of--
    (I) making loans,
    (II)   purchasing   or  discounting  accounts  receivable,  notes,  or
  installment obligations,
    (III) engaging in rental and leasing of  real  and  tangible  personal
  property,  including entering into leases and purchasing, servicing, and
  disposing of leases and leased assets,
    (IV) rendering services or making facilities available in the ordinary
  course of a lending or finance business, and
    (V) rendering services or making facilities  available  in  connection
  with  activities  described in subclauses (I) through (IV) carried on by
  the corporation rendering services or making  facilities  available,  or


 another  corporation  which is a member of the same affiliated group (as
  defined in section 1504 without regard to section 1504(b)(3)).
    (iii)  Limitation.--The term "qualifying lending and finance business"
  shall not include any interest in an entity, if the  stock  or  debt  of
  such  entity  or a controlled group (as defined in section 267(f)(1)) of
  which such entity was a member was readily tradable  on  an  established
  securities  market  or secondary market (as defined by the Secretary) at
  any time within 3 years before the date of the decedent's death.
    (c)  Special  rule  for  interest  in   2   or   more   closely   held
  businesses.--For purposes of this section, interest in 2 or more closely
  held  businesses,  with  respect  to  each of which there is included in
  determining the value of the decedent's gross estate 20 percent or  more
  of  the  total  value  of  each  such  business,  shall be treated as an
  interest in  a  single  closely  held  business.  For  purposes  of  the
  20-percent  requirement  of  the  preceding  sentence,  an interest in a
  closely held business which represents the surviving  spouse's  interest
  in  property  held by the decedent and the surviving spouse as community
  property or as joint tenants, tenants by the  entirety,  or  tenants  in
  common shall be treated as having been included in determining the value
  of the decedent's gross estate.
    (d)  Election.--Any  election  under  subsection (a) shall be made not
  later than the time prescribed by section 6075(a) for filing the  return
  of tax imposed by section 2001 (including extensions thereof), and shall
  be  made in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulations prescribe.
  If an election under subsection (a) is  made,  the  provisions  of  this
  subtitle shall apply as though the Secretary were extending the time for
  payment of the tax.
    (e)  Proration  of deficiency to installments.--If an election is made
  under subsection (a) to pay any part of the tax imposed by section  2001
  in installments and a deficiency has been assessed, the deficiency shall
  (subject to the limitation provided by subsection (a)(2)) be prorated to
  the   installments  payable  under  subsection  (a).  The  part  of  the
  deficiency so prorated to any installment the date for payment of  which
  has  not  arrived  shall be collected at the same time as, and as a part
  of, such installment. The part of the  deficiency  so  prorated  to  any
  installment the date for payment of which has arrived shall be paid upon
  notice and demand from the Secretary. This subsection shall not apply if
  the  deficiency  is due to negligence, to intentional disregard of rules
  and regulations, or to fraud with intent to evade tax.
    (f) Time for payment of interest.--If the  time  for  payment  of  any
  amount of tax has been extended under this section--
    (1)  Interest  for first 5 years.--Interest payable under section 6601
  of any unpaid portion of such amount attributable to the first  5  years
  after  the  date  prescribed  by  section 6151(a) for payment of the tax
  shall be paid annually.
    (2) Interest for periods after first 5 years.--Interest payable  under
  section  6601  on  any unpaid portion of such amount attributable to any
  period after the 5-year period referred to in  paragraph  (1)  shall  be
  paid  annually  at  the same time as, and as a part of, each installment
  payment of the tax.
    (3) Interest in the case of certain deficiencies.--In the  case  of  a
  deficiency  to  which subsection (e) applies which is assessed after the
  close of the 5-year  period  referred  to  in  paragraph  (1),  interest
  attributable   to  such  5-year  period,  and  interest  assigned  under
  paragraph (2) to any installment the  date  for  payment  of  which  has
  arrived on or before the date of the assessment of the deficiency, shall
  be paid upon notice and demand from the Secretary.


   (4)  Selection  of  shorter  period.--If  the  executor has selected a
  period shorter than 5 years under subsection (a)(3), such shorter period
  shall be substituted for 5 years in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of this
  subsection.
    (g) Acceleration of payment.--
    (1) Disposition of interest; withdrawal of funds from business.--
    (A) If--
    (i)(I)  any  portion  of  an interest in a closely held business which
  qualifies under subsection (a)(1) is distributed,  sold,  exchanged,  or
  otherwise disposed of, or
    (II)  money  and  other  property  attributable to such an interest is
  withdrawn from such trade or business, and
    (ii) the aggregate of such distributions, sales, exchanges,  or  other
  dispositions  and  withdrawals equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value
  of such interest, then the extension of time for payment of tax provided
  in subsection (a) shall cease to apply, and the unpaid  portion  of  the
  tax  payable  in  installments shall be paid upon notice and demand from
  the Secretary.
    (B) In the case of a distribution in  redemption  of  stock  to  which
  section  303  (or  so  much  of  section  304 as relates to section 303)
  applies--
    (i) the redemption of such stock, and  the  withdrawal  of  money  and
  other property distributed in such redemption, shall not be treated as a
  distribution or withdrawal for purposes of subparagraph (A), and
    (ii)  for  purposes  of subparagraph (A), the value of the interest in
  the closely held business shall be considered to be such  value  reduced
  by the value of the stock redeemed.
    This  subparagraph  shall  apply  only  if,  on  or  before  the  date
  prescribed by subsection (a)(3) for the payment of the first installment
  which becomes due after the date of the distribution (or, if earlier, on
  or before the day which is 1 year after the date of  the  distribution),
  there is paid an amount of the tax imposed by section 2001 not less than
  the amount of money and other property distributed.
    (C)  Subparagraph  (A)(i)  does  not  apply  to  an  exchange of stock
  pursuant to a plan of reorganization described in subparagraph (D), (E),
  or (F) of section 368(a)(1) nor to an exchange to which section 355  (or
  so much of section 356 as relates to section 355) applies; but any stock
  received   in  such  an  exchange  shall  be  treated  for  purposes  of
  subparagraph (A)(i) as an interest qualifying under subsection (a)(1).
    (D) Subparagraph (A)(i) does not apply to a transfer  of  property  of
  the  decedent  to a person entitled by reason of the decedent's death to
  receive such property under the decedent's will, the applicable  law  of
  descent  and distribution, or a trust created by the decedent. A similar
  rule shall apply in the case of a series of subsequent transfers of  the
  property  by  reason of death so long as each transfer is to a member of
  the family (within the meaning of section 267(c)(4)) of  the  transferor
  in such transfer.
    (E) Changes in interest in holding company.--If any stock in a holding
  company  is  treated  as  stock  in  a  business  company  by  reason of
  subsection (b)(8)(A)--
    (i) any disposition of any interest in  such  stock  in  such  holding
  company  which  was  included  in  determining  the  gross estate of the
  decedent, or
    (ii) any withdrawal of any money or other property from  such  holding
  company  attributable  to any interest included in determining the gross
  estate of the decedent,


   shall be treated for purposes of subparagraph (A) as a disposition  of
  (or  a withdrawal with respect to) the stock qualifying under subsection
  (a)(1).
    (F)  Changes  in  interest  in  business  company.--If  any stock in a
  holding company is treated as stock in a business company by  reason  of
  subsection (b)(8)(A)--
    (i)  any  disposition  of  any  interest in such stock in the business
  company by such holding company, or
    (ii) any withdrawal of any money or other property from such  business
  company  attributable  to such stock by such holding company owning such
  stock,
    shall be treated for purposes of subparagraph (A) as a disposition  of
  (or  a withdrawal with respect to) the stock qualifying under subsection
  (a)(1).
    (2) Undistributed income of estate.--
    (A) If an election is made under  this  section  and  the  estate  has
  undistributed net income for any taxable year ending on or after the due
  date  for  the  first  installment, the executor shall, on or before the
  date prescribed by law for filing the income tax return for such taxable
  year (including  extensions  thereof),  pay  an  amount  equal  to  such
  undistributed net income in liquidation of the unpaid portion of the tax
  payable in installments.
    (B)  For purposes of subparagraph (A), the undistributed net income of
  the estate for any taxable year is the amount by which the distributable
  net income of the estate for such taxable year (as  defined  in  section
  643) exceeds the sum of--
    (i)  the amounts for such taxable year specified in paragraphs (1) and
  (2) of section 661(a) (relating to deductions for distributions, etc.);
    (ii) the amount of tax imposed for the  taxable  year  on  the  estate
  under chapter 1; and
    (iii)  the  amount  of  the  tax  imposed  by  section 2001 (including
  interest) paid by the executor during the taxable year (other  than  any
  amount paid pursuant to this paragraph).
    (C)  For  purposes of this paragraph, if any stock in a corporation is
  treated  as  stock  in  another  corporation  by  reason  of  subsection
  (b)(8)(A),   any  dividends  paid  by  such  other  corporation  to  the
  corporation shall be treated as paid to the estate of  the  decedent  to
  the extent attributable to the stock qualifying under subsection (a)(1).
    (3) Failure to make payment of principal or interest.--
    (A)  In  general.--Except  as  provided  in  subparagraph  (B), if any
  payment of principal or interest under this section is not  paid  on  or
  before  the  date  fixed  for its payment by this section (including any
  extension  of  time),  the  unpaid  portion  of  the  tax   payable   in
  installments shall be paid upon notice and demand from the Secretary.
    (B)  Payment within 6 months.--If any payment of principal or interest
  under this section is not paid on or before the  date  determined  under
  subparagraph (A) but is paid within 6 months of such date--
    (i) the provisions of subparagraph (A) shall not apply with respect to
  such payment,
    (ii) the provisions of section 6601(j) shall not apply with respect to
  the determination of interest on such payment, and
    (iii)  there  is  imposed  a penalty in an amount equal to the product
  of--
    (I) 5 percent of the amount of such payment, multiplied by
    (II) the number of months (or fractions thereof) after such  date  and
  before  payment is made. The penalty imposed under clause (iii) shall be
  treated in the same manner as a penalty imposed under  subchapter  B  of
  chapter 68.


   (h) Election in case of certain deficiencies.--
    (1) In general.--If--
    (A) a deficiency in the tax imposed by section 2001 is assessed,
    (B) the estate qualifies under subsection (a)(1), and
    (C)  the  executor  has not made an election under subsection (a), the
  executor  may  elect  to  pay  the  deficiency  in  installments.   This
  subsection  shall  not  apply if the deficiency is due to negligence, to
  intentional disregard of rules and regulations, or to fraud with  intent
  to evade tax.
    (2) Time of election.--An election under this subsection shall be made
  not  later  than  60  days  after  issuance  of notice and demand by the
  Secretary for the payment of the deficiency, and shall be made  in  such
  manner as the Secretary shall by regulations prescribe.
    (3)  Effect of election on payment.--If an election is made under this
  subsection, the deficiency shall (subject to the limitation provided  by
  subsection (a)(2)) be prorated to the installments which would have been
  due if an election had been timely made under subsection (a) at the time
  the  estate tax return was filed. The part of the deficiency so prorated
  to any installment the date for payment  of  which  would  have  arrived
  shall  be  paid  at  the  time  of the making of the election under this
  subsection. The portion of the deficiency so  prorated  to  installments
  the date for payment of which would not have so arrived shall be paid at
  the  time  such installments would have been due if such an election had
  been made.
    (i) Special rule for certain direct  skips.--To  the  extent  that  an
  interest  in  a  closely  held  business is the subject of a direct skip
  (within the meaning of section 2612(c)) occurring at the  same  time  as
  and  as  a  result  of  the  decedent's death, then for purposes of this
  section any tax imposed by section 2601 on the transfer of such interest
  shall be treated as if it were additional tax imposed by section 2001.
    (j) Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe  such  regulations  as
  may be necessary to the application of this section.
    (k) Cross references.--
    (1)  Security.-- For authority of the Secretary to require security in
  the case of an extension under this section, see section 6165.
    (2) Lien.--For special lien (in lieu  of  bond)  in  the  case  of  an
  extension under this section, see section 6324A.
    (3)  Period  of limitation.--For extension of the period of limitation
  in the case of an extension under this section, see section 6503(d).
    (4) Interest.--For provisions relating to interest on tax  payable  in
  installments under this section, see subsection (j) of section 6601.
    (5)   Transfers  within  3  years  of  death.--For  special  rule  for
  qualifying  an  estate  under  this  section  where  property  has  been
  transferred within 3 years of decedent's death, see section 2035(c)(2).


   §  1080.  Application of article.--- (a) General.--- The provisions of
  this article shall apply to the administration  of  and  the  procedures
  with  respect  to the taxes imposed by articles nine, and nine-a of this
  chapter for taxable  years  or  periods  ending  on  or  after  December
  thirty-first, nineteen hundred sixty-four.
    (b)  Definitions.---  As  used  in  this  article, where not otherwise
  specifically  defined  and  unless  a  different  meaning   is   clearly
  required---
    (1)  The  term  "return" means a report or return of tax, but does not
  include a declaration of estimated tax.
    (2)  The  term  "corporation"  includes  a  corporation,   association
  (including  a  limited  liability company), joint stock company or other
  entity subject to tax under article nine, nine-a, nine-b or nine-c.
    (3) The term "person" includes a  corporation,  association,  company,
  partnership,  estate,  trust,  liquidator,  fiduciary or other entity or
  individual liable for the tax imposed by article nine, nine-a, nine-b or
  nine-c, or under a duty to perform an act under this  article  or  under
  article nine, nine-a, nine-b or nine-c.




   §  1081. Notice of deficiency.-- (a) General.-- If upon examination of
  a taxpayer's return under article nine, nine-a, nine-b  or  nine-c,  the
  tax commission determines that there is a deficiency of tax, it may mail
  a  notice  of  deficiency to the taxpayer. If a taxpayer fails to file a
  tax return required under article nine, nine-a, nine-b  or  nine-c,  the
  tax  commission  is  authorized  to estimate the taxpayer's New York tax
  liability from any information in its possession, and to mail  a  notice
  of deficiency to the taxpayer. A notice of deficiency shall be mailed by
  certified  or  registered mail to the taxpayer at its last known address
  in or out of this state. If the taxpayer has terminated its existence, a
  notice of deficiency may be mailed to its last known address in  or  out
  of  this  state,  unless  the  tax commission has received notice of the
  existence of a fiduciary relationship with respect to the taxpayer.
    (b) Notice of deficiency as assessment.--After ninety  days  from  the
  mailing of a notice of deficiency, such notice shall be an assessment of
  the  amount of tax specified in such notice, together with the interest,
  additions to tax and penalties stated in such notice,  except  only  for
  any  such  tax or other amounts as to which the taxpayer has within such
  ninety day period filed with the tax commission a petition under section
  one thousand eighty-nine. If the notice of deficiency is addressed to  a
  taxpayer  whose last known address is outside of the United States, such
  period shall be one hundred fifty days instead of ninety days.
    (c)  Restrictions  on  assessment  and  levy.--No  assessment   of   a
  deficiency  in tax and no levy or proceeding in court for its collection
  shall be made, begun or prosecuted,  except  as  otherwise  provided  in
  section  one thousand ninety-four, until a notice of deficiency has been
  mailed to the taxpayer, nor until the expiration of the time for  filing
  a  petition  contesting  such notice, nor, if a petition with respect to
  the taxable year has been filed  with  the  tax  commission,  until  the
  decision  of  the  tax commission has become final. For exception in the
  case of judicial review of the  decision  of  the  tax  commission,  see
  subsection (c) of section one thousand ninety.
    (d) Exceptions for mathematical or clerical errors.--If a mathematical
  or clerical error appears on a return (including an overstatement of the
  amount  paid  as  estimated  tax),  the  commissioner  shall  notify the
  taxpayer that an amount of tax in excess of that shown upon  the  return
  is due, and that such excess has been assessed. Such notice shall not be
  considered  as  a notice of deficiency for the purposes of this section,
  subsection (f) of section one thousand eighty-seven (limiting credits or
  refunds after petition to the division of tax appeals),  subsection  (b)
  of  section  one  thousand  eighty-nine  (authorizing  the  filing  of a
  petition with  the  division  of  tax  appeals  based  on  a  notice  of
  deficiency), or article forty of this chapter, nor shall such assessment
  or collection be prohibited by the provisions of subsection (c).
    (e)   Exception   where  change  in  federal  taxable  income  is  not
  reported.--
    (1) If the taxpayer fails to comply with subdivision three of  section
  two  hundred  eleven  or  with  section  two hundred nineteen-bb or with
  section two hundred nineteen-zz in not reporting a change or  correction
  or  renegotiation, or computation or recomputation of tax, increasing or
  decreasing its federal taxable income  or  federal  alternative  minimum
  taxable  income  as  reported on its federal income tax return or in not
  reporting a change or correction or  renegotiation,  or  computation  or
  recomputation  of tax, which is treated in the same manner as if it were
  a deficiency for federal income tax purposes or in not filing an amended
  return, instead of the mode and  time  of  assessment  provided  for  in
  subsection  (b)  of  this  section,  the  tax  commission  may  assess a
  deficiency based upon such increased or decreased federal taxable income


 or federal alternative minimum taxable income by mailing to the taxpayer
  a notice of additional tax due specifying the amount of the  deficiency,
  and  such  deficiency,  together with the interest, additions to tax and
  penalties  stated  in  such notice, shall be deemed assessed on the date
  such notice is mailed unless within thirty days  after  the  mailing  of
  such   notice   a   report  of  the  federal  change  or  correction  or
  renegotiation, or computation or recomputation of  tax,  or  an  amended
  return,  where  such return was required by subdivision three of section
  two hundred eleven or by section two hundred nineteen-bb or  by  section
  two  hundred  nineteen-zz,  is  filed accompanied by a statement showing
  wherein such federal determination and such notice of additional tax due
  are erroneous.
    (2) Such notice shall not be considered as a notice of deficiency  for
  the  purposes  of  this  section, subsection (f) of section one thousand
  eighty-seven (limiting credits or refunds  after  petition  to  the  tax
  commission),  or  subsection  (b)  of  section  one thousand eighty-nine
  (authorizing the filing of a petition with the tax commission based on a
  notice of deficiency), nor  shall  such  assessment  or  the  collection
  thereof be prohibited by the provisions of subsection (c).
    (3)  If  the  taxpayer  has  terminated  its  existence,  a  notice of
  additional tax due may be mailed to its last known address in or out  of
  this  state,  unless  the  tax  commission  has  received  notice of the
  existence of a fiduciary relationship with respect to the taxpayer.
    (f) Waiver of restrictions.-- The taxpayer shall at any time  (whether
  or  not  a notice of deficiency has been issued) have the right to waive
  the restrictions on assessment and collection of the whole or  any  part
  of  the  deficiency  by  a  signed  notice in writing filed with the tax
  commission.
    (g) Two or more corporations.--In the case of a combined return  under
  article  nine-a  or a consolidated return under article nine-b or nine-c
  of two  or  more  corporations,  the  tax  commission  may  determine  a
  deficiency of tax under article nine-a, nine-b or nine-c with respect to
  the  entire  tax  due  upon  such  return  against any taxpayer included
  therein. In the case of a taxpayer which might  have  been  included  in
  such  a return under article nine-a, nine-b or nine-c when the tax under
  such articles was originally reported, the tax commission may  determine
  a  deficiency of tax under article nine-a, nine-b or nine-c against such
  taxpayer and against any other taxpayers which might have been  included
  in such a return.
    (h)  Deficiency  defined.--For  purposes of this article, a deficiency
  means the amount of the tax imposed by article nine, nine-a,  nine-b  or
  nine-c,  less (i) the amount shown as the tax upon the taxpayer's return
  (whether the return was made or the tax computed by it  or  by  the  tax
  commission), and less (ii) the amounts previously assessed (or collected
  without  assessment)  as  a  deficiency and plus (iii) the amount of any
  rebates. For the purpose of this definition, the tax imposed by  article
  nine-a,  nine-b  or nine-c and the tax shown on the return shall both be
  determined without regard to any payment of estimated tax; and a  rebate
  means  so  much  of  an  abatement,  credit,  refund  or other repayment
  (whether or not erroneous) as was made on the ground  that  the  amounts
  entering  into  the definition of a deficiency showed a balance in favor
  of the taxpayer.
    (i)  Exception  for  final  determination  of  refund  or  credit   of
  retaliatory taxes.--
    (1)  If  the taxpayer files the report required under paragraph (2) of
  subdivision (e) of section  fifteen  hundred  fifteen  of  this  chapter
  within  the  time  prescribed  by  such paragraph, in respect of a final
  determination of a refund  or  credit  of  retaliatory  taxes  or  other


 charges,  the  amount  of  the refund or credit of such taxes or charges
  paid for which the taxpayer  has  been  allowed  a  credit  pursuant  to
  subdivision (c) of section fifteen hundred eleven of this chapter and in
  respect to which the taxpayer filed such report shall be deemed assessed
  on  the  date  of filing such report. If payment of such amount does not
  accompany the report, the tax commission shall issue a notice and demand
  for the unpaid amount, together with any interest, additions to tax  and
  penalties,   pursuant   to   subsection  (b)  of  section  one  thousand
  ninety-two.
    (2) If the taxpayer fails to file the report required under  paragraph
  (2)  of  subdivision  (e)  of  section  fifteen  hundred fifteen of this
  chapter within the time prescribed by such paragraph, in  respect  of  a
  final  determination of a refund or credit of retaliatory taxes or other
  charges, the amount of the refund or credit of  such  taxes  or  charges
  paid  for  which  the  taxpayer  has  been  allowed a credit pursuant to
  subdivision (c) of section fifteen hundred eleven of this chapter and in
  respect to which the taxpayer was required to file such report shall  be
  deemed  assessed  on  the  last  date  prescribed for the filing of such
  report. The tax commission shall issue  a  notice  and  demand  for  the
  unpaid  amount,  together  with  any  interest,  additions  to  tax  and
  penalties,  pursuant  to  subsection  (b)  of   section   one   thousand
  ninety-two.
    (3)  The  assessments  provided  for in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this
  subsection  or  collection  thereof  shall  not  be  prohibited  by  the
  provisions of subsection (c).




   §  1082.  Assessment.---(a)  Assessment date.--- (1) The amount of tax
  which a return shows to be due, or the amount  of  tax  which  a  return
  would  have  shown  to  be due but for a mathematical or clerical error,
  shall be deemed to be assessed on the  date  of  filing  of  the  return
  (including  any  amended return showing an increase of tax). If a notice
  of deficiency has been mailed, the amount of  the  deficiency  shall  be
  deemed to be assessed on the date specified in subsection (b) of section
  one thousand eighty-one if no petition to the division of tax appeals is
  filed,   or  if  a  petition  is  filed,  then  upon  the  date  when  a
  determination or decision  rendered  in  the  division  of  tax  appeals
  establishing the amount of the deficiency becomes final.
    (2)  If  a  report  or an amended return filed pursuant to subdivision
  three of section two hundred eleven or section two  hundred  nineteen-bb
  or  two hundred nineteen-zz concedes the accuracy of a federal change or
  correction or renegotiation, or computation or recomputation of tax, any
  deficiency in tax under  article  nine-a,  nine-b  or  nine-c  resulting
  therefrom  shall  be  deemed  to  be assessed on the date of filing such
  report  or  amended  return,  and  such  assessment  shall   be   timely
  notwithstanding  section  one  thousand  eighty-three.  If  a  notice of
  additional tax due, as prescribed  in  subsection  (e)  of  section  one
  thousand eighty-one, has been mailed, the amount of the deficiency shall
  be deemed to be assessed on the date specified in such subsection unless
  within  thirty  days  after  the  mailing of such notice a report of the
  federal  change  or  correction  or  renegotiation  or  computation   or
  recomputation  of  tax,  or  an  amended  return,  where such return was
  required by subdivision three  of  section  two  hundred  eleven  or  by
  section  two  hundred nineteen-bb or by section two hundred nineteen-zz,
  is filed  accompanied  by  a  statement  showing  wherein  such  federal
  determination and such notice of additional tax due are erroneous.
    (3)  If  the taxpayer files the report required under paragraph (2) of
  subdivision (e) of section  fifteen  hundred  fifteen  of  this  chapter
  within  the  time  prescribed  by  such paragraph, in respect of a final
  determination of a refund  or  credit  of  retaliatory  taxes  or  other
  charges,  the  amount  of  the refund or credit of such taxes or charges
  paid for which the taxpayer  has  been  allowed  a  credit  pursuant  to
  subdivision (c) of section fifteen hundred eleven of this chapter and in
  respect to which the taxpayer filed such report shall be deemed assessed
  on  the date of filing such report; if the taxpayer fails to file such a
  required report within the time prescribed, such amount shall be  deemed
  assessed  on  the last date prescribed for filing of such report; either
  such assessment shall be timely  notwithstanding  section  one  thousand
  eighty-three.
    (4)  Any  amount  paid  as  a  tax  or in respect of a tax, other than
  amounts paid as estimated tax, shall be deemed to be assessed  upon  the
  date of receipt of payment, notwithstanding any other provisions.
    (b)  Other assessment powers.---If the mode or time for the assessment
  of any tax under article  nine,  nine-a,  nine-b  or  nine-c  (including
  interest,  additions  to  tax and assessable penalties) is not otherwise
  provided for, the tax commission may establish the same by regulations.
    (c) Estimated tax.---No unpaid amount of estimated tax  under  article
  nine-a, nine-b or nine-c shall be assessed.
    (d)  Supplemental  assessment.---  The tax commission may, at any time
  within  the  period  prescribed  for  assessment,  make  a  supplemental
  assessment, subject to the provisions of section one thousand eighty-one
  where  applicable,  whenever  it  is  ascertained that any assessment is
  imperfect or incomplete in any material respect.
    (e) Cross reference.---  For  assessment  in  case  of  jeopardy,  see
  section one thousand ninety-four.




   §  1083.  Limitations  on  assessment.---  (a)  General.---  Except as
  otherwise provided in this section, any tax under article nine,  nine-a,
  nine-b  or  nine-c shall be assessed within three years after the return
  was filed (whether or not such return was filed on  or  after  the  date
  prescribed).
    (b) Time return deemed filed.---For purposes of this section, a return
  of  tax  filed  before  the last day prescribed by law or by regulations
  promulgated pursuant to law for the filing thereof shall be deemed to be
  filed on such last day.
    (c) Exceptions.---
    (1) Assessment at any time.---The tax may  be  assessed  at  any  time
  if---
    (A) no return is filed,
    (B) a false or fraudulent return is filed with intent to evade tax,
    (C)  in  the  case  of the tax imposed under article nine-a, nine-b or
  nine-c, the taxpayer fails to file a report or amended  return  required
  under  subdivision  three  of  section two hundred eleven or section two
  hundred nineteen-bb  or  two  hundred  nineteen-zz,  in  respect  of  an
  increase  or  decrease  in federal taxable income or federal alternative
  minimum taxable income or federal tax, or in  respect  of  a  change  or
  correction  or  renegotiation,  or  computation or recomputation of tax,
  which is treated in the same manner as  if  it  were  a  deficiency  for
  federal income tax purposes, or
    (D)  it is assessed in respect of a final determination of a refund or
  credit of retaliatory taxes or other charges as prescribed by paragraphs
  (1) and (2) of subsection (i) of section one  thousand  eighty-one.  For
  any  such  assessment,  the  amount  of  the assessment of tax shall not
  exceed the amount of the increase in New York tax attributable  to  such
  refund  or  credit. The provisions of this subparagraph shall not extend
  the time within which or affect the amount for which an  assessment  may
  otherwise be made.
    (2) Extension by agreement.---Where, before the expiration of the time
  prescribed  in  this  section  for  the  assessment of tax, both the tax
  commission and the taxpayer have consented in writing to its  assessment
  after  such  time,  the  tax  may  be  assessed at any time prior to the
  expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so agreed upon  may  be
  extended  by subsequent agreements in writing made before the expiration
  of the period previously agreed upon.
    (3) Report of changed or corrected federal income.---In  the  case  of
  the  tax imposed under article nine-a, nine-b or nine-c, if the taxpayer
  files a report or amended return required  under  subdivision  three  of
  section  two  hundred  eleven  or section two hundred nineteen-bb or two
  hundred nineteen-zz, in respect of an increase or  decrease  in  federal
  taxable  income or federal alternative minimum taxable income or federal
  tax, or in respect of  a  change  or  correction  or  renegotiation,  or
  computation or recomputation of tax, which is treated in the same manner
  as  if  it  were  a  deficiency  for  federal  income  tax purposes, the
  assessment (if not deemed to have been  made  upon  the  filing  of  the
  report or amended return) may be made at any time within two years after
  such  report  or amended return was filed. The amount of such assessment
  of tax shall not exceed the amount of  the  increase  in  New  York  tax
  attributable  to  such federal change or correction or renegotiation, or
  computation or recomputation of tax. The provisions  of  this  paragraph
  shall  not  affect  the  time  within  which  or the amount for which an
  assessment may otherwise be made.
    (4) Deficiency attributable to carryback.---If  a  deficiency  of  tax
  under  article nine-a is attributable to the application to the taxpayer
  of a net operating loss carryback or a capital loss carryback, it may be


 assessed at any time that a deficiency for the taxable year of the  loss
  may be assessed.
    (5)  Recovery  of  erroneous  refund.---An  erroneous  refund shall be
  considered an underpayment of tax on the date made, and an assessment of
  a deficiency arising out of an erroneous refund may be made at any  time
  within  two  years  from  the  making  of  the  refund,  except that the
  assessment may be made within five years from the making of  the  refund
  if  it  appears  that  any  part  of  the refund was induced by fraud or
  misrepresentation of a material fact.
    (6) Request for prompt assessment.---The tax shall be assessed  within
  eighteen months after written request therefor (made after the return is
  filed)  by the taxpayer or by a fiduciary representing the taxpayer, but
  not more than  three  years  after  the  return  was  filed,  except  as
  otherwise   provided   in  this  subsection  and  subsection  (d).  This
  subsection shall not apply unless---
    (A) (i) such written request notifies  the  tax  commission  that  the
  taxpayer  contemplates  dissolution  at or before the expiration of such
  eighteen-month period, (ii) the  dissolution  is  in  good  faith  begun
  before  the  expiration  of  such  eighteen-month  period, and (iii) the
  dissolution is completed;
    (B) (i) such written  request  notifies  the  tax  commission  that  a
  dissolution  has  in  good faith been begun, and (ii) the dissolution is
  completed; or
    (C) a dissolution has been completed at the time such written  request
  is made.
    (7)  Change  of  the  allocation of taxpayer's income or capital.---No
  change of the allocation of income or capital upon which the  taxpayer's
  return  (or  any additional assessment) was based shall be made where an
  assessment of tax is made during the  additional  period  of  limitation
  under  subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1), or under paragraph (3) or (4);
  and where any such assessment has  been  made,  or  where  a  notice  of
  deficiency  has  been  mailed  to  the taxpayer on the basis of any such
  proposed assessment, no change of the allocation of  income  or  capital
  shall be made in a proceeding on the taxpayer's claim for refund of such
  assessment  or  on  the  taxpayer's petition for redetermination of such
  deficiency.
    (8) Report concerning waste treatment facility, air pollution  control
  facility   or   eligible  business  facility.  Under  the  circumstances
  described in subparagraph (3) of paragraph (g) of  subdivision  nine  of
  section  two  hundred  eight,  paragraph  (f)  of  subdivision eleven of
  section two hundred ten  or  paragraph  (f)  of  subdivision  eleven  of
  section  two hundred nineteen-q of this chapter, the tax may be assessed
  within three years  after  the  filing  of  the  report  containing  the
  information  required  by  such  paragraph,  or,  if  a  certificate  of
  compliance in respect to an air  pollution  control  facility  shall  be
  revoked,  within  three  years  after  the  tax commission shall receive
  notice  of  such  revocation  from  the  taxpayer  or  as  required   by
  subdivision  three  of section 19-0309 of the environmental conservation
  law, whichever notice is received earlier.
    (9)  Reports  concerning  empire  zone  credits.   If   a   taxpayer's
  certification  under  article eighteen-B of the general municipal law is
  revoked with respect to an empire zone or zone equivalent area, any  tax
  liability  generated  by  reason of such decertification may be assessed
  within three years after the commissioner has received  notice  of  such
  decertification  as  required by subdivision (a) of section nine hundred
  fifty-nine of the general municipal law.
    (10) Reports concerning a certificate of completion. If  a  taxpayer's
  certificate  of  completion  issued  pursuant  to section 27-1419 of the


 environmental conservation law is  revoked  by  a  determination  issued
  pursuant  to  section 27-1419 of the environmental conservation law, any
  tax liability generated by reason of such  revocation  may  be  assessed
  within  one  year  after  such  determination  is final and is no longer
  subject to judicial review.
    * (11)   Extended   statute   of   limitations   for   tax   avoidance
  transactions.--(A)  If a taxpayer fails to file, disclose or provide any
  statement, return or other information for any taxable year with respect
  to a listed transaction (as defined in paragraph three of subsection (p)
  of section one thousand eighty-five of this article) which  is  required
  under  subdivision  (a) of section twenty-five of this chapter, the time
  for assessment of any tax imposed by this article with respect  to  such
  transaction shall not expire before the date which is one year after the
  earlier of:
    (i)  the  date  on  which the commissioner is furnished the statement,
  return, or information so required, or
    (ii) the date that the requirements  of  subdivision  (c)  of  section
  twenty-five of this chapter are met with respect to a request under such
  subdivision by the commissioner relating to such transaction.
    (B)  If  later than the time for assessment otherwise provided by this
  section, tax may be assessed at any time  within  six  years  after  the
  return  was  filed  if  the deficiency is attributable to an abusive tax
  avoidance transaction.
    (C) For purposes of subparagraph (B) of this  paragraph,  an  "abusive
  tax  avoidance  transaction" means a plan or arrangement devised for the
  principal purpose of avoiding tax. Abusive  tax  avoidance  transactions
  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  listed  transactions described in
  paragraph five of subsection (k-1) of section one  thousand  eighty-five
  of this article.
    * NB Repealed July 1, 2024
    (12)   Except  as  otherwise  provided  in  paragraph  three  of  this
  subsection, or as otherwise provided in  this  section  where  a  longer
  period  of  time  may  apply,  if a taxpayer files an amended return, an
  assessment of tax (if not deemed to have been made upon  the  filing  of
  the  amended  return),  including  recovery of a previously paid refund,
  attributable to a change or correction on  the  amended  return  from  a
  prior  return may be made at any time within one year after such amended
  return is filed.
    (d) Omission of income on return.---The tax may  be  assessed  at  any
  time within six years after the return was filed if (i) a taxpayer omits
  from  gross  income  required  to  be reported on a return under article
  nine, nine-a, nine-b or nine-c an  amount  properly  includible  therein
  which  is in excess of twenty-five percent of the amount of gross income
  stated in the return or, (ii) a taxpayer omits from the sum of its items
  of tax preference and its adjustment  required  in  the  computation  of
  minimum taxable income an amount properly includible therein which is in
  excess of twenty-five percent of such sum as stated in the return.
    For purposes of this subsection---
    (1)  the  term  gross income means gross income for federal income tax
  purposes as reportable on a return  under  article  nine-a,  and  "gross
  earnings",  "gross  income",  "gross operating income" and "gross direct
  premiums less return premiums", as those terms are used in article nine,
  nine-b or nine-c, whichever is applicable;
    (2) there shall not be taken into account any amount which is  omitted
  in  the  return  if  such  amount  is  disclosed  in the return, or in a
  statement attached to the return, in a manner adequate  to  apprise  the
  tax commission of the nature and amount of such item.


   (e)  Suspension  of  running of period of limitation.---The running of
  the period of limitations on assessment or collection of  tax  or  other
  amount  (or  of  a transferee's liability) shall, after the mailing of a
  notice of deficiency, be suspended for the period during which  the  tax
  commission  is  prohibited  under subsection (c) of section one thousand
  eighty-one from making the assessment or from collecting by levy.




   § 1084. Interest on underpayment.---(a) General.--If any amount of tax
  is  not  paid  on  or before the last date prescribed in article nine or
  nine-a of this chapter for payment,  interest  on  such  amount  at  the
  underpayment  rate  set  by  the  commissioner  pursuant  to section one
  thousand ninety-six of this article, or if no rate is set, at  the  rate
  of  seven  and  one-half  percent per annum shall be paid for the period
  from such last date to the date paid, whether or not  any  extension  of
  time  for  payment was granted. Interest under this subsection shall not
  be paid if the amount thereof is less than one dollar.
    (b) Exception as to estimated tax.---This section shall not  apply  to
  any failure to pay estimated tax under article nine-a, nine-b or nine-c.
    (c) Exception for mathematical or clerical error.--- No interest shall
  be  imposed  on  any  underpayment  of tax due solely to mathematical or
  clerical error if the taxpayer files a return within the time prescribed
  in article nine or nine-A (including any extension of time) and pays the
  amount of underpayment within three months after the due  date  of  such
  return, as it may be extended.
    (d)   Suspension   of  interest  on  deficiencies.---If  a  waiver  of
  restrictions on assessment  of  a  deficiency  has  been  filed  by  the
  taxpayer,  and if notice and demand by the tax commission for payment of
  such deficiency is not made within thirty days after the filing of  such
  waiver,  interest shall not be imposed on such deficiency for the period
  beginning immediately after such thirtieth day and ending with the  date
  of notice and demand.
    (e)  Tax  reduced  by  carryback.---If the amount of tax under article
  nine-a for any taxable year is reduced by reason of a carryback of a net
  operating loss or a capital loss, such reduction in tax shall not affect
  the computation of interest under this section  for  the  period  ending
  with  the  filing  date  for the taxable year in which the net operating
  loss or capital loss  arises.  Such  filing  date  shall  be  determined
  without regard to extensions of time to file.
    (f)  Interest  treated  as tax.---Interest under this section shall be
  paid upon notice and demand and shall be assessed, collected and paid in
  the same manner as the tax under article nine, nine-a, nine-b or nine-c.
  Any reference in this article  to  the  tax  imposed  by  article  nine,
  nine-a,  nine-b  or  nine-c  shall  be  deemed also to refer to interest
  imposed by this section on such tax.
    (g) Interest on penalties or additions  to  tax.---Interest  shall  be
  imposed  under  subsection  (a)  of  this  section  in  respect  of  any
  assessable penalty or addition to tax only if such assessable penalty or
  addition to tax is not paid within twenty-one  calendar  days  from  the
  date  of  the notice and demand therefor under subsection (b) of section
  one thousand ninety-two of this article (ten business days if the amount
  for which such notice and demand is made equals or exceeds  one  hundred
  thousand  dollars)  and  in such case interest shall be imposed only for
  the period from such date of the  notice  and  demand  to  the  date  of
  payment.
    (h)  Payment  within  specified  period  after notice and demand.---If
  notice and demand is made for payment of any amount under subsection (b)
  of section one thousand ninety-two of this article, and if  such  amount
  is paid within twenty-one calendar days (ten business days if the amount
  for  which  such notice and demand is made equals or exceeds one hundred
  thousand dollars) after the date of such  notice  and  demand,  interest
  under  this  section  on the amount so paid shall not be imposed for the
  period after the date of such notice and demand.
    (i) Limitation on assessment and  collection.---  Interest  prescribed
  under  this section may be assessed and collected at any time during the


 period within which the tax or  other  amount  to  which  such  interest
  relates may be assessed and collected, respectively.
    (j) Interest on erroneous refund.---Any portion of tax or other amount
  which  has  been  erroneously  refunded, and which is recoverable by the
  commissioner, shall bear interest at the underpayment rate  set  by  the
  commissioner  pursuant  to  section  one  thousand  ninety-six  of  this
  article, or if no rate is set, at the rate of seven and one-half percent
  per annum from the date of the payment of the refund,  but  only  if  it
  appears  that  any  part  of  the  refund  was  induced  by  fraud  or a
  misrepresentation of a material fact.
    (k) Satisfaction by credits.---If any portion of a tax is satisfied by
  credit of an overpayment, then no interest shall be imposed  under  this
  section  on  the  portion  of the tax so satisfied for any period during
  which, if the credit  had  not  been  made,  interest  would  have  been
  allowable with respect to such overpayment.




   §  1085.  Additions  to  tax and civil penalties.---(a) (1) Failure to
  file return.---(A) In case of failure to file  a  return  under  article
  nine,  nine-a,  nine-b  or  nine-c  on  or  before  the  prescribed date
  (determined with regard to any extension of time for filing), unless  it
  is  shown  that  such  failure is due to reasonable cause and not due to
  willful neglect, there shall be added to the amount required to be shown
  as tax on such return five percent of the amount  of  such  tax  if  the
  failure  is for not more than one month, with an additional five percent
  for each additional month or fraction thereof during which such  failure
  continues, not exceeding twenty-five percent in the aggregate.
    (B) In the case of a failure to file a return of tax within sixty days
  of the date prescribed for filing of such return (determined with regard
  to  any  extension  of  time  for  filing), unless it is shown that such
  failure is due to reasonable cause and not due to willful  neglect,  the
  addition  to  tax  under subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall not be
  less than the lesser of one hundred dollars or one  hundred  percent  of
  the amount required to be shown as tax on such return.
    (C)  For  purposes of this paragraph, the amount of tax required to be
  shown on the return shall be reduced by the amount of any  part  of  the
  tax  which  is  paid on or before the date prescribed for payment of the
  tax and by the amount of any credit against the tax which may be claimed
  upon the return.
    (2) Failure to pay tax shown on return.--In case of failure to pay the
  amounts shown as tax on any return required to be  filed  under  article
  nine,  nine-a,  nine-b  or  nine-c  on  or  before  the  prescribed date
  (determined with regard to any extension of time for payment), unless it
  is shown that such failure is due to reasonable cause  and  not  due  to
  willful neglect, there shall be added to the amount shown as tax on such
  return one-half of one per cent of the amount of such tax if the failure
  is  not  for more than one month, with an additional one-half of one per
  cent for each additional month or fraction  thereof  during  which  such
  failure  continues, not exceeding twenty-five per cent in the aggregate.
  For the purpose of computing the addition for any month  the  amount  of
  tax  shown  on  the return shall be reduced by the amount of any part of
  the tax which is paid on or before the beginning of such  month  and  by
  the  amount  of any credit against the tax which may be claimed upon the
  return. If the amount of tax required to be shown on a  return  is  less
  than  the  amount  shown  as tax on such return, this paragraph shall be
  applied by substituting such lower amount.
    (3) Failure to pay tax required to be shown  on  return.--In  case  of
  failure  to pay any amount in respect of any tax required to be shown on
  a return required to be filed under article nine or nine-a which is  not
  so  shown  (including  an  assessment made pursuant to subsection (a) of
  section one thousand  eighty-two  of  this  article)  within  twenty-one
  calendar  days of the date of a notice and demand therefor (ten business
  days if the amount for which such notice and demand is  made  equals  or
  exceeds  one  hundred  thousand  dollars),  unless it is shown that such
  failure is due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect, there
  shall be added to the amount of tax stated in  such  notice  and  demand
  one-half  of one percent of such tax if the failure is not for more than
  one  month,  with  an  additional  one-half  of  one  percent  for  each
  additional   month   or  fraction  thereof  during  which  such  failure
  continues, not exceeding twenty-five percent in the aggregate.  For  the
  purpose  of  computing  the  addition  for  any month, the amount of tax
  stated in the notice and demand shall be reduced by the  amount  of  any
  part of the tax which is paid before the beginning of such month.
    (4) Limitations on additions.--


   (A)  With  respect  to  any  return,  the amount of the addition under
  paragraph one of this subsection shall be reduced by the amount  of  the
  addition  under  paragraph two of this subsection for any month to which
  an addition applies under both paragraphs  one  and  two.  In  any  case
  described  in  subparagraph (B) of paragraph one of this subsection, the
  amount of the addition under such paragraph one  shall  not  be  reduced
  below the amount provided in such subparagraph.
    (B)  With  respect  to  any return, the maximum amount of the addition
  permitted under paragraph three of this subsection shall be  reduced  by
  the  amount  of  the  addition  under  paragraph  one of this subsection
  (determined without regard to subparagraph (B) of  such  paragraph  one)
  which is attributable to the tax for which the notice and demand is made
  and which is not paid within ten days of such notice and demand.
    (b) Deficiency due to negligence.---(1) If any part of a deficiency is
  due  to  negligence  or intentional disregard of this article or article
  nine, nine-a, nine-b or nine-c, or rules or regulations thereunder  (but
  without  intent  to  defraud), there shall be added to the tax an amount
  equal to five percent of the deficiency.
    (2) There shall be added  to  the  tax  (in  addition  to  the  amount
  determined  under  paragraph  one of this subsection) an amount equal to
  fifty percent  of  the  interest  payable  under  section  one  thousand
  eighty-four with respect to the portion of the underpayment described in
  such   paragraph   one  which  is  attributable  to  the  negligence  or
  intentional disregard referred to in such paragraph one, for the  period
  beginning  on  the  last  date  prescribed  by  law  for payment of such
  underpayment (determined without regard to any extension) and ending  on
  the  date  of the assessment of the tax (or, if earlier, the date of the
  payment of the tax).
    (3) If any payment is shown on a return made by a payor  with  respect
  to  dividends,  patronage dividends and interest under subsection (a) of
  section six thousand forty-two, subsection (a) of section  six  thousand
  forty-four  or  subsection (a) of section six thousand forty-nine of the
  internal revenue code of nineteen hundred fifty-four, respectively,  and
  the  payee fails to include any portion of such payment in gross income,
  as that term is defined in paragraph one of subsection  (d)  of  section
  one  thousand  eighty-three, any portion of an underpayment attributable
  to such failure shall be treated, for purposes of  this  subsection,  as
  due to negligence in the absence of clear and convincing evidence to the
  contrary.  If  any penalty is imposed under this subsection by reason of
  the preceding sentence, the amount of the penalty imposed  by  paragraph
  one  of  this  subsection  shall  be  five percent of the portion of the
  underpayment which is attributable  to  the  failure  described  in  the
  preceding sentence.
    (c)  Failure  to  file declaration or underpayment of estimated tax.--
  (1) If any taxpayer fails to file a declaration of estimated  tax  under
  article  nine-A  of  this chapter, or fails to pay all or any part of an
  amount which is applied as an installment against such estimated tax, it
  shall be deemed to have made an underpayment  of  estimated  tax.  There
  shall  be  added  to  the  tax  for  the  taxable  year an amount at the
  underpayment rate set  by  the  commissioner  pursuant  to  section  one
  thousand  ninety-six  of this article, or if no rate is set, at the rate
  of seven  and  one-half  percent  per  annum  upon  the  amount  of  the
  underpayment  for  the  period  of  the  underpayment but not beyond the
  fifteenth day of the fourth month following the  close  of  the  taxable
  year.  Provided,  however, that, for taxable years beginning on or after
  January first, two thousand seventeen  and  before  January  first,  two
  thousand  eighteen,  no amount shall be added to the tax with respect to
  the portion of such tax related to the amount of any interest deductions


 directly or indirectly attributable to the amount included in exempt CFC
  income pursuant to subparagraph (ii) of  paragraph  (b)  of  subdivision
  six-a  of section two hundred eight of this chapter or the forty percent
  reduction  of  such exempt CFC income in lieu of interest attribution if
  the election described in paragraph (b) of  subdivision  six-a  of  such
  section  is  made. The amount of the underpayment shall be, with respect
  to any installment of estimated tax computed on the basis of either  the
  preceding  year's  tax or the second preceding year's tax, the excess of
  the amount required to be paid over the  amount,  if  any,  paid  on  or
  before  the last day prescribed for such payment or, with respect to any
  other installment of estimated tax, the excess  of  the  amount  of  the
  installment which would be required to be paid if the estimated tax were
  equal  to  ninety-one  percent  of  the  tax shown on the return for the
  taxable year (or if no return was filed, ninety-one percent of  the  tax
  for  such  year)  over the amount, if any, of the installment paid on or
  before the last day prescribed for such payment. In any  case  in  which
  there  would be no underpayment if "eighty percent" were substituted for
  "ninety-one percent" each place  it  appears  in  this  subsection,  the
  addition to the tax shall be equal to seventy-five percent of the amount
  otherwise  determined.  No  underpayment  shall  be deemed to exist with
  respect to a declaration or installment otherwise due on  or  after  the
  termination of existence of the taxpayer.
    (2)  For  purposes of applying the addition to tax for an underpayment
  of any installment of  estimated  tax  by  a  taxpayer  subject  to  tax
  pursuant  to  article  thirty-three  of  this chapter, the amount of tax
  shall be determined by using the lesser  of  the  differential  earnings
  rate  (as  described  in subsection (c) of section eight hundred nine of
  the internal revenue code) of the second tax year preceding the  taxable
  year  for  which  the  installment is made, or the differential earnings
  rate for the taxable year  for  which  the  installment  is  made.  Such
  addition  to  tax shall be applied to any taxable year without regard to
  any adjustments to the differential earnings amount under subsection (f)
  of section eight hundred nine of the  internal  revenue  code  for  such
  year.
    (3)  The  provisions of this subsection and subsections (d) and (e) of
  this section shall apply  to  the  failure  of  a  taxpayer  to  file  a
  declaration  of estimated tax surcharge or the failure to pay all or any
  part of an amount which  is  applied  as  an  installment  against  such
  estimated tax surcharge pursuant to sections one hundred ninety-seven-a,
  one   hundred   ninety-seven-b,  two  hundred  thirteen-a,  two  hundred
  thirteen-b, fifteen hundred thirteen and  fifteen  hundred  fourteen  of
  this  chapter. For purposes of applying this section and subsections (d)
  and  (e)  of  this  section  to  the  estimated  tax  surcharge,   where
  appropriate  the  term  "tax" shall be read to mean "tax surcharge," and
  the terms "amount required to be paid," "amount which would be  required
  to  be  paid,"  and  "amount  which would have been required to be paid"
  shall be computed as the product of (1)  such  amount  computed  without
  regard  to  the  tax  surcharges  imposed  under  sections  one  hundred
  eighty-four-a, one hundred eighty-six-c, one hundred  eighty-eight,  two
  hundred  nine-A, two hundred nine-B, fifteen hundred five-a, and fifteen
  hundred twenty of this chapter, and (2) the  MTA  percentage.  The  term
  "MTA  percentage"  shall mean the product of (A) the tax rate applicable
  under such sections imposing such  surcharges  and  (B)  the  percentage
  utilized  in determining the portion of the taxpayer's business activity
  carried on within  the  metropolitan  commuter  transportation  district
  under such sections.
    (d)  Exception  to  addition  for  underpayment of estimated tax.--The
  addition to tax under subsection (c) with respect to any underpayment of


 any amount which is applied as  an  installment  against  estimated  tax
  under article nine-a, nine-b or nine-c shall not be imposed if the total
  amount  of all payments of estimated tax made on or before the last date
  prescribed  for  the  payment  of  any such amount equals or exceeds the
  amount which would have been required to be paid on or before such  date
  if the estimated tax were whichever of the following is the least--
    (1)  The  tax  shown  on  the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
  taxable year, if a return showing a liability for tax was filed  by  the
  taxpayer  for  the  preceding taxable year and such preceding year was a
  taxable year of twelve months, or
    (2) An amount equal to the tax computed at the rates applicable to the
  taxable year, but otherwise on the basis  of  the  facts  shown  on  the
  return  of  the  taxpayer  for, and the law applicable to, the preceding
  taxable year, or
    (3) Annualized income installment. (A) General.   An amount  equal  to
  ninety-one percent of the tax for the taxable year computed on all items
  entering  into  the  computation of the tax or taxes of the taxpayer for
  the taxable year under article nine,  nine-A  or  thirty-three  of  this
  chapter.  For  purposes  of  computing  the  tax, all items of receipts,
  income and expenses shall be placed on an annualized basis--
    (i) for the first three months of the taxable year, in the case of the
  installment required to be paid in the sixth month,
    (ii) for the first six months of the taxable year, in the case of  the
  installment required to be paid in the ninth month, and
    (iii)  for  the  first nine months of the taxable year, in the case of
  the installment required to be paid in the twelfth month.
    (B)  Special  rules.  For  purposes  of  subparagraph  (A),  items  of
  receipts,  income  and  expenses  shall be placed on an annualized basis
  by--
    (i) multiplying such items by twelve (or, in the  case  of  a  taxable
  year  of  less  than  twelve months, the number of months in the taxable
  year), and
    (ii) dividing the resulting amounts by the number of  months  referred
  to  in  subparagraph (A) (or in subparagraph (C), if an election applies
  to the taxable year under such subparagraph).
    (C) Election for different annualization periods. (i) If the  taxpayer
  makes an election under this clause--
    (I)  Clause (i) of subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall be applied
  by substituting "four months" for "three months",
    (II) Clause (ii) of  subparagraph  (A)  of  this  paragraph  shall  be
  applied by substituting "seven months" for "six months",
    (III)  Clause  (iii)  of  subparagraph  (A) of this paragraph shall be
  applied by substituting "ten months" for "nine months".
    (ii) If the taxpayer makes an election under this clause--
    (I) Clause (i) of subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall be  applied
  by substituting "five months" for "three months",
    (II)  Clause  (ii)  of  subparagraph  (A)  of  this paragraph shall be
  applied by substituting "eight months" for "six months",
    (III) Clause (iii) of subparagraph (A)  of  this  paragraph  shall  be
  applied by substituting "eleven months" for "nine months".
    (iii)  An election under clause (i) or (ii) of this subparagraph shall
  apply to the taxable year for which made and such an election  shall  be
  effective  only  if  made  on or before the date required for filing the
  declaration of estimated tax for such taxable year, or
    (4) (A) If the base period percentage for any six  consecutive  months
  of  the  taxable year equals or exceeds seventy percent, an amount equal
  to ninety-one percent of the tax determined in the following manner--


   (i) take the items entering into the computation of the tax  or  taxes
  of  the  taxpayer  for  the  taxable  year under article nine, nine-A or
  thirty-three of this chapter, for all months  during  the  taxable  year
  preceding the filing month,
    (ii)  divide such amounts by the base period percentage for all months
  during the taxable year preceding the filing month,
    (iii) determine the tax on the amounts determined under  clause  (ii),
  and
    (iv) multiply the tax determined under clause (iii) by the base period
  percentage  for  the filing month and all months during the taxable year
  preceding the filing month.
    (B) For purposes of subparagraph (A)--
    (i) the base period percentage for any period of months shall  be  the
  average percent which the taxable income for the corresponding months in
  each  of  the  three preceding taxable years bears to the taxable income
  for the three  preceding  taxable  years.  The  tax  commission  may  by
  regulations  provide for the determination of the base period percentage
  in the case of reorganizations,  new  corporations,  and  other  similar
  circumstances, and
    (ii)  the term "filing month" means the month in which the installment
  is required to be paid.
    (5) In the case of any declaration installment, any reduction in  such
  installment resulting from the application of paragraph three or four of
  this subsection shall be recaptured by increasing the amount of the next
  installment  determined under paragraph one or two of this subsection or
  paragraph one of subsection (c) of this section by the  amount  of  such
  reduction  (and by increasing subsequent installments to the extent that
  the reduction has not previously been recaptured under this  paragraph).
  For  purposes of the preceding sentence, a declaration installment means
  any  installment  of  estimated  tax  other  than  the  mandatory  first
  installment  required  under paragraph (a) of subdivision one of section
  one hundred ninety-seven-b,  subdivision  (a)  of  section  two  hundred
  thirteen-b  or  subdivision  (a)  of section fifteen hundred fourteen of
  this chapter.
    For  the  purposes  of  this  subsection  the  amounts  specified   in
  paragraphs  (2),  (3)  and  (4)  shall be computed without regard to any
  increase in the rates applicable to the  taxable  year  which  may  have
  become effective after the first day of the seventh month of such year.
    (e) (1) Paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (d) of this section shall
  not   apply   in  the  case  of  any  corporation  (or  any  predecessor
  corporation) which had business income, or the portion thereof allocated
  within the state, of one million dollars or more for  any  taxable  year
  during  the  three  taxable years immediately preceding the taxable year
  involved; provided, however, that in the case of a  corporation  subject
  to  tax  under section fifteen hundred two-a of this chapter, paragraphs
  (1) and (2) of subsection (d) of this section shall not  apply  if  such
  corporation  had  entire  net  income,  or the portion thereof allocated
  within the state, of one million dollars or more for any  of  the  three
  taxable years immediately preceding the taxable year involved, or if the
  direct  premiums  subject  to tax under section fifteen hundred two-a of
  this chapter of the corporation for any of such three preceding  taxable
  years  beginning on or after January first, two thousand three equals or
  exceeds three million seven hundred fifty thousand dollars.
    (2) In the case of  taxpayers  described  in  paragraph  one  of  this
  subsection,  paragraph  one  of  subsection  (c),  subparagraph  (A)  of
  paragraph three of subsection (d), and  subparagraph  (A)  of  paragraph
  four  of subsection (d) of this section shall be applied by substituting
  "one hundred percent" for "ninety-one percent" each place it appears.


   (e-1) Waiver  of  addition  for  underpayment  of  estimated  tax.  No
  addition  to  tax  shall be imposed under subsection (c) of this section
  with  respect  to  any  underpayment  to  the  extent  the  commissioner
  determines  that  by  reason  of  casualty,  disaster  or  other unusual
  circumstances  the  imposition  of such addition to tax would be against
  equity and good conscience.
    (f) Deficiency due to fraud.---(1) If any part of a deficiency is  due
  to  fraud,  there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to two times
  the deficiency.
    (2) The addition to tax under this subsection shall be in lieu of  any
  other addition to tax imposed by subsection (a) or (b).
    (g)  Additional penalty.---Any person who with fraudulent intent shall
  fail to pay under article nine, nine-a, nine-b or nine-c, any tax, or to
  make, render, sign or certify any return  or  declaration  of  estimated
  tax,  or  to supply any information within the time required by or under
  such article, shall be liable to penalty of not more than  one  thousand
  dollars,  in  addition to any other amounts required under this article,
  to be imposed, assessed and collected by the  tax  commission.  The  tax
  commission  shall have the power, in its discretion, to waive, reduce or
  compromise any penalty under this subsection.
    (h) Additions treated as tax.---The additions  to  tax  and  penalties
  provided  by this section shall be paid upon notice and demand and shall
  be assessed, collected and paid in the same manner  as  taxes,  and  any
  reference in this article to tax imposed by article nine, nine-a, nine-b
  or  nine-c  shall  be  deemed  also to refer to the additions to tax and
  penalties provided by this section. For purposes of section one thousand
  eighty-one, this subsection shall not apply to---
    (1) any addition to tax under subsection (a) except as to that portion
  attributable to a deficiency;
    (2) any addition to tax under subsection (c) or (o); and
    (3) any additional penalties under subsections (g) and (l).
    (i) Determination of deficiency.---For purposes of subsections (b) and
  (f), the amount shown as the tax by the taxpayer upon its  return  shall
  be  taken  into account in determining the amount of the deficiency only
  if such return was filed on or before the last day  prescribed  for  the
  filing  of  such return, determined with regard to any extension of time
  for such filing.
    (j) Person defined.---For purposes of subsections  (g)  and  (l),  the
  term  person includes an individual, corporation, partnership or limited
  liability  company  or  an  officer  or  employee  of  any   corporation
  (including  a  dissolved  corporation),  or  a member or employee of any
  partnership, or a member, employee or manager  of  a  limited  liability
  company,  who  as  such  officer, employee, manager or member is under a
  duty to perform the act in respect of which the violation occurs.
    * (k) Substantial understatement of liability.-- (1)  If  there  is  a
  substantial  understatement  of tax for any taxable year, there shall be
  added to the tax an amount equal to ten percent of  the  amount  of  any
  underpayment  attributable  to such understatement. For purposes of this
  subsection, there is a substantial understatement of tax for any taxable
  year if the amount of the understatement for the  taxable  year  exceeds
  the greater of ten percent of the tax required to be shown on the return
  for  the  taxable  year  or  five  thousand dollars. For purposes of the
  preceding sentence, the term "understatement" means the  excess  of  the
  amount  of  the  tax  required to be shown on the return for the taxable
  year, over the amount of the tax imposed which is shown  on  the  return
  reduced  by  any rebate (within the meaning of subsection (h) of section
  one thousand eighty-one of this article). The excess under the preceding
  sentence shall be determined without regard to items to which subsection


 (k-1) of this section applies. The commissioner may  waive  all  or  any
  part of the addition to tax provided by this section on a showing by the
  taxpayer that there was reasonable cause for the understatement (or part
  thereof) and that the taxpayer acted in good faith.
    (2)  The  amount  of  the  understatement  under paragraph one of this
  subsection shall be reduced by that portion of the understatement  which
  is  attributable to (A) the tax treatment of any item by the taxpayer if
  there is or was substantial authority for such  treatment,  or  (B)  any
  item  if  the  relevant  facts  affecting  the  item's tax treatment are
  adequately disclosed in the return or in a  statement  attached  to  the
  return.
    (3)(A)  Subparagraph (B) of paragraph two of this subsection shall not
  apply to any item attributable to a tax shelter.
    (B) For purposes of this paragraph, the term "tax shelter" means
    (i) a partnership or other entity,
    (ii) any investment plan or arrangement, or
    (iii) any other plan or arrangement,
  if  a  significant  purpose  of  such  partnership,  entity,  plan,   or
  arrangement is the avoidance or evasion of tax.
    * NB Effective until July 1, 2024
    * (k)   Substantial   understatement  of  liability.--If  there  is  a
  substantial understatement of tax for any taxable year, there  shall  be
  added  to  the  tax  an amount equal to ten percent of the amount of any
  underpayment attributable to such understatement. For purposes  of  this
  subsection, there is a substantial understatement of tax for any taxable
  year  if  the  amount of the understatement for the taxable year exceeds
  the greater of ten percent of the tax required to be shown on the return
  for the taxable year or five  thousand  dollars.  For  purposes  of  the
  preceding  sentence,  the  term "understatement" means the excess of the
  amount of the tax required to be shown on the  return  for  the  taxable
  year,  over  the  amount of the tax imposed which is shown on the return
  reduced by any rebate (within the meaning of subsection (h)  of  section
  one  thousand  eighty-one).  The  amount of such understatement shall be
  reduced by that portion of the understatement which is  attributable  to
  the  tax  treatment  of  any  item  by  the  taxpayer if there is or was
  substantial authority for such treatment, or any item  with  respect  to
  which  the  relevant  facts  affecting  the  item's  tax  treatment  are
  adequately disclosed in the return or in a  statement  attached  to  the
  return.  The tax commission may waive all or any part of the addition to
  tax provided by this section on a showing by the taxpayer that there was
  reasonable cause for the understatement (or part thereof) and  that  the
  taxpayer acted in good faith.
    * NB Effective July 1, 2024
    * (k-1) Reportable transaction understatement.-- (1) If a taxpayer has
  a  reportable  transaction  understatement  for  any taxable year, there
  shall be added to the tax an amount  equal  to  twenty  percent  of  the
  amount of such understatement.
    (2)  For  purposes  of  this section, the term "reportable transaction
  understatement" means the sum of
    (A) the product of--
    (i) the amount of the increase (if any) in  the  applicable  tax  base
  which  results  from a difference between the proper tax treatment of an
  item to which this section applies and the taxpayer's treatment of  such
  item (as shown on the taxpayer's return of tax), and
    (ii) the highest rate of tax imposed under the article of this chapter
  that applies to the taxpayer, and
    (B)  the  amount  of  the decrease (if any) in the aggregate amount of
  credits determined under the article of this chapter that applies to the


 taxpayer  which  results  from  a  difference  between  the   taxpayer's
  treatment  of  an  item  to  which this section applies (as shown on the
  taxpayer's return of tax) and the proper tax treatment of such item.
    For  purposes  of subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, any reduction of
  the excess of deductions allowed for the taxable year over gross  income
  for  such  year, and any reduction in the amount of capital losses which
  would (without regard to section one thousand two hundred eleven of  the
  internal  revenue code) be allowed for such year, shall be treated as an
  increase in the applicable tax base.
    (3) This subsection shall apply to any item which is attributable to--
    (A) any listed transaction, and
    (B) any reportable transaction (other than a listed transaction) if  a
  significant  purpose  of such transaction is the avoidance or evasion of
  tax.
    (4) Paragraph one of this subsection shall be applied by  substituting
  "thirty percent" for "twenty percent" with respect to the portion of any
  reportable   transaction   understatement  with  respect  to  which  the
  requirement of clause (i) of subparagraph (B) of paragraph ten  of  this
  subsection is not met.
    (5)   For   purposes   of   this  subsection,  the  terms  "reportable
  transaction" and "listed transaction" have the meanings  given  to  such
  terms  by  section  twenty-five  of  this  chapter, the term "reportable
  transaction" shall  include  a  "New  York  reportable  transaction"  as
  defined  in  such section twenty-five, and the term "listed transaction"
  shall include any transaction designated as a tax avoidance  transaction
  pursuant to such section twenty-five.
    (6)  In the case of an understatement (as defined in subsection (k) of
  this section)
    (A) the amount of such understatement (determined  without  regard  to
  this paragraph) shall be increased by the aggregate amount of reportable
  transaction  understatements  for  purposes  of determining whether such
  understatement is a substantial understatement under subsection  (k)  of
  this  section,  and (B) the addition to tax under subsection (k) of this
  section shall apply only to the excess of the amount of the  substantial
  understatement  (if  any)  after  the application of subparagraph (A) of
  this paragraph over  the  aggregate  amount  of  reportable  transaction
  understatements.
    (7)  References  to  an understatement (or a deficiency) in subsection
  (f) of this section shall  be  treated  as  including  references  to  a
  reportable transaction understatement.
    (8)   This   subsection   shall  not  apply  to  any  portion  of  any
  understatement on which a penalty is imposed  under  subsection  (f)  of
  this section.
    (9)  Except as provided in regulations prescribed by the commissioner,
  in no event shall any  tax  treatment  included  with  an  amendment  or
  supplement  to  a return of tax be taken into account in determining the
  amount of any reportable transaction understatement if the amendment  or
  supplement  is filed after the earlier of the date the taxpayer is first
  contacted by the commissioner regarding the examination of the return or
  such other date as is specified by the commissioner.
    (10)(A) No penalty shall be imposed under this subsection with respect
  to any portion of a reportable transaction understatement if it is shown
  that there was a reasonable cause for such portion and that the taxpayer
  acted in good faith with respect to such portion.
    (B) Subparagraph  (A)  of  this  paragraph  shall  not  apply  to  any
  reportable transaction understatement unless:


   (i)  the  relevant  facts  affecting the tax treatment of the item are
  adequately disclosed in accordance  with  section  twenty-five  of  this
  chapter,
    (ii) there is or was substantial authority for such treatment, and
    (iii)  the  taxpayer  reasonably believed that such treatment was more
  likely than not the proper treatment.
  A taxpayer failing to adequately disclose  in  accordance  with  section
  twenty-five of this chapter shall be treated as meeting the requirements
  of  clause  (i) of this subparagraph if the penalty for such failure was
  rescinded under subsection (p) of this section.
    (11)(A) A taxpayer shall be treated as having a reasonable belief with
  respect to the tax treatment of an item only if such belief
    (i) is based on the facts and law that exist at the time the return of
  tax which includes such tax treatment is filed, and
    (ii) relates solely to the taxpayer's chances of success on the merits
  of such treatment and does not take into account the possibility that  a
  return  will not be audited, such treatment will not be raised on audit,
  or such treatment will be resolved through settlement if it is raised.
    (B)(i) An opinion of a tax advisor may not be relied upon to establish
  the reasonable belief of a taxpayer if
    (I) the tax advisor is described in clause (ii) of this  subparagraph,
  or
    (II) the opinion is described in clause (iii) of this subparagraph.
    (ii) A tax advisor is described in this clause if the tax advisor:
    (I)  is a material advisor (within the meaning of section six thousand
  one hundred eleven of the internal revenue code or within  such  meaning
  as  it  also  applies to a New York reportable transaction as defined in
  section  twenty-five  of  this  chapter)   and   participates   in   the
  organization,  management,  promotion,  or sale of the transaction or is
  related (within the meaning of subsection (b)  of  section  two  hundred
  sixty-seven  of  the  internal revenue code or subsection (b) of section
  seven hundred seven of the internal revenue code) to any person  who  so
  participates,
    (II)  is compensated directly or indirectly by a material advisor with
  respect to the transaction,
    (III) has a fee arrangement with respect to the transaction  which  is
  contingent  on  all  or  part  of  the  intended  tax  benefits from the
  transaction being sustained, or
    (IV) has a  disqualifying  financial  interest  with  respect  to  the
  transaction.
    (iii)  For  purposes of clause (i) of this subparagraph, an opinion is
  disqualified if the opinion
    (I) is based on unreasonable factual or legal  assumptions  (including
  assumptions as to future events),
    (II)  unreasonably relies on representations, statements, findings, or
  agreements of the taxpayer or any other person,
    (III) does not identify and consider all relevant facts, or
    (IV) fails to meet any  other  requirement  as  the  commissioner  may
  prescribe.
    * NB Repealed July 1, 2024
    (k-2)  No penalty will be imposed pursuant to subsection (c) or (k) of
  this section for a taxable year beginning on or after January first, two
  thousand eight and before January first,  two  thousand  nine  resulting
  from  the  denial  of  an empire zone tax credit claimed by the taxpayer
  because an empire zone retention certificate was not issued pursuant  to
  subdivision  (w)  of  section  nine  hundred  fifty-nine  of the general
  municipal law to the empire zone enterprise which is the basis  for  the
  tax credit or credits claimed on the return or report.


   (l)  Aiding or assisting in the giving of fraudulent returns, reports,
  statements or other documents.--(1) Any person who, with the intent that
  tax be evaded, shall, for a fee or other compensation or as an  incident
  to  the  performance  of  other  services for which such person receives
  compensation,  aid  or  assist  in,  or  procure, counsel, or advise the
  preparation or presentation under, or  in  connection  with  any  matter
  arising  under article nine, nine-A, nine-B or nine-C of this chapter of
  any return, report, declaration, statement or other  document  which  is
  fraudulent  or  false  as to any material matter, or supply any false or
  fraudulent information, whether or not such falsity or fraud is with the
  knowledge or consent of the person authorized  or  required  to  present
  such  return, report, declaration, statement or other document shall pay
  a penalty not exceeding ten thousand dollars.
    (2) For purposes  of  paragraph  one  of  this  subsection,  the  term
  "procures"  includes ordering (or otherwise causing) a subordinate to do
  an act, and knowing of, and not attempting to prevent, participation  by
  a  subordinate  in an act. The term "subordinate" means any other person
  (whether or not a director, officer, employee, or agent of the  taxpayer
  involved)  over  whose activities the person has direction, supervision,
  or control.
    (3) For purposes  of  paragraph  one  of  this  subsection,  a  person
  furnishing  typing,  reproducing,  or  other  mechanical assistance with
  respect to a document shall not be treated as having aided  or  assisted
  in the preparation of such document by reason of such assistance.
    (4) The penalty imposed by this subsection shall be in addition to any
  other penalty provided by law.
    (n) Failure to file report of information relating to certain interest
  payments.--In case of failure to file the report of information required
  under  subdivision  two-a  of  section  two hundred eleven, unless it is
  shown that such failure is due  to  reasonable  cause  and  not  due  to
  willful  neglect,  there  shall  be  added  to the tax a penalty of five
  hundred dollars.
    * (p)  Failure  to  disclose   or   provide   reportable   transaction
  information.    -- (1) Any person who fails to file, disclose or provide
  any  statement,  return  or  other  document  which  is  required  under
  subdivision  (a)  of  section  twenty-five  of  this chapter shall pay a
  penalty in the amount determined under paragraph two of this subsection.
    (2)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B) of this  paragraph,  the
  amount  of  the  penalty under paragraph one of this subsection shall be
  twenty thousand dollars.
    (B) The amount of the penalty under paragraph one of  this  subsection
  with respect to a listed transaction shall be fifty thousand dollars.
    (3)   For   purposes   of   this  subsection,  the  terms  "reportable
  transaction" and "listed transaction" shall have the  same  meanings  as
  used  in  section  twenty-five  of  this  chapter,  the term "reportable
  transaction" shall  include  a  "New  York  reportable  transaction"  as
  defined  in  such section twenty-five, and the term "listed transaction"
  shall include any transaction designated as a tax avoidance  transaction
  pursuant to such section twenty-five.
    (4)  The  commissioner  may  rescind all or any portion of any penalty
  imposed by this subsection with respect to any violation if
    (A) the violation is with respect to a  reportable  transaction  other
  than a listed transaction, and
    (B)   rescinding   the  penalty  would  promote  compliance  with  the
  requirements of this chapter and effective tax administration.
    (5) The penalty imposed by this section shall be in  addition  to  any
  other penalty imposed by this chapter.
    * NB Repealed July 1, 2024


   * (q)  Failure to disclose or provide reportable transaction return.--
  (1) Any person who fails to file, disclose  or  provide  any  statement,
  return  or  other  document  which  is required under subdivision (b) of
  section twenty-five of this chapter shall pay a penalty  in  the  amount
  determined under paragraph two of this subsection.
    (2)(A)  Except  as provided in subparagraph (B) of this paragraph, the
  amount of the penalty under paragraph one of this  subsection  shall  be
  twenty thousand dollars.
    (B)  The  amount of the penalty under paragraph one of this subsection
  with respect to a listed transaction shall be the greater of
    (i) fifty thousand dollars or,
    (ii) fifty percent of the gross income that the organizer or  material
  advisor  derived  with respect to activities that were the basis for the
  requirement to file, disclose or provide information pursuant to section
  six thousand eleven of the internal revenue code,  to  the  extent  such
  gross  income  is attributable to the avoidance of any tax imposed under
  article nine, nine-A or thirty-three of this chapter.
    (C) Clause (ii) of subparagraph (B) of this paragraph shall be applied
  by substituting "seventy-five percent" for "fifty percent" in  the  case
  of  an  intentional  failure  or  act described in paragraph one of this
  subsection.
    (3)  For  purposes  of  this   subsection,   the   terms   "reportable
  transaction"  and  "listed  transaction" shall have the same meanings as
  used in section  twenty-five  of  this  chapter,  the  term  "reportable
  transaction"  shall  include  a  "New  York  reportable  transaction" as
  defined in such section twenty-five, and the term  "listed  transaction"
  shall  include any transaction designated as a tax avoidance transaction
  pursuant to such section twenty-five.
    (4) The commissioner may rescind all or any  portion  of  any  penalty
  imposed by this subsection with respect to any violation if
    (A)  the  violation  is with respect to a reportable transaction other
  than a listed transaction, and
    (B)  rescinding  the  penalty  would  promote  compliance   with   the
  requirements of this chapter and effective tax administration.
    (5) The penalty imposed by this subsection shall be in addition to any
  other  penalty  imposed by this chapter, except that no penalty shall be
  imposed under subparagraph (A) or clause  (i)  of  subparagraph  (B)  of
  paragraph  two  of  subsection (y) of section six hundred eighty-five of
  this chapter for the same failure that is the basis for a penalty  under
  this subsection. Nothing in this paragraph shall preclude the imposition
  of  a  penalty under clause (ii) of subparagraph (B) of paragraph two of
  subsection (y) of section six hundred eighty-five of  this  chapter  for
  the  same  failure  that is the basis for a penalty under clause (ii) of
  subparagraph (B) of paragraph two of this subsection.
    * NB Repealed July 1, 2024
    * (r) Failure to maintain list of advisees.-- (1) If any person who is
  required to maintain a list under subdivision (c) of section twenty-five
  of this chapter fails to make a duplicate of such  list  available  upon
  written  request by the commissioner in accordance with such subdivision
  within twenty business days after the date of such request, such  person
  shall pay a penalty of ten thousand dollars for each day of such failure
  after such twentieth day.
    (2)  No  penalty  shall be imposed by paragraph one of this subsection
  with respect to the failure on  any  day  if  such  failure  is  due  to
  reasonable cause.
    * NB Repealed July 1, 2024
    * (s) Tax preparer penalty.-- (1) If:


   (A)  any  part  of any understatement of liability with respect to any
  return or claim for refund is due to a position for which there was  not
  a  reasonable  belief  that  the tax treatment in that position was more
  likely than not the proper treatment,
    (B)  any  person  who  is  a  tax return preparer with respect to such
  return or claim knew (or reasonably should have known) of such position,
  and
    (C) such position was not disclosed as provided in subsection  (k)  of
  this  section  or there was no reasonable basis for the tax treatment of
  that position, such person shall pay a penalty of  up  to  one  thousand
  dollars  with  respect  to  such return or claim unless it is shown that
  there is reasonable cause for the understatement and such  person  acted
  in good faith.
    (2) If any part of any understatement of liability with respect to any
  return or claim for refund is due
    (A) to a willful attempt in any manner to understate the liability for
  tax by a person who is a tax return preparer with respect to such return
  or claim, or
    (B)  to  any reckless or intentional disregard of rules or regulations
  by any such person, such person shall  pay  a  penalty  of  up  to  five
  thousand  dollars  with respect to such return or claim. With respect to
  any return or claim, the amount of the penalty payable by any person  by
  reason  of  this paragraph shall be reduced by the amount of the penalty
  paid by such person by reason of paragraph one of this subsection.
    (3) For purposes of  this  subsection,  the  term  "understatement  of
  liability"  means  any  understatement  of  the  net amount payable with
  respect to any tax imposed under article nine, nine-A or thirty-three of
  this chapter or any  overstatement  of  the  net  amount  creditable  or
  refundable with respect to any such tax.
    (4)  This  subsection  shall not apply if the penalty under subsection
  (l) of this section is imposed on the tax return preparer  with  respect
  to such understatement.
    * NB Repealed July 1, 2024
    * (t) Promoting abusive tax shelters.-- (1) Any person who
    (A)(i) organizes (or assists in the organization of)
    (I) a partnership or other entity,
    (II) any investment plan or arrangement, or
    (III) any other plan or arrangement, or
    (ii) participates (directly or indirectly) in the sale of any interest
  in  an  entity  or plan or arrangement referred to in clause (i) of this
  subparagraph, and
    (B) makes or furnishes or causes another person to make or furnish (in
  connection with such organization or sale)
    (i) a statement with respect to the allowability of any  deduction  or
  credit,  the  excludability  of any income, or the securing of any other
  tax  benefit  by  reason  of  holding  an  interest  in  the  entity  or
  participating  in  the plan or arrangement which the person knows or has
  reason to know is false or fraudulent as to any material matter, or
    (ii) a gross valuation overstatement as to any material matter, and
    (C) satisfies any of the following conditions
    (i) the person is organized in this state,
    (ii) the person is doing business in this state,
    (iii) the person is deriving income in this state, or
    (iv)  the  person  conducts  any  of  the  activities   described   in
  subparagraph (A) or (B) of this paragraph within the state of New York,
  shall  pay,  with respect to each activity described in subparagraph (A)
  of this paragraph, a penalty equal to one thousand dollars  or,  if  the
  person  establishes  that it is lesser, one hundred percent of the gross


 income derived (or to be derived) by such person from such  activity  to
  the  extent  such gross income is attributed to the avoidance of any tax
  imposed under articles nine, nine-A or  thirty-three  of  this  chapter;
  provided,  however,  that if an activity with respect to which a penalty
  imposed under this subsection involves a statement described  in  clause
  (i) of subparagraph (B) of paragraph one of this subsection, the penalty
  shall  be  equal  to fifty percent of the gross income derived (or to be
  derived) from that activity within the state by the person on which  the
  penalty  is  imposed. For purposes of the preceding sentence, activities
  described in clause (i) of  subparagraph  (A)  of  this  paragraph  with
  respect  to  each  entity  or arrangement shall be treated as a separate
  activity and participation in each sale  described  in  clause  (ii)  of
  subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall be so treated.
    (2)(A)  For  purposes  of  this  subsection, the term "gross valuation
  overstatement" means any statement as to the value of  any  property  or
  services if--
    (i)  the  value  so  stated  exceeds two hundred percent of the amount
  determined to be the correct valuation, and
    (ii) the value of such property or services is directly related to the
  amount of any deduction or credit allowable under this  chapter  to  any
  participant.
    (B) The commissioner may waive all or any part of the penalty provided
  by  paragraph one of this subsection with respect to any gross valuation
  overstatement on a showing that there was a  reasonable  basis  for  the
  valuation and that such valuation was made in good faith.
    (3) The penalty imposed by this subsection shall be in addition to any
  other penalty provided by law.
    * NB Repealed July 1, 2024
    (u)  False or fraudulent document penalty. Any taxpayer that submits a
  false or fraudulent document to the department  will  be  subject  to  a
  penalty  of  one hundred dollars per document submitted, or five hundred
  dollars per tax return submitted. This penalty will be  in  addition  to
  any other penalty or addition provided by law.
    (v)  Failure  to  supply  all  the  information required or to provide
  correct information in secretary of state statements. Unless it is shown
  that such failure to provide the statement and information  required  by
  section  four  hundred  eight  of the business corporation law is due to
  reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, there  shall,  upon  notice
  and demand by the commissioner and in the same manner as tax, be paid by
  the  taxpayer  failing  to  supply  complete  and correct information, a
  penalty of two hundred fifty dollars per corporation required to provide
  such information.






	   § 1086. Overpayment.--- (a) General.--The commissioner of taxation and
  finance,  within  the  applicable  period  of limitations, may credit an
  overpayment  of  tax  and  interest  on  such  overpayment  against  any
  liability  in  respect of any tax imposed by the tax law on the taxpayer
  who made the overpayment,  or  against  any  liability  for  a  past-due
  legally enforceable debt of which he is notified pursuant to section one
  hundred  seventy-one-f  of this chapter, or against any city of New York
  tax warrant judgment debt of which he is notified  pursuant  to  section
  one  hundred  seventy-one-l  of  this  chapter, and the balance shall be
  refunded by the comptroller out of the proceeds of the tax  retained  by
  him  for  such  general  purpose.  Provided,  however, in the case of an
  overpayment claimed on a return or report, such  refund  shall  be  made
  only  if  application  therefor is made on such return or report. In the
  absence of such application, the amount of such overpayment with respect
  to any taxable year shall be credited  against,  and  considered  as,  a
  payment  of  tax  liability  with respect to such tax for the succeeding
  taxable year and shall be credited against the estimated  tax,  if  any,
  for  such year (whether or not claimed as a credit in the declaration of
  estimated tax for such succeeding taxable year). The commissioner  shall
  notify  the taxpayer that such overpayment has been so credited, and the
  taxpayer may, prior to the due date (without regard  to  extensions)  of
  the  taxpayer's return or report for such succeeding taxable year, claim
  a refund of such overpayment. Any refund under  this  section  shall  be
  made  only  upon  the  filing  of a return and upon a certificate of the
  commissioner  approved  by  the  comptroller.  The  comptroller,  as   a
  condition  precedent  to the approval of such a certificate, may examine
  into the facts as disclosed by the return of the taxpayer who  made  the
  overpayment and other information and data available in the files of the
  commissioner.
    (b)  Credits  against  estimated tax.---The commissioner may prescribe
  regulations providing for the crediting against the estimated tax  under
  article  nine-a  for  any taxable year of the amount determined to be an
  overpayment of tax under such article for a preceding taxable  year.  If
  any  overpayment  of tax is so claimed as a credit against estimated tax
  for the succeeding taxable year, such amount shall be  considered  as  a
  payment  of  the  tax  under  article  nine-a  of  this  chapter for the
  succeeding taxable year (whether or not  claimed  as  a  credit  in  the
  declaration  of  estimated tax for such succeeding taxable year), and no
  claim for credit or refund of such overpayment shall be allowed for  the
  taxable  year  for  which the overpayment arises, except upon request to
  the commissioner on or before the last day prescribed for the filing  of
  the  return  for  the succeeding taxable year, determined with regard to
  any extension of time granted. If good cause is shown for reversing  the
  credit,  the  commissioner  may,  in  his  or her discretion, credit the
  overpayment against  a  liability  or  refund  the  overpayment  without
  interest.  Provided,  the  person  who  made the overpayment will not be
  relieved  of  liability  for  any  penalty  imposed  for  a   consequent
  underpayment  of  estimated  tax  for  the  succeeding taxable year. The
  decision of the commissioner to grant or deny the request is  final  and
  not subject to further administrative or judicial review.
    (c)  Rule where no tax liability.---If there is no tax liability for a
  period in respect of which an amount is paid as tax, such  amount  shall
  be considered an overpayment.
    (d) Assessment and collection after limitation period.---If any amount
  of  tax  is  assessed or collected after the expiration of the period of
  limitations properly applicable thereto, such amount shall be considered
  an overpayment.


   (e) Assignment of overpayment.---A credit for an  overpayment  of  tax
  under  article  nine,  nine-a,  nine-b  or nine-c may be assigned by the
  taxpayer to a  corporation  liable  to  pay  taxes  under  any  of  such
  articles,  and  the assignee of the whole or any part of such credit, on
  filing  such  assignment  with  the  tax  commission, shall thereupon be
  entitled to credit upon the books of the tax commission for  the  amount
  thereof  on its current account for taxes, in the same manner and to the
  same effect as though the credit had  originally  been  allowed  in  its
  favor.




   §  1087.  Limitations  on  credit  or refund.--(a) General.--Claim for
  credit or refund of an overpayment of tax under article nine  or  nine-A
  shall  be filed by the taxpayer within (i) three years from the time the
  return was filed, (ii) two years from the time the tax was paid or (iii)
  in the case of any overpayment arising from an erroneous denial  by  the
  department   of   environmental   conservation  of  a  certification  of
  completion pursuant to section 27-1419 of the environmental conservation
  law, two years from the time a final determination to  the  effect  that
  such  denial  was erroneous is made and is no longer subject to judicial
  review, whichever of such periods expires the latest, or  if  no  return
  was filed, within two years from the time the tax was paid. If the claim
  is  filed  within  the  three  year  period, the amount of the credit or
  refund shall not exceed the portion of the tax  paid  within  the  three
  years  immediately  preceding the filing of the claim plus the period of
  any extension of time for filing the return. If the claim is  not  filed
  within  the  three year period, but is filed within the two year period,
  the amount of the credit or refund shall not exceed the portion  of  the
  tax  paid  during  the two years immediately preceding the filing of the
  claim. In the case of a claim for credit  or  refund  filed  within  the
  period  prescribed  in paragraph (iii) of this subsection, the amount of
  the credit or refund may exceed the portion of the tax paid  within  the
  applicable  period specified in the two immediately preceding sentences,
  but only to the extent of the amount of the overpayment attributable  to
  the  denial  described  in  such  paragraph  (iii).  Except as otherwise
  provided in this section, if no claim is filed, the amount of  a  credit
  or  refund  shall  not  exceed  the amount which would be allowable if a
  claim had been filed on the date the credit or refund  is  allowed.  For
  special  restriction  in  a proceeding on a claim for refund of tax paid
  pursuant to an assessment made as a result of (i) a net  operating  loss
  carryback  or capital loss carryback, or (ii) an increase or decrease in
  federal taxable income or federal tax, or  (iii)  a  federal  change  or
  correction  or  renegotiation,  or  computation or recomputation of tax,
  which is treated in the same manner as  if  it  were  a  deficiency  for
  federal  income  tax  purposes,  see  paragraph (7) of subsection (c) of
  section one thousand eighty-three.
    (b) Extension  of  time  by  agreement.--If  an  agreement  under  the
  provisions  of  paragraph  (2) of subsection (c) of section one thousand
  eighty-three (extending the period for assessment of tax) is made within
  the period prescribed in subsection (a) for the filing of  a  claim  for
  credit or refund, the period for filing a claim for credit or refund, or
  for making credit or refund if no claim is filed, shall not expire prior
  to  six  months  after  the  expiration  of  the  period within which an
  assessment may be made  pursuant  to  the  agreement  or  any  extension
  thereof.  The  amount  of  such  credit  or  refund shall not exceed the
  portion of the tax paid after the execution of the agreement and  before
  the  filing  of  the claim or the making of the credit or refund, as the
  case may be, plus the portion of the tax paid within  the  period  which
  would  be  applicable  under subsection (a) if a claim had been filed on
  the date the agreement was executed.
    (c) Notice of change or correction of federal income.-- If a  taxpayer
  is  required  by  subdivision  three  of  section  two hundred eleven or
  paragraph one of subdivision (e) of section fifteen hundred  fifteen  of
  this  chapter,  to  file  a report or amended return in respect of (i) a
  decrease or increase in federal taxable income  or  federal  alternative
  minimum  taxable  income  or  federal  tax,  or (ii) a federal change or
  correction or renegotiation, or computation  or  recomputation  of  tax,
  which  is  treated  in  the same manner as if it were an overpayment for
  federal income tax purposes, claim for credit or refund of any resulting


 overpayment of tax shall be filed by the taxpayer within two years  from
  the time such report or amended return was required to be filed with the
  commissioner.  If  the  report  or  amended  return required by any such
  provision  of  law  is not filed within the period therein specified, no
  interest shall be payable on any claim  for  credit  or  refund  of  the
  overpayment attributable to the federal change or correction. The amount
  of such credit or refund--
    (1)  shall  be  computed without change of the allocation of income or
  capital upon which the taxpayer's return (or any additional  assessment)
  was based, and
    (2)  shall  not exceed the amount of the reduction in tax attributable
  to  such  decrease  or  increase  in  federal  taxable  income,  federal
  alternative  minimum  taxable  income, or federal tax or to such federal
  change or correction or renegotiation, or computation  or  recomputation
  of  tax.   This subsection shall not affect the time within which or the
  amount for which a claim for credit or refund may be  filed  apart  from
  this subsection.
    (d)  Overpayment  attributable  to  net  operating  loss  carryback or
  capital loss carryback.--A claim for credit or refund of so much  of  an
  overpayment  under  article nine-a as is attributable to the application
  to the taxpayer of a net operating loss  carryback  or  a  capital  loss
  carryback shall be filed within three years from the time the return was
  due  (including extensions thereof) for the taxable year of the loss, or
  within the period prescribed  in  subsection  (b)  in  respect  of  such
  taxable  year,  or within the period prescribed in subsection (c), where
  applicable, in respect of the taxable year to which  the  net  operating
  loss  or  capital  loss  is  carried back, whichever expires the latest.
  Where such claim for credit or refund is filed after the  expiration  of
  the  period  prescribed  in  subsection  (a), or in subsection (b) where
  applicable, in respect of the taxable year to which  the  net  operating
  loss  or  capital  loss  is  carried  back, the amount of such credit or
  refund shall be computed without change of the allocation of  income  or
  capital  upon which the taxpayer's return (or any additional assessment)
  was based.
    (e) Failure to file claim  within  prescribed  period.--No  credit  or
  refund shall be allowed or made, except as provided in subsection (f) of
  this section or subsection (d) of section one thousand ninety, after the
  expiration  of  the  applicable  period  of limitation specified in this
  article, unless a claim for credit or refund is filed  by  the  taxpayer
  within  such period. Any later credit shall be void and any later refund
  erroneous. No period of limitations specified in  any  other  law  shall
  apply  to  the recovery by a taxpayer of moneys paid in respect of taxes
  under article nine, nine-a, nine-b or nine-c.
    (f) effect of petition to tax commission.--If a notice  of  deficiency
  for  a  taxable  year  has been mailed to the taxpayer under section one
  thousand eighty-one and if the taxpayer files a timely petition with the
  tax commission under section one thousand eighty-nine, it may  determine
  that  the taxpayer has made an overpayment for such year (whether or not
  it also determines a deficiency for such year). No  separate  claim  for
  credit  or  refund for such year shall be filed, and no credit or refund
  for such year shall be allowed or made, except--
    (1) as to overpayments determined by a decision of the tax  commission
  which has become final; and
    (2)  as  to  any  amount  collected in excess of an amount computed in
  accordance with the decision of the  tax  commission  which  has  become
  final; and
    (3) as to any amount collected after the period of limitation upon the
  making of levy for collection has expired; and


   (4)  as  to  any  amount claimed as a result of a change or correction
  described in subsection (c).
    (g)  Limit  on  amount of credit or refund.--The amount of overpayment
  determined under subsection (f) shall, when  the  decision  of  the  tax
  commission  has become final, be credited or refunded in accordance with
  subsection (a) of section one thousand eighty-six and shall  not  exceed
  the  amount  of  tax  which the tax commission determines as part of its
  decision was paid--
    (1) after the mailing of the notice of deficiency, or
    (2) within the period which would be applicable under subsections (a),
  (b) or (c), if on the date of the mailing of the notice of deficiency  a
  claim  had  been  filed  (whether or not filed) stating the grounds upon
  which the tax commission finds that there is an overpayment.
    For special restriction on credit or  refund  in  a  proceeding  on  a
  petition  for  redetermination  of  a  deficiency  where  the  notice of
  deficiency is issued as a result of (i) a net operating  loss  carryback
  or  a capital loss carryback, or (ii) an increase or decrease in federal
  taxable income or federal tax, or (iii) a federal change  or  correction
  or  renegotiation,  or  computation  or  recomputation  of tax, which is
  treated in the same manner as if it were a deficiency for federal income
  tax purposes, see  paragraph  (7)  of  subsection  (c)  of  section  one
  thousand eighty-three.
    (h)  Early  return.--For  purposes  of  this section, any return filed
  before  the  last  day  prescribed  for  the  filing  thereof  shall  be
  considered  as  filed on such last day, determined without regard to any
  extension of time granted the taxpayer.
    (i) Prepaid tax.--For purposes of this section, any tax  paid  by  the
  taxpayer  before  the last day prescribed for its payment (including any
  amount paid by the taxpayer as estimated tax for a taxable  year)  shall
  be  deemed  to  have  been  paid by it on the fifteenth day of the third
  month following the close of the taxable year the income of which is the
  basis for tax under article nine-a, or on the  last  day  prescribed  in
  article  nine for the filing of a final return for such taxable year, or
  portion thereof, determined in all cases without regard to any extension
  of time granted the taxpayer, for taxable years beginning before January
  first, two thousand sixteen, and on the  fifteenth  day  of  the  fourth
  month following the close of the taxable year the income of which is the
  basis  for  tax  under  article nine-a, or on the last day prescribed in
  article nine for the filing of a final return for such taxable year,  or
  portion thereof, determined in all cases without regard to any extension
  of  time  granted  the taxpayer, for taxable years beginning on or after
  January first, two thousand sixteen.
    (j) Cross reference.--For  provision  barring  refund  of  overpayment
  credited  against tax of a succeeding year, except for good cause shown,
  see subsection (b) of section one thousand eighty-six.






	   §  1088.  Interest  on overpayment.--(a) General.--Notwithstanding the
  provisions of section sixteen of the state finance law,  interest  shall
  be  allowed  and  paid  as  follows  at  the overpayment rate set by the
  commissioner of taxation and finance pursuant to  section  one  thousand
  ninety-six,  or  if no rate is set, at the rate of six percent per annum
  upon any overpayment in respect of the tax imposed by  article  nine  or
  nine-a:
    (1)  from  the  date  of  the overpayment to the due date of an amount
  against which a credit is taken;
    (2) from the date of the overpayment to a date (to  be  determined  by
  the  commissioner) preceding the date of a refund check by not more than
  thirty days, whether or  not  such  refund  check  is  accepted  by  the
  taxpayer  after  tender of such check to the taxpayer. The acceptance of
  such check shall be without prejudice to any right of  the  taxpayer  to
  claim any additional overpayment and interest thereon.
    (3)  Late  and  amended  returns  and  claims  for  credit  or refund.
  Notwithstanding paragraph one or two of this subsection, in the case  of
  an  overpayment claimed on a return of tax which is filed after the last
  date prescribed for  filing  such  return  (determined  with  regard  to
  extensions),  or  claimed  on  an  amended return of tax or claimed on a
  claim for credit or refund, no interest shall be allowed or paid for any
  day before the date on which such return or claim is filed.
    (4) Interest on  certain  refunds.  To  the  extent  provided  for  in
  regulations  promulgated by the commissioner of taxation and finance, if
  an item of income, gain, loss, deduction or credit is changed  from  the
  taxable  year  or  period in which it is reported to the taxable year or
  period in which it belongs and the change results in an underpayment  in
  a  taxable  year or period and an overpayment in some other taxable year
  or period, the provisions of paragraph three  of  this  subsection  with
  respect to an overpayment shall not be applicable to the extent that the
  limitation  in such paragraph on the right to interest would result in a
  taxpayer not being allowed interest for a length of time with respect to
  an overpayment while being required to pay  interest  on  an  equivalent
  amount of the related underpayment. However, this paragraph shall not be
  construed  as  limiting  or  mitigating  the  effect  of  any statute of
  limitations or any other provision of law relating to the  authority  of
  such  commissioner  to issue a notice of deficiency or to allow a credit
  or refund on an overpayment.
    (5) Amounts of less than five dollars. No interest shall be allowed or
  paid if the amount thereof is less than five dollars.
    (b) Advance payment of  tax  and  estimated  tax.--The  provisions  of
  subsections  (h) and (i) of section one thousand eighty-seven applicable
  in determining the date of payment of tax for  purposes  of  determining
  the  period  of  limitations on credit or refund, shall be applicable in
  determining the date of payment for purposes of this section.
    (c) Tax refund within three months of claim for  overpayment.  (1)  If
  any  overpayment of tax imposed by article nine or nine-a is credited or
  refunded  within  three  months  after  the  last  date  prescribed  (or
  permitted  by  extension  of  time) for filing the return of such tax on
  which such overpayment was claimed or within  three  months  after  such
  return  was  filed,  whichever is later, or within three months after an
  amended return was filed  claiming  such  overpayment  or  within  three
  months  after  a  claim  for  credit  or  refund was filed on which such
  overpayment was claimed, no interest shall be allowed under this section
  on any such overpayment. For purposes of this  subsection,  any  amended
  return  or  claim  for  credit  or  refund  filed  before  the  last day
  prescribed (or permitted by extension of time) for  the  filing  of  the


 return  of  tax  for such year or period shall be considered as filed on
  such last day.
    (2)  In  the  case of an overpayment of tax credited due to absence of
  application by the taxpayer for refund under subsection (a)  of  section
  one  thousand  eighty-six,  where the commissioner notifies the taxpayer
  that such overpayment has been so credited within three months after the
  last date prescribed (or permitted by extension of time) for filing  the
  return of such tax on which such overpayment was claimed or within three
  months  after  such  return was filed, whichever is later, and where the
  taxpayer subsequent to such notice makes a claim for refund  of  all  or
  part  of  such  overpayment,  no  interest  shall  be allowed under this
  section prior to the date of such claim for refund.
    (d) Refund of tax caused by carryback.--For purposes of this  section,
  if  any  overpayment  of  tax  imposed  by article nine-a results from a
  carryback  of  a  net  operating  loss  or  a  net  capital  loss,  such
  overpayment  shall  be  deemed not to have been made prior to the filing
  date for the taxable year in  which  such  net  operating  loss  or  net
  capital  loss  arises.  In  the  case  of  a  taxpayer which has made an
  election under subchapter s of chapter one of the internal revenue code,
  where an overpayment of tax results from a carryback of a net  operating
  loss arising in a taxable year ending on or after December thirty-first,
  nineteen  hundred seventy-six, or from a carryback of a net capital loss
  arising in a taxable year ending  on  or  after  December  thirty-first,
  nineteen  hundred  eighty-one,  unless  a claim for refund based on such
  overpayment has been filed within a period ending twelve months and  one
  hundred  eighty  days  subsequent to the last day of the taxable year in
  which the net operating loss or net capital loss arises, interest on any
  resulting refund or credit shall cease to accrue upon the conclusion  of
  such  period.  Such  filing  date  shall be determined without regard to
  extensions of time to file. For  purposes  of  subsection  (c)  of  this
  section  any  overpayment  described  herein  shall  be  treated  as  an
  overpayment for the loss year and such subsection shall be applied  with
  respect  to such overpayment by treating the return for the loss year as
  not filed before claim for such overpayment is  filed.  The  term  "loss
  year" means the taxable year in which such loss arises.
    (e) No interest until return in processible form.--
    (1)  For purposes of subsections (a) and (c) of this section, a return
  shall not be treated as filed until it is filed in processible form.
    (2) For purposes of paragraph one of this subsection, a return is in a
  processible form if--
    (A) such return is filed on a permitted form, and
    (B) such return contains--
    (i) the taxpayer's name, address,  and  indentifying  number  and  the
  required signatures, and
    (ii)  sufficient  required  information  (whether  on the return or on
  required attachments) to permit the  mathematical  verification  of  tax
  liability shown on the return.
    (f)   Overpayment   credited   against  past-due  legally  enforceable
  debts.--If interest is payable pursuant to this section on that  portion
  of an overpayment which is certified by the commissioner of taxation and
  finance  to  the  comptroller  as  the  amount  to be credited against a
  past-due legally enforceable debt pursuant to the provisions of  section
  one  hundred  seventy-one-f  of  this chapter, or a city of New York tax
  warrant judgment debt pursuant to the provisions of section one  hundred
  seventy-one-l of this chapter, such portion of such an overpayment shall
  cease to bear interest on the date of such certification.
    (g)  Cross-reference.--For  provision  with  respect to interest after
  failure to file a report or amended return under  subdivision  three  of


 section  two  hundred  eleven  or  paragraph  one  of subdivision (e) of
  section fifteen hundred fifteen,  see  subsection  (c)  of  section  one
  thousand eighty-seven.
    (h)  Notwithstanding  any other provision in this section, for taxable
  years beginning on or after January first, two thousand eight and before
  January first, two  thousand  nine,  interest  will  be  allowed  on  an
  overpayment on any return or report on which one or more empire zone tax
  credits  are  claimed, only from the one hundred eightieth day after the
  taxpayer files with the department an empire zone retention  certificate
  issued pursuant to subdivision (w) of section nine hundred fifty-nine of
  the  general  municipal  law  to the empire zone enterprise which is the
  basis for the tax credit or credits claimed on the return or report.




   §  1089.  Petition  to  tax  commission.--(a)  General.--The form of a
  petition to the tax commission, and further proceedings before  the  tax
  commission  in  any case initiated by the filing of a petition, shall be
  governed by such  rules  as  the  tax  commission  shall  prescribe.  No
  petition  shall  be denied in whole or in part without opportunity for a
  hearing on reasonable prior notice. Such hearing shall be  conducted  by
  one  or  more  members  of  the  tax commission, or by a hearing officer
  designated by the tax commission to take evidence and report to the  tax
  commission.  The  tax  commissioners  shall,  acting  as a body, jointly
  decide the case as quickly as practicable. Notice of decision  shall  be
  mailed  promptly  to the taxpayer by certified or registered mail at its
  last known address, and such notice shall set forth the tax commission's
  findings of fact and a brief statement of the  grounds  of  decision  in
  each case decided in whole or in part adversely to the taxpayer.
    (b)  Petition  for  redetermination  of  a deficiency.---Within ninety
  days, or one hundred fifty days if the notice is addressed to a taxpayer
  whose last known address is outside of  the  United  States,  after  the
  mailing  of  the notice of deficiency authorized by section one thousand
  eighty-one, the taxpayer may file a petition with the tax commission for
  a redetermination of the deficiency. Such petition  may  also  assert  a
  claim  for  refund  for  the  same taxable year or years, subject to the
  limitations of subsection (g) of section one thousand eighty-seven.  For
  special restriction where the notice of deficiency relates to a proposed
  assessment  made  as  a  result of (i) a net operating loss carryback or
  capital loss carryback, (ii) an increase or decrease in federal  taxable
  income  or  federal  tax,  or  (iii)  a  federal change or correction or
  renegotiation, or computation or recomputation of tax, which is  treated
  in  the  same  manner  as if it were a deficiency for federal income tax
  purposes, see paragraph (7) of subsection (c) of  section  one  thousand
  eighty-three.
    (c) Petition for refund.---A taxpayer may file a petition with the tax
  commission for the amounts asserted in a claim for refund if---
    (1)  the  taxpayer  has  filed  a timely claim for refund with the tax
  commission,
    (2) the taxpayer has not previously filed with the  tax  commission  a
  timely  petition  under  subsection (b) for the same taxable year unless
  the petition under this subsection  relates  to  a  separate  claim  for
  credit  or  refund  properly  filed  under subsection (f) of section one
  thousand eighty-seven, and
    (3) either (A) six months have expired since the claim was  filed,  or
  (B)  the  tax  commission  has  mailed to the taxpayer, by registered or
  certified mail, a notice of disallowance of such claim in  whole  or  in
  part.
    (4)  Notwithstanding  paragraph  three of this subsection, no petition
  may be filed by a taxpayer claiming a refund of one or more empire  zone
  tax  credits for a taxable year beginning on or after January first, two
  thousand eight and before January first, two thousand  nine,  until  six
  months  have  expired  after  the date on which an empire zone retention
  certificate was issued pursuant  to  subdivision  (w)  of  section  nine
  hundred  fifty-nine  of  the  general  municipal  law to the empire zone
  enterprise which is the basis for the tax credit or credits  claimed  on
  the return or report.
  No  petition  under  this  subsection shall be filed more than two years
  after the date of mailing of a notice of disallowance, unless  prior  to
  the  expiration  of such two year period it has been extended by written
  agreement between the taxpayer and the tax  commission.  If  a  taxpayer
  files  a written waiver of the requirement that he be mailed a notice of
  disallowance, the two year period  prescribed  by  this  subsection  for


 filing  a  petition  for  refund  shall begin on the date such waiver is
  filed.
    (d) Assertion of deficiency after filing petition.---
    (1)  Petition for redetermination of deficiency.---If a taxpayer files
  with the tax commission a petition for redetermination of a  deficiency,
  the  tax  commission  shall have power to determine a greater deficiency
  than asserted in the notice of deficiency  and  to  determine  if  there
  should  be  assessed  any addition to tax or penalty provided in section
  one thousand eighty-five, if claim therefor is asserted at or before the
  hearing under rules of the tax commission.
    (2)  Petition  for  refund.---If  the  taxpayer  files  with  the  tax
  commission  a  petition for credit or refund for a taxable year, the tax
  commission may
    (A) determine  a  deficiency  for  such  year  as  to  any  amount  of
  deficiency  asserted  at  or  before  the hearing under rules of the tax
  commission, and within the period in which an assessment would be timely
  under section one thousand eighty-three, or
    (B) deny so much of the amount for which credit or refund is sought in
  the petition, as is offset  by  other  issues  pertaining  to  the  same
  taxable  year which are asserted at or before the hearing under rules of
  the tax commission.
    (3) Opportunity to respond.--- A taxpayer shall be given a  reasonable
  opportunity  to  respond  to  any matters asserted by the tax commission
  under this subsection.
    (4) Restriction on further notices of  deficiency.---If  the  taxpayer
  files  a  petition with the tax commission under this section, no notice
  of deficiency under section one thousand eighty-one  may  thereafter  be
  issued  by  the tax commission for the same taxable year, except in case
  of fraud or with respect to an increase or decrease in  federal  taxable
  income or federal alternative minimum taxable income or federal tax or a
  federal  change  or  correction  or  renegotiation,  or  computation  or
  recomputation of tax, which is treated in the same manner as if it  were
  a  deficiency  for  federal income tax purposes, required to be reported
  under subdivision three of section two hundred eleven, or under  section
  two hundred nineteen-bb or under section two hundred nineteen-zz.
    (e)  Burden  of  proof.---In  any case before the tax commission under
  this article, the burden of proof shall be upon  the  petitioner  except
  for  the following issues, as to which the burden of proof shall be upon
  the tax commission:
    (1) whether the petitioner has been guilty of  fraud  with  intent  to
  evade tax;
    (2)  whether the petitioner is liable as the transferee of property of
  a taxpayer, but not to show that the taxpayer was liable for the tax;
    (3) whether the petitioner is liable for any increase in a  deficiency
  where  such  increase is asserted initially after a notice of deficiency
  was mailed and a petition under this section filed, unless such increase
  in deficiency is the result  of  an  increase  or  decrease  in  federal
  taxable  income or federal alternative minimum taxable income or federal
  tax or a federal change or correction or renegotiation,  or  computation
  or  recomputation  of  tax, which is treated in the same manner as if it
  were a deficiency for  federal  income  tax  purposes,  required  to  be
  reported under subdivision three of section two hundred eleven, or under
  section   two   hundred   nineteen-bb,  or  under  section  two  hundred
  nineteen-zz, and of which increase, decrease, change  or  correction  or
  renegotiation,  or  computation or recomputation, the tax commission had
  no notice at the time it mailed the notice of deficiency; and
    (4) whether any person is liable for a penalty under subsection (l) of
  section one thousand eighty-five.


   (f) Evidence of related federal determination.---Evidence of a federal
  determination relating to  issues  raised  in  a  case  before  the  tax
  commission   under   this  section  shall  be  admissible,  under  rules
  established by the tax commission.
    (g) Jurisdiction over other years.---The tax commission shall consider
  such  facts  with  relation  to  the  taxes  for  other  years as may be
  necessary correctly to determine the tax for the taxable year, but in so
  doing shall have no jurisdiction to determine whether or not the tax for
  any other year has been overpaid or underpaid.




   §  1090.  Review  of  tax  commission  decision.---(a)  General.---  A
  decision of the tax appeals tribunal shall be subject to judicial review
  in the manner provided for by  section  two  thousand  sixteen  of  this
  chapter.    Provided, however, an application by a taxpayer for judicial
  review of a decision of  the  tax  appeals  tribunal  that  there  is  a
  deficiency  of tax under section one hundred eighty-two of this chapter,
  or liability for any interest, addition to tax or penalty  with  respect
  to  such  deficiency,  shall not be instituted unless the amount of such
  deficiency of tax and such interest, addition to tax or penalty are paid
  at or before the time such  application  for  review  is  made  or  such
  amounts  are  deposited with the commissioner of taxation and finance at
  or before such time.
    (b) Judicial review exclusive remedy of taxpayer.---The  review  of  a
  decision  of  the  tax  commission provided by this section shall be the
  exclusive  remedy  available  to   any   taxpayer   for   the   judicial
  determination  of the liability of the taxpayer for the taxes imposed by
  article nine, nine-a, nine-b or nine-c.
    (c) Assessment pending  review;  review  bond.---Irrespective  of  any
  restrictions  on  the assessment and collection of deficiencies, the tax
  commission may assess a deficiency after the expiration  of  the  period
  specified  in  subsection  (a),  notwithstanding that an application for
  judicial review in respect of such deficiency has been duly made by  the
  taxpayer  unless  the  taxpayer,  at  or  before the time the taxpayer's
  application for review is made, has paid the deficiency,  has  deposited
  with  the tax commission the amount of the deficiency, or has filed with
  the tax commission a bond (which may be a jeopardy bond under subsection
  (h) of section one thousand ninety-four) in the amount of the portion of
  the deficiency (including interest and  other  amounts)  in  respect  of
  which the application for review is made and all costs and charges which
  may  accrue  against  the taxpayer in the prosecution of the proceeding,
  including costs of all appeals, and with surety approved by a justice of
  the supreme court of the state of New York, conditioned upon the payment
  of the deficiency (including interest  and  other  amounts)  as  finally
  determined  and  such  costs and charges.  If as a result of a waiver of
  the restrictions on the assessment and collection of  a  deficiency  any
  part  of  the  amount determined by the tax commission is paid after the
  filing of the review bond, such  bond  shall,  at  the  request  of  the
  taxpayer,  be  proportionately reduced. Provided, however, where the tax
  commission has rendered a decision that there is  a  deficiency  of  tax
  under  section  one hundred eighty-two of this chapter, or liability for
  any  interest,  addition  to  tax  or  penalty  with  respect  to   such
  deficiency,  irrespective  of  any  restrictions  on  the assessment and
  collection  of  deficiencies,  the  tax  commission  may   assess   such
  deficiency  after  the  expiration of the period specified in subsection
  (a), notwithstanding that an application for judicial review in  respect
  of such deficiency has been duly made by the taxpayer.
    (d)  Credit,  refund  or  abatement after review.---If the amount of a
  deficiency determined by the tax commission is disallowed in whole or in
  part by the court of review, the amount so disallowed shall be  credited
  or  refunded  to the taxpayer, without the making of claim therefor, or,
  if payment has not been made, shall be abated.
    (e) Date of finality of  division  of  tax  appeals  determination  or
  decision.---  A  determination  of  an  administrative  law judge in the
  division  of  tax  appeals  shall  become  final  in   accordance   with
  subdivision four of section two thousand ten of this chapter. A decision
  of  the  tax  appeals tribunal shall become final upon the expiration of
  the period specified in subsection (a) for  making  an  application  for
  review,  if  no such application has been duly made within such time, or


 if such application has been duly made, upon expiration of the time  for
  all  further  judicial  review, or upon the rendering by the tax appeals
  tribunal of a decision in accordance with the mandate of  the  court  on
  review.    Notwithstanding  the  foregoing, for the purpose of making an
  application for review, the decision of the tax appeals  tribunal  shall
  be  deemed  final  on  the date the notice of such decision is served as
  provided in section two thousand sixteen of this chapter.




   §   1091.   Mailing   rules;   holidays;   miscellaneous.--(a)  Timely
  mailing.--(1) If  any  return,  declaration  of  estimated  tax,  claim,
  statement,  notice, petition, or other document required to be filed, or
  any payment required to be made, within a prescribed  period  or  on  or
  before  a  prescribed  date  under  authority  of  any provision of this
  article, or of article nine, nine-a, nine-b or nine-c,  is,  after  such
  period  or  such  date,  delivered  by  United  States  mail  to the tax
  commission, bureau, office, officer or person with which  or  with  whom
  such  document  is  required  to  be  filed, or to which or to whom such
  payment is required to be made, the date of the United  States  postmark
  stamped on the envelope shall be deemed to be the date of delivery. This
  subsection  shall  apply  only  if  the  postmark  date falls within the
  prescribed period or on or before the prescribed date for the filing  of
  such  document,  or  for  making  the  payment,  including any extension
  granted for such filing or payment, and only if such document or payment
  was deposited in the mail, postage prepaid, properly  addressed  to  the
  tax  commission,  bureau,  office,  officer or person with which or with
  whom the document is required to be filed or to which or  to  whom  such
  payment  is  required  to be made. If any document or payment is sent by
  United States registered mail, such registration shall  be  prima  facie
  evidence  that  such  document  or  payment  was  delivered  to  the tax
  commission, bureau, office, officer  or  person  to  which  or  to  whom
  addressed.  To  the  extent  that  the tax commission shall prescribe by
  regulation, certified mail may be used in lieu of registered mail  under
  this  section.  This subsection shall apply in the case of postmarks not
  made by the United States Post Office only if and to the extent provided
  by regulations of the tax commission.
    (2)(A) Any reference in paragraph one of this subsection to the United
  States mail shall be treated as including a reference  to  any  delivery
  service designated by the secretary of the treasury of the United States
  pursuant  to  section  seventy-five  hundred two of the internal revenue
  code and any reference in paragraph one of this subsection to a postmark
  by the United States mail shall be treated as including a  reference  to
  any  date  recorded  or  marked  in  the  manner  described  in  section
  seventy-five hundred two of the internal revenue code  by  a  designated
  delivery  service.  If  the commissioner finds that any delivery service
  designated by such secretary is inadequate for the needs of  the  state,
  the  commissioner  may  withdraw  such  designation for purposes of this
  article.  The  commissioner  may  also  designate  additional   delivery
  services meeting the criteria of section seventy-five hundred two of the
  internal  revenue code for purposes of this article, or may withdraw any
  such designation if the commissioner finds that a  delivery  service  so
  designated  is  inadequate  for the needs of the state. Any reference in
  paragraph one of this subsection to the  United  States  mail  shall  be
  treated  as  including a reference to any delivery service designated by
  the commissioner and any reference in paragraph one of  this  subsection
  to  a postmark by the United States mail shall be treated as including a
  reference to any date recorded or marked  in  the  manner  described  in
  section  seventy-five  hundred  two  of  the  internal revenue code by a
  delivery service designated by the commissioner.
    (B) Any equivalent of registered or certified mail designated  by  the
  United  States secretary of the treasury, or as may be designated by the
  commissioner pursuant to the same criteria used by  such  secretary  for
  such  designations  pursuant  to section seventy-five hundred two of the
  internal  revenue  code,  shall  be  included  within  the  meaning   of
  registered   or  certified  mail  as  used  in  paragraph  one  of  this
  subsection. If the commissioner finds that any equivalent of  registered
  or  certified  mail  designated by such secretary or the commissioner is


 inadequate for the needs of the state,  the  commissioner  may  withdraw
  such designation for purposes of this article.
    (b)  Last  known  address.--For purposes of this article, a taxpayer's
  last known address shall be the address given in the last  return  filed
  by  it,  unless  subsequently  to the filing of such return the taxpayer
  shall have notified the tax commission of a change of address.
    (c) Last day a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.--When the  last  day
  prescribed  under  authority  of  this  article or article nine, nine-a,
  nine-b or nine-c (including any extension of time)  for  performing  any
  act  falls  on  a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday in the state of New
  York, the performance of such act shall be considered timely  if  it  is
  performed  on the next succeeding day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or
  legal holiday.
    (d) Certificate; unfiled return.--For purposes of  this  chapter,  the
  certificate  of the tax commission to the effect that a tax has not been
  paid, that a return or declaration of estimated tax has not been  filed,
  or  that  information has not been supplied, as required by or under the
  provisions of this article or of article nine, nine-a, nine-b or  nine-c
  of  this  chapter,  shall  be prima facie evidence that such tax has not
  been paid, that such return or declaration has not been filed,  or  that
  such information has not been supplied.
    (e)  Attorney  general; jurisdiction.--The attorney general shall have
  concurrent jurisdiction with any district attorney in the prosecution of
  any offenses arising under article thirty-seven  of  this  chapter  with
  respect to the taxes to which this article applies.




   § 1092. Collection, levy and liens.---(a) Collection procedures.---The
  taxes  imposed  by  articles  nine,  nine-a,  nine-b  or nine-c shall be
  collected by the tax commission, and it may establish the mode  or  time
  for  the  collection  of  any  amount due it under these articles if not
  otherwise specified. The tax commission  shall,  upon  request,  give  a
  receipt  for  any  sum collected under such articles. The tax commission
  may authorize  banks  or  trust  companies  which  are  depositaries  or
  financial  agents of the state to receive and give a receipt for any tax
  imposed under such articles in such manner, at  such  times,  and  under
  such  conditions  as  the  tax  commission  may  prescribe;  and the tax
  commission shall prescribe the manner, times and conditions under  which
  the  receipt  of  such  tax  by  such banks and trust companies is to be
  treated as payment of such tax to the tax commission.
    (b) Notice and demand for tax.---The tax commission shall as  soon  as
  practicable  give  notice to each taxpayer liable for any amount of tax,
  addition to tax, penalty  or  interest,  which  has  been  assessed  but
  remains  unpaid,  stating the amount and demanding payment thereof. Such
  notice shall be left at the principal office of  the  taxpayer  in  this
  state  or  shall  be sent by mail to such taxpayer's last known address.
  Except where the tax commission  determines  that  collection  would  be
  jeopardized  by  delay,  if  any  tax is assessed prior to the last date
  (including any date fixed by extension) prescribed for payment  of  such
  tax, payment of such tax shall not be demanded until after such date.
    (c)  Issuance of warrant after notice and demand.---If any corporation
  or other person liable under articles nine or nine-a for the payment  of
  any tax, addition to tax, penalty or interest neglects or refuses to pay
  the  same  within  twenty-one  calendar  days  after  notice  and demand
  therefor is given to such corporation or other person  under  subsection
  (b)  of  this  section  (ten  business days if the amount for which such
  notice and demand  is  made  equals  or  exceeds  one  hundred  thousand
  dollars),  the  commissioner may within six years after the date of such
  assessment issue  a  warrant  under  the  commissioner's  official  seal
  directed to the sheriff of any county of the state, or to any officer or
  employee  of  the  department,  commanding him to levy upon and sell the
  real and personal property of such corporation or other person  for  the
  payment  of the amount assessed, with the cost of executing the warrant,
  and to return such warrant to the commissioner and pay to him or her the
  money collected by virtue thereof within sixty days after the receipt of
  the warrant. If the commissioner finds that the collection of the tax or
  other amount is in jeopardy, notice and demand for immediate payment  of
  such  tax may be made by the commissioner and upon failure or refusal to
  pay such tax or other  amount  the  commissioner  may  issue  a  warrant
  without  regard  to  the  twenty-one  day  period  (or ten-day period if
  applicable)  provided  in  this  subsection.    For  purposes  of   this
  subsection,  the  term  corporation shall include an exempt QSSS of such
  corporation.
    (d) Copy of warrant to be filed and lien to be created.---Any  sheriff
  or officer or employee who receives a warrant under subsection (c) shall
  within  five  days  thereafter  file  a  copy  with  the  clerk  of  the
  appropriate county. The clerk shall  thereupon  enter  in  the  judgment
  docket,  in  the  column  for judgment debtors, the name of the taxpayer
  mentioned in the warrant, and in appropriate columns the  tax  or  other
  amounts  for  which the warrant is issued and the date when such copy is
  filed; and such amount shall thereupon be a lien upon the title  to  and
  interest in real, personal and other property of the taxpayer. Such lien
  shall not apply to personal property unless such warrant is filed in the
  department of state.  For purposes of this subsection, the term taxpayer
  shall include an exempt QSSS of such taxpayer.


   (e)  Judgment.---When  a  warrant has been filed with the county clerk
  the tax commission shall, in the right of the people of the state of New
  York, be deemed to have obtained judgment against the taxpayer  for  the
  tax  or  other  amounts.    For  purposes  of  this subsection, the term
  taxpayer shall include an exempt QSSS of such taxpayer.
    (f)  Execution.---The  sheriff  or officer or employee shall thereupon
  proceed upon the warrant in all respects, with like effect, and  in  the
  same  manner  prescribed  by law in respect to executions issued against
  property upon judgments of a court of record, and  a  sheriff  shall  be
  entitled  to the same fees for his services in executing the warrant, to
  be collected  in  the  same  manner.  An  officer  or  employee  of  the
  department of taxation and finance may proceed in any county or counties
  of  this  state  and shall have all the powers of execution conferred by
  law upon sheriffs, but shall be entitled to no fee  or  compensation  in
  excess  of  actual expenses paid in connection with the execution of the
  warrant.
    (g) Foreign corporations.---Where a notice and demand under subsection
  (b) shall have been given to a foreign corporation or other  person  who
  is  not then a resident, and it appears to the tax commission that it is
  not  practicable  to  find  in  this  state  property  of  such  foreign
  corporation  or  nonresident person sufficient to pay the entire balance
  of tax or other amount owing by such foreign corporation or  nonresident
  person, the tax commission may, in accordance with subsection (c), issue
  a  warrant  directed  to  an  officer  or  employee of the department of
  taxation and finance, a  copy  of  which  warrant  shall  be  mailed  by
  certified  or registered mail to such foreign corporation or nonresident
  person at its last known address,  subject  to  the  rules  for  mailing
  provided  in  subsection  (a)  of section one thousand eighty-one.  Such
  warrant shall command the officer  or  employee  to  proceed  in  Albany
  county,  and  he  shall,  within five days after receipt of the warrant,
  file the warrant and obtain a judgment in accordance with this  section.
  Thereupon the tax commission may authorize the institution of any action
  or proceeding to collect or enforce the judgment in any place and by any
  procedure that a civil judgment of the supreme court of the state of New
  York could be collected or enforced. The tax commission may also, in its
  discretion,  designate  agents  or  retain  counsel  for  the purpose of
  collecting, outside the state of New York, any unpaid  taxes,  additions
  to  tax,  penalties  or  interest  which  have  been assessed under this
  article or under article nine, nine-a, nine-b or nine-c, against foreign
  corporations or other nonresident persons, may fix the  compensation  of
  such  agents  and  counsel  to  be  paid  out  of  money appropriated or
  otherwise lawfully available for payment thereof,  and  may  require  of
  them  bonds  or  other  security  for  the faithful performance of their
  duties, in such form and in such amount as the tax commission shall deem
  proper and sufficient.   For  purposes  of  this  subsection,  the  term
  corporation shall include an exempt QSSS of such corporation.
    (h)  Action by state for recovery of taxes.---Action may be brought by
  the attorney general at the instance of the tax commission in  the  name
  of  the  state  to  recover the amount of any unpaid taxes, additions to
  tax, penalties or interest which have been assessed under  this  article
  or  under  article nine, nine-a, nine-b or nine-c within six years prior
  to the date the action is commenced.
    (i) Release of lien.---The  tax  commission,  if  it  finds  that  the
  interests  of  the  state will not thereby be jeopardized, and upon such
  conditions as it may require, may release any property from the lien  of
  any  warrant  filed  under  subsection  (d)  or  (g)  for  unpaid taxes,
  additions to tax, penalties and interest filed pursuant to this section,


 and such release may be recorded in the office of any recording  officer
  in which such warrant has been filed.
    (j)  Lien from due date of return.---(1) In addition to any other lien
  provided for in this section, each tax imposed by article nine,  nine-a,
  nine-b  or nine-c shall become a lien on the date on which the return is
  required to be filed (without regard to any extension of time for filing
  such return), except that such tax shall become a lien  not  later  than
  the  date  the  taxpayer  ceases to be subject to the tax imposed by any
  such article or to exercise its franchise, or to  do  business  in  this
  state  in  a  corporate  or organized capacity. Each such tax shall be a
  lien and binding upon the real and personal property of the taxpayer, or
  of a transferee liable to pay the same, until the same is paid in  full,
  except  that  no  lien  for any additional tax assessed pursuant to this
  article shall  be  enforceable  against  property  which  prior  to  the
  issuance  to  the  taxpayer  of a notice of deficiency under section one
  thousand eighty-one had been transferred in good faith to  a  bona  fide
  transferee  for value. But the lien of each such tax shall be subject to
  the lien of any mortgage indebtedness  existing  against  real  property
  previous  to the time when the tax became a lien and where such mortgage
  indebtedness has been incurred in good faith and was not given, directly
  or indirectly, to any officer or stockholder of the  corporation  owning
  such  real  property, whether as a purchase money mortgage or otherwise,
  and shall also be subject to the lien of local  taxes  and  assessments,
  without  regard to when the lien for such taxes and assessments may have
  accrued. If the return is filed and the tax shown on the  report  to  be
  due  is paid on or before the date on which the report is required to be
  filed, without regard to any extensions of time for filing such  report,
  the  lien shall not be enforceable against the interest of any purchaser
  or mortgagee in property which is thereafter, but prior to the  issuance
  to  the  taxpayer  of  a notice of deficiency under section one thousand
  eighty-one, transferred to a bona fide purchaser for value, or mortgaged
  where the mortgage indebtedness  is  incurred  in  good  faith  and  the
  mortgage  is  not  given,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  any officer or
  stockholder of the corporation. In any  action  to  foreclose  any  such
  mortgage,  or  to  foreclose  the lien of local taxes or assessments, to
  which the people of the state of New York shall have been made  a  party
  defendant  by  reason of the existence of a lien for any such tax, or if
  no such tax was due or was a lien at the time  of  the  commencement  of
  such action and the filing of the notice of pendency thereof, but such a
  tax  becomes  due  or  becomes  a  lien  subsequent  to  the time of the
  commencement of such action and the filing of  the  notice  of  pendency
  thereof,  such  real  property shall be sold and conveyed in such action
  free from any such tax lien, and any such tax lien may become a lien  on
  any  surplus moneys which may result from such sale, to be determined in
  the proceedings for the distribution of such surplus moneys. Where title
  to real property passes from an individual, or from a corporation  owing
  no  franchise  tax,  to another corporation which is in default for such
  tax, the lien herein provided shall not be enforceable except as to  any
  equity  after the prior mortgage or purchase money mortgage encumbrance.
  For purposes of this paragraph, the terms taxpayer and corporation shall
  include an exempt QSSS of such taxpayer or corporation.
    (2) The tax commission may,  upon  application  made  to  it  and  the
  payment  of  a  fee of fifty dollars, release any real property from the
  lien under  this  subsection,  provided  payment  be  made  to  the  tax
  commission  of  such  a  sum  as  the tax commission shall deem adequate
  consideration for such release, or deposit be made of such  security  or
  such  bond  be  filed  as the tax commission shall deem proper to secure
  payment of any such tax. The application for such release shall  contain


 an  accurate  description  of  the property to be released together with
  such other information as the tax commission may require.  Such  release
  may  be  recorded  in any office in which conveyances of real estate are
  entitled to be recorded.
    (3)  All  taxes,  additions  to tax, penalties and interest which have
  become a lien under this subsection shall cease to be a lien  after  the
  expiration of twenty years from date they become due and payable, except
  that taxes, additions to tax, penalties and interest which have become a
  lien under this subsection (i) as to real estate in the hands of persons
  who  are  owners  thereof  who would be purchasers in good faith but for
  such taxes, additions to tax, penalties or interest and (ii) as  to  the
  lien  on  real  estate of mortgages held by persons who would be holders
  thereof in good faith but for such taxes, additions to tax, penalties or
  interest, as against such purchasers or holders shall cease to be a lien
  after the expiration of ten years from date they become due and payable.
  The limitations herein provided for shall not apply to any transfer from
  a corporation to a person or corporation with intent to avoid payment of
  any taxes, or where with like intent the transfer is made to  a  grantee
  corporation,  or  any subsequent grantee corporation, controlled by such
  grantor or which has any community of interest with it,  either  through
  stock ownership or otherwise.




   §  1093.  Transferees.---(a)  General.---The  liability,  at law or in
  equity, of a transferee of property of a taxpayer for any tax, additions
  to tax, penalty or interest due the tax commission under this article or
  under article nine, nine-a, nine-b or nine-c, shall be  assessed,  paid,
  and  collected in the same manner and subject to the same provisions and
  limitations as in the case of the tax to which  the  liability  relates,
  except  that  the  period  of  limitations  for  assessment  against the
  transferee shall be extended by one year for each  successive  transfer,
  in order, from the original taxpayer to the transferee involved, but not
  by  more  than  three  years  in  the  aggregate.    The term transferee
  includes,  in  case  of  successive  transfers,  donee,  heir,  legatee,
  devisee,  distributee,  and  successor by merger, consolidation or other
  reorganization.
    (b) Exceptions.---
    (1) If  before  the  expiration  of  the  period  of  limitations  for
  assessment of liability of the transferee, a claim has been filed by the
  tax  commission  in  any court against the original taxpayer or the last
  preceding transferee based upon the liability of the original  taxpayer,
  then  the  period  of  limitation  for  assessment  of  liability of the
  transferee shall in no event expire prior to one year after  such  claim
  has been finally allowed, disallowed or otherwise disposed of.
    (2) If, before the expiration of the time prescribed in subsection (a)
  or  the  immediately  preceding  paragraph  of  this  subsection for the
  assessment of the liability, the tax commission and the transferee  have
  both  consented  in  writing  to  its  assessment  after  such time, the
  liability may be assessed at any time prior to  the  expiration  of  the
  period  agreed  upon.  The  period  so  agreed  upon  may be extended by
  subsequent agreements in writing  made  before  the  expiration  of  the
  period previously agreed upon. For the purpose of determining the period
  of  limitation  on credit or refund to the transferee of overpayments of
  tax made  by  such  transferee  or  overpayments  of  tax  made  by  the
  transferor  as  to which the transferee is legally entitled to credit or
  refund, such agreement and any extension  thereof  shall  be  deemed  an
  agreement and extension thereof referred to in subsection (b) of section
  one  thousand  eighty-seven.  If  the  agreement  is  executed after the
  expiration of the  period  of  limitation  for  assessment  against  the
  original taxpayer, then in applying the limitations under subsection (b)
  of  section  one  thousand  eighty-seven  on the amount of the credit or
  refund, the periods specified in subsection (a) of section one  thousand
  eighty-seven  shall  be  increased  by  the period from the date of such
  expiration to the date of the agreement.
    (c) Period for assessment against certain transferors.---For  purposes
  of  this  section,  if any person is deceased, or is a corporation which
  has terminated its existence, the period of  limitation  for  assessment
  against  such person or corporation shall be the period that would be in
  effect had death or termination of existence not occurred.
    (d) Evidence.---The tax  commission  shall  use  its  powers  to  make
  available  to the transferee evidence necessary to enable the transferee
  to determine the liability of the original taxpayer and of any preceding
  transferees, but without undue hardship  to  the  original  taxpayer  or
  preceding  transferee.    See  subsection  (e)  of  section one thousand
  eighty-nine for rule as to burden of proof.




   §  1094. Jeopardy assessment.---(a) Authority for making.---If the tax
  commission believes that the assessment or collection  of  a  deficiency
  will  be  jeopardized by delay, it shall, notwithstanding the provisions
  of section one thousand eighty-one, immediately assess  such  deficiency
  (together with all interest, penalties and additions to tax provided for
  by  law),  and notice and demand shall be made by the tax commission for
  the payment thereof.
    (b) Notice of deficiency.---If the jeopardy assessment is made  before
  any  notice  in  respect  of  the  tax  to which the jeopardy assessment
  relates has been mailed under section one thousand eighty-one, then  the
  tax  commission shall mail a notice under such section within sixty days
  after the making of the assessment.
    (c)  Amount  assessable  before  decision  of  tax   commission.---The
  jeopardy  assessment  may  be made in respect of a deficiency greater or
  less than that of which notice is mailed to the taxpayer and whether  or
  not  the  taxpayer  has  theretofore  filed  a  petition  with  the  tax
  commission. The tax commission may, at any  time  before  rendering  its
  decision,  abate  such assessment, or any unpaid portion thereof, to the
  extent that it believes the assessment to be excessive  in  amount.  The
  tax  commission may in its decision redetermine the entire amount of the
  deficiency and of all amounts assessed at the same  time  in  connection
  therewith.
    (d)  Amount  assessable  after  decision  of tax commission.--- If the
  jeopardy assessment is made after the decision of the tax commission  is
  rendered,  such assessment may be made only in respect of the deficiency
  determined by the tax commission in its decision.
    (e) Expiration of right to assess.---A jeopardy assessment may not  be
  made  after the decision of the tax commission has become final or after
  the taxpayer has made an application for review of the decision  of  the
  tax commission.
    (f)  Collection  of  unpaid  amounts.---When a petition has been filed
  with the tax commission and when  the  amount  which  should  have  been
  assessed  has  been determined by a decision of the tax commission which
  has become final, then any unpaid portion, the collection of  which  has
  been  stayed  by bond, shall be collected as part of the tax upon notice
  and demand from the tax commission, and any  remaining  portion  of  the
  assessment  shall be abated. If the amount already collected exceeds the
  amount determined as the amount which should have  been  assessed,  such
  excess  shall  be  credited  or  refunded to the taxpayer as provided in
  section one thousand eighty-six without the filing of claim therefor. If
  the amount determined as the amount which should have been  assessed  is
  greater  than the amount actually assessed, then the difference shall be
  assessed and shall be collected as part  of  the  tax  upon  notice  and
  demand from the tax commission.
    (g)  Abatement  if  jeopardy  does not exist.---The tax commission may
  abate the jeopardy assessment if it finds that jeopardy does not  exist.
  Such abatement may not be made after a decision of the tax commission in
  respect  of the deficiency has been rendered or, if no petition is filed
  with the tax commission, after the expiration of the period  for  filing
  such petition. The period of limitation on the making of assessments and
  levy or a proceeding for collection, in respect of any deficiency, shall
  be determined as if the jeopardy assessment so abated had not been made,
  except  that  the running of such period shall in any event be suspended
  for the period from the date  of  such  jeopardy  assessment  until  the
  expiration  of  the  tenth  day  after  the  day  on which such jeopardy
  assessment is abated.
    (h) Bond to stay collection.---The collection  of  the  whole  or  any
  amount  of  any jeopardy assessment may be stayed by filing with the tax


 commission, within such time as may be fixed by regulation, a bond in an
  amount equal to the amount as to which the stay is desired,  conditioned
  upon  the  payment  of  the  amount (together with interest thereon) the
  collection  of  which is stayed at the time at which, but for the making
  of the jeopardy assessment, such amount would be due. Upon the filing of
  the bond the collection of so much of the amount assessed as is  covered
  by the bond shall be stayed.  The taxpayer shall have the right to waive
  such  stay at any time in respect of the whole or any part of the amount
  covered by the bond, and if as a result of such waiver any part  of  the
  amount  covered  by the bond is paid, then the bond shall at the request
  of the taxpayer, be proportionately  reduced.  If  any  portion  of  the
  jeopardy  assessment  is  abated,  or  if  a  notice of deficiency under
  section one thousand eighty-one is mailed to the taxpayer  in  a  lesser
  amount,   the   bond   shall,   at  the  request  of  the  taxpayer,  be
  proportionately reduced.
    (i) Petition to tax commission.---If the  bond  is  given  before  the
  taxpayer  has filed its petition under section one thousand eighty-nine,
  the bond shall contain a further condition that if  a  petition  is  not
  filed  within  the period provided in such section, then the amount, the
  collection of which is stayed by the bond, will be paid  on  notice  and
  demand  at  any  time after the expiration of such period, together with
  interest thereon from the date of the jeopardy notice and demand to  the
  date  of  notice  and  demand  under  this subsection. The bond shall be
  conditioned upon the payment of so much of such  assessment  (collection
  of  which  is  stayed by the bond) as is not abated by a decision of the
  tax commission which has become final. If the tax commission  determines
  that  the  amount  assessed is greater than the amount which should have
  been assessed, then the bond shall, at the request of the  taxpayer,  be
  proportionately  reduced  when  the  decision  of  the tax commission is
  rendered.
    (j)  Stay  of  sale  of  seized  property   pending   tax   commission
  decision.---Where a jeopardy assessment is made, the property seized for
  the collection of the tax shall not be sold---
    (1)  if  subsection  (b)  is  applicable, prior to the issuance of the
  notice of deficiency and the expiration of the time provided in  section
  one  thousand eighty-nine for filing a petition with the tax commission,
  and
    (2) if a petition is filed with the tax commission (whether before  or
  after  the  making of such jeopardy assessment), prior to the expiration
  of the period during which the assessment of  the  deficiency  would  be
  prohibited if subsection (a) were not applicable.
  Such  property  may  be sold if the taxpayer consents to the sale, or if
  the tax commission determines that  the  expenses  of  conservation  and
  maintenance  will greatly reduce the net proceeds, or if the property is
  perishable.
    (k) Interest.---For the purpose  of  subsection  (a)  of  section  one
  thousand  eighty-four,  the  last  date  prescribed for payment shall be
  determined without regard to any notice and demand  for  payment  issued
  under  this section prior to the last date otherwise prescribed for such
  payment.
    (l) Early termination of taxable year.---If the tax  commission  finds
  that  a taxpayer designs quickly to remove its property from this state,
  or to conceal its property therein, or to do any other  act  tending  to
  prejudice  or  to  render  wholly  or  partly ineffectual proceedings to
  collect the tax for the current or the  preceding  taxable  year  unless
  such  proceedings  be  brought  without  delay, the tax commission shall
  declare the taxable period for such taxpayer immediately terminated, and
  shall cause notice of such finding  and  declaration  to  be  given  the


 taxpayer,  together  with  a demand for immediate payment of the tax for
  the taxable period so  declared  terminated  and  of  the  tax  for  the
  preceding  taxable  year or so much of such tax as is unpaid, whether or
  not  the  time otherwise allowed by law for filing return and paying the
  tax has expired; and such taxes shall thereupon become  immediately  due
  and  payable. In any proceeding brought to enforce payment of taxes made
  due and payable by virture of the provisions  of  this  subsection,  the
  finding  of  the  tax  commission  made as herein provided, whether made
  after notice  to  the  taxpayer  or  not,  shall  be  for  all  purposes
  presumptive evidence of jeopardy.
    (m)  Reopening of taxable period.---Notwithstanding the termination of
  the taxable period of the taxpayer by the tax commission, as provided in
  subsection (l), the tax commission may reopen such taxable  period  each
  time  the  taxpayer  is  found  by  the  tax commission to have received
  income, within the current taxable year, since the termination  of  such
  period.  A  taxable  period  so  terminated by the tax commission may be
  reopened by the taxpayer if it files with the tax commission a true  and
  accurate  return  under  article nine, nine-a, nine-b or nine-c for such
  taxable  period,  together  with  such  other  information  as  the  tax
  commission may by regulations prescribe.
    (n)  Furnishing  of  bond  where  taxable  year  is  closed by the tax
  commission.---Payment of taxes shall not be enforced by any  proceedings
  under  the  provisions  of subsection (l) prior to the expiration of the
  time otherwise allowed for paying such taxes if the taxpayer  furnishes,
  under regulations prescribed by the tax commission, a bond to insure the
  timely  making of returns with respect to, and payment of, such taxes or
  any taxes for prior years.




   §  1095. Criminal penalties; cross-reference.--For criminal penalties,
  see article thirty-seven of this chapter.




   §  1096.  General  powers  of tax commission.---(a) General.---The tax
  commission shall administer and enforce the tax imposed by article nine,
  nine-a, nine-b and nine-c, and it is authorized to make such  rules  and
  regulations,  and  to require such facts and information to be reported,
  as it may deem necessary to enforce the provisions of such articles  and
  of this article.
    (b)  Examination  of books and witnesses.---(1) The tax commission for
  the purpose of ascertaining the correctness of any return,  or  for  the
  purpose of making an estimate of tax liability of any corporation, shall
  have  power  to  examine  or  to cause to have examined, by any agent or
  representative designated by it for that  purpose,  any  books,  papers,
  records or memoranda bearing upon the matters required to be included in
  the  return, and may require the attendance of the corporation rendering
  the return through any officer or employee of such corporation,  or  the
  attendance of any other person having knowledge in the premises, and may
  take  testimony  and  require  proof  material for its information, with
  power to administer oaths to such person or persons.
    (2) The commissioner may take any action under paragraph one  of  this
  subdivision  to inquire into the commission of an offense connected with
  the administration or enforcement  of  this  article  or  article  nine,
  nine-A,  thirteen, thirteen-A or thirty-three of this chapter, provided,
  however, that notwithstanding the  provisions  of  section  one  hundred
  seventy-four  of  this  chapter  no  such  action  shall be taken when a
  referral by the department or the commissioner to the attorney  general,
  a  district  attorney  or  any  other prosecutorial agency is in effect.
  Provided, however, the commissioner shall have power, during the  period
  when  such  referral  is  in  effect,  to  examine  or  to cause to have
  examined, by any agent or  representative  designated  by  it  for  that
  purpose,  any  books,  papers,  records  or  memoranda  bearing upon the
  matters required to be included in the return, where such books, papers,
  records or memoranda are in its possession, or where such books, papers,
  records or memoranda are in the  possession  of  the  attorney  general,
  district  attorney  or other prosecutorial agency to which such referral
  is made.
    (c) Abatement authority.---The tax commission, of its own motion,  may
  abate any small unpaid balance of an assessment of tax, or any liability
  in respect thereof, if the tax commission determines under uniform rules
  prescribed  by  it that the administration and collection costs involved
  would not warrant collection of the amount due. It may  also  abate,  of
  its  own  motion, the unpaid portion of the assessment of any tax or any
  liability in respect thereof,  which  is  excessive  in  amount,  or  is
  assessed  after  the  expiration  of  the  period of limitation properly
  applicable thereto, or is erroneously or illegally  assessed.  No  claim
  for abatement under this subsection shall be filed by a taxpayer.
    (d)  Special refund authority.---Where no questions of fact or law are
  involved and it appears from the records of the tax commission that  any
  moneys have been erroneously or illegally collected from any taxpayer or
  other  person,  or paid by such taxpayer or other person under a mistake
  of facts, pursuant to the provisions of this article or of article nine,
  nine-a, nine-b or nine-c, the tax commission at any time, without regard
  to any period of limitations, shall have the power, upon making a record
  of its reasons therefor in writing, to cause such  moneys  so  paid  and
  being  erroneously  and  illegally  held  to  be  refunded  and to issue
  therefor its certificate to the comptroller.
    (e) (1) Authority to set interest rates.---The commissioner shall  set
  the  overpayment  and underpayment rates of interest to be paid pursuant
  to sections two hundred thirteen, two hundred  thirteen-b,  two  hundred
  fifty-eight,  two  hundred  sixty-three,  two  hundred  ninety-four, one


 thousand  eighty-four,  one  thousand  eighty-five  and   one   thousand
  eighty-eight  of  this chapter, but if no such rate or rates of interest
  are set, such overpayment rate shall be deemed to be set at six  percent
  per  annum and such underpayment rate shall be deemed to be set at seven
  and one-half percent per annum. Such overpayment and underpayment  rates
  shall  be  the rates prescribed in paragraph two of this subsection, but
  the underpayment rate shall not be less than seven and one-half  percent
  per  annum. Any such rates set by the commissioner shall apply to taxes,
  or any portion thereof, which remain or become due  or  overpaid  on  or
  after the date on which such rates become effective and shall apply only
  with  respect to interest computed or computable for periods or portions
  of periods occurring in the  period  during  which  such  rates  are  in
  effect.
    (2) General rule. (A) Overpayment rate. The overpayment rate set under
  this  subsection  shall be the sum of (i) the federal short-term rate as
  provided under  paragraph  three  of  this  subsection,  plus  (ii)  two
  percentage points.
    (B) Underpayment rate. The underpayment rate set under this subsection
  shall  be  the  sum of (i) the federal short-term rate as provided under
  paragraph three of this subsection, plus (ii) seven percentage points.
    (3) Federal short-term rate. For purposes of this subsection:
    (A) The federal short-term rate for any month  shall  be  the  federal
  short-term  rate  determined  by  the  United  States  secretary  of the
  treasury during such month in accordance with subsection (d) of  section
  twelve  hundred  seventy-four  of  the  internal revenue code for use in
  connection with section six  thousand  six  hundred  twenty-one  of  the
  internal  revenue  code.  Any  such rate shall be rounded to the nearest
  full percent (or, if a multiple of one-half of one  percent,  such  rate
  shall be increased to the next highest full percent).
    (B) Period during which rate applies.
    (i)   In   general.   Except  as  provided  in  clause  (ii)  of  this
  subparagraph, the federal short-term rate for the first  month  in  each
  calendar quarter shall apply during the first calendar quarter beginning
  after such month.
    (ii)  Special  rule  for  the  month  of  September,  nineteen hundred
  eighty-nine. The  federal  short-term  rate  for  the  month  of  April,
  nineteen  hundred  eighty-nine  shall  apply with respect to setting the
  overpayment and underpayment rates for the month of September,  nineteen
  hundred eighty-nine.
    (4)  In computing the amount of any interest required to be paid under
  this article by the commissioner of  taxation  and  finance  or  by  the
  taxpayer,  or any other amount determined by reference to such amount of
  interest, such interest and such amount shall be compounded  daily.  The
  preceding  sentence shall not apply for purposes of computing the amount
  of any addition to tax for failure to pay estimated tax under subsection
  (c) of section one thousand eighty-five of this article.
    (5) Publication of interest rates. The commissioner  of  taxation  and
  finance  shall  publish  the interest rates set under this subsection on
  the website of the  department  of  taxation  and  finance.  Immediately
  following  such  publication, the commissioner shall cause such interest
  rates to be published in the section for miscellaneous  notices  in  the
  state  register  and  give  other  appropriate  general  notice  of such
  interest rates. The setting and publication of such interest rates shall
  not be included within paragraph (a) of subdivision two of  section  one
  hundred  two  of  the state administrative procedure act relating to the
  definition of a rule.


   (6) Cross-reference. For provisions  relating  to  the  power  of  the
  commissioner of taxation and finance to abate small amounts of interest,
  see subsection (c) of this section.






	   § 1097. Disposition of revenue.---All revenue collected or received by
  the tax commission under this article shall be deposited and disposed of
  in accordance with the provisions of the article of the tax law imposing
  the tax to which the revenue relates.




    §  1101.  Definitions. (a) When used in this article the term "person"
  includes an individual, partnership, limited liability company, society,
  association,  joint  stock  company,  corporation,   estate,   receiver,
  trustee,  assignee,  referee, and any other person acting in a fiduciary
  or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court  or  otherwise,
  and any combination of the foregoing.
    (b) When used in this article for the purposes of the taxes imposed by
  subdivisions (a), (b), (c) and (d) of section eleven hundred five and by
  section eleven hundred ten, the following terms shall mean:
    (1) Purchase at retail. A purchase by any person for any purpose other
  than  those  set  forth  in  clauses  (A) and (B) of subparagraph (i) of
  paragraph (4) of this subdivision.
    (2) Purchaser. A person who purchases property or to whom are rendered
  services, the receipts  from  which  are  taxable  under  this  article,
  including a mobile telecommunications customer.
    (3)  Receipt. (i) The amount of the sale price of any property and the
  charge for any service taxable under this article, including gas and gas
  service and electricity and electric service of whatever nature,  valued
  in  money,  whether received in money or otherwise, including any amount
  for which credit is allowed by the vendor to the purchaser, without  any
  deduction for expenses or early payment discounts and also including any
  charges  by  the  vendor to the purchaser for shipping or delivery, and,
  with respect to  gas  and  gas  service  and  electricity  and  electric
  service,  any  charges by the vendor for transportation, transmission or
  distribution, regardless of whether such charges are  separately  stated
  in  the  written  contract,  if  any,  or  on  the bill rendered to such
  purchaser and  regardless  of  whether  such  shipping  or  delivery  or
  transportation, transmission, or distribution is provided by such vendor
  or  a  third  party,  but  excluding  any  credit  for tangible personal
  property accepted in part payment and intended for resale.  For  special
  rules  governing  computation  of  receipts,  see section eleven hundred
  eleven of this article.
    (ii) Receipt shall include consideration received by the  vendor  from
  third parties if:
    (A)  The  vendor  receives  consideration  from  a third party and the
  consideration is directly related to a rebate, discount or similar price
  reduction on the sale;
    (B) The vendor has an obligation to pass such consideration through to
  the purchaser in the  form  of  a  rebate,  discount  or  similar  price
  reduction;
    (C)  The  amount of the consideration to be paid by the third party is
  fixed and determinable by the vendor at the time  of  the  sale  of  the
  property or service to the purchaser; and
    (D) One of the following criteria is met:
    (I)   the   purchaser   presents   a   coupon,  certificate  or  other
  documentation to the vendor to claim a rebate, discount or similar price
  reduction where the coupon, certificate or documentation is  authorized,
  distributed  or granted by a third party with the understanding that the
  third party shall reimburse any vendor to whom the  coupon,  certificate
  or documentation is presented;
    (II)  the  purchaser presents identification as a member of a group or
  organization entitled to a rebate, discount or similar price  reduction;
  or
    (III) the rebate, discount or similar price reduction is identified as
  a third party rebate, discount or similar price reduction on the invoice
  received  by  the  purchaser  or  on  a  coupon,  certificate  or  other
  documentation presented by the purchaser.


   (iii) Subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph shall not apply to  rebates,
  discounts  or  similar  price  reductions that are reimbursed by a third
  party on sales of motor vehicles.
    (iv)  For the purposes of subclause (II) of clause (D) of subparagraph
  (ii) of this paragraph, "identification  as  a  member  of  a  group  or
  organization  entitled to a rebate, discount or similar price reduction"
  shall not include the presentation of  a  customer  loyalty  or  related
  rewards program card.
    (4)  Retail  sale.  (i)  A  sale  of tangible personal property to any
  person for any purpose, other than (A)  for  resale  as  such  or  as  a
  physical component part of tangible personal property, or (B) for use by
  that  person  in performing the services subject to tax under paragraphs
  (1), (2), (3), (5), (7) and (8) of subdivision  (c)  of  section  eleven
  hundred  five  where  the  property so sold becomes a physical component
  part of the property upon which the services are performed or where  the
  property  so  sold is later actually transferred to the purchaser of the
  service in conjunction with the performance of the  service  subject  to
  tax.    Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this subparagraph, a
  sale of any tangible personal property to a contractor, subcontractor or
  repairman for use or consumption in erecting structures or buildings, or
  building on, or otherwise adding to, altering,  improving,  maintaining,
  servicing  or  repairing  real  property, property or land, as the terms
  real property, property or land are defined in  the  real  property  tax
  law,  is  deemed  to be a retail sale regardless of whether the tangible
  personal property is to be resold as  such  before  it  is  so  used  or
  consumed,  except  that  a  sale  of  a new mobile home to a contractor,
  subcontractor or repairman who, in such capacity, installs such property
  is not a retail sale. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions  of  this
  subparagraph,  the  purchase  of  a  truck,  trailer  or tractor-trailer
  combination for rental or lease to an authorized carrier,  as  described
  in  paragraph  twenty-two  of  subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred
  fifteen, shall be deemed a retail sale.
    (ii) Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  subparagraph  (i)  of  this
  paragraph,  no  motor fuel or diesel motor fuel shall be sold or used in
  this state without payment, and inclusion in the  sales  price  of  such
  motor  fuel, of the tax on motor fuel required to be prepaid pursuant to
  the provisions of section eleven hundred  two  of  this  article  except
  where a provision of this article relating to motor fuel or diesel motor
  fuel specifically provides otherwise and except in the case of a sale or
  use  subject  to tax under section eleven hundred five or eleven hundred
  ten, respectively, of this article. Provided, however, except  for  such
  requirement  of prepayment of tax required by section eleven hundred two
  of this article, the provisions of this subparagraph shall not otherwise
  modify the meaning of the term "retail sale" as used  in  this  article.
  For  purposes  of  this  subparagraph  and  sections eleven hundred two,
  eleven hundred eleven, eleven hundred twenty, eleven hundred thirty-two,
  eleven hundred thirty-four, eleven hundred thirty-five,  eleven  hundred
  thirty-six,  eleven  hundred  forty-two,  eleven  hundred forty-five and
  eighteen hundred seventeen of this chapter, the  following  terms  shall
  have the following meanings:
    (A)  "Petroleum  products"  means  diesel  motor  fuel  as  defined in
  subdivision fourteen of section two hundred eighty-two of this  chapter,
  other  than  kerosene or propane used for residential purposes, or motor
  fuel as defined in subdivision two of section two hundred eighty-two  of
  this  chapter. The phrase "used for residential purposes" shall have the
  same meaning as it has for purposes of section eleven hundred five-A  of
  this article.


   (B)  The  term "distributor" shall have the same meaning as it has for
  purposes of article twelve-A of this chapter, excluding persons who  are
  not required pursuant to section two hundred eighty-two-a to pay the tax
  imposed thereby.
    (C)  The  term "motor fuel" means motor fuel as defined in subdivision
  two of section two hundred eighty-two of this chapter.
    (D) The terms "filling station", "terminal" and "owner" shall have the
  same meaning as they have for the purposes of article twelve-A  of  this
  chapter.
    (E) The term "diesel motor fuel" means diesel motor fuel as defined in
  subdivision fourteen of section two hundred eighty-two of this chapter.
    (F)  The  terms  "highway  diesel  motor fuel" and "non-highway diesel
  motor fuel" shall have the same meaning as they  have  for  purposes  of
  article twelve-A of this chapter.
    (iii)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  subparagraph  (i) of this
  paragraph, no cigarettes shall be sold or used  in  this  state  without
  payment, and inclusion in the sales price of such cigarettes, of the tax
  on  cigarettes  required  to  be  prepaid  pursuant to the provisions of
  section eleven hundred three of this article except where a provision of
  this article relating to cigarettes specifically provides otherwise  and
  except  in the case of a sale or use subject to tax under section eleven
  hundred five or eleven  hundred  ten,  respectively,  of  this  article.
  Provided,  however,  except  for  such  requirement of prepayment of tax
  required by section eleven hundred three of this article, the provisions
  of this subparagraph shall not otherwise modify the meaning of the  term
  "retail sale" as used in this article. For purposes of this subparagraph
  and sections eleven hundred three, eleven hundred eleven, eleven hundred
  fifteen,  eleven  hundred  sixteen,  eleven  hundred  twenty-one, eleven
  hundred  thirty-two,  eleven   hundred   thirty-four,   eleven   hundred
  thirty-five,  eleven  hundred  thirty-six,  eleven hundred thirty-eight,
  eleven hundred forty-two and eleven hundred forty-five of  this  article
  and  eighteen  hundred seventeen of this chapter, the terms "cigarette,"
  "agent" and "package" shall have the same meaning  that  they  have  for
  purposes of article twenty of this chapter.
    (iv) (A) The term retail sale does not include:
    (I)  The  transfer  of  tangible  personal  property to a corporation,
  solely in consideration for the issuance of its  stock,  pursuant  to  a
  merger  or consolidation effected under the law of New York or any other
  jurisdiction.
    (II) The distribution of property by a corporation to its stockholders
  as a liquidating dividend.
    (III) The distribution of property by a partnership to its partners in
  whole or partial liquidation.
    (IV) The transfer of property to a corporation upon  its  organization
  in consideration for the issuance of its stock.
    (V) The contribution of property to a partnership in consideration for
  a partnership interest therein.
    (B)  For an exception applicable to this subparagraph, see subdivision
  (q) of section eleven hundred eleven of this article.
    (v)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  subparagraph  (i)  of  this
  paragraph,  the  following  sales of tangible personal property shall be
  deemed to be retail sales:  (A)  a  sale  to  a  single  member  limited
  liability  company  or  a  subsidiary for resale to its member or owner,
  where such single member limited  liability  company  or  subsidiary  is
  disregarded  as an entity separate from its owner for federal income tax
  purposes  (without  reference  to  any  special  rules  related  to  the
  imposition  of  certain  federal  taxes),  including  but not limited to
  certain employment and excise taxes; (B) a sale  to  a  partnership  for


 resale  to  one or more of its partners; or (C) a sale to a trustee of a
  trust for resale to one or more beneficiaries of such trust.
    (5)  Sale, selling or purchase. Any transfer of title or possession or
  both, exchange or barter, rental, lease or license  to  use  or  consume
  (including,  with  respect  to  computer  software,  merely the right to
  reproduce), conditional or otherwise, in any  manner  or  by  any  means
  whatsoever for a consideration, or any agreement therefor, including the
  rendering   of   any   service,   taxable  under  this  article,  for  a
  consideration or any agreement therefor.
    (6) Tangible personal property. Corporeal  personal  property  of  any
  nature.  However,  except for purposes of the tax imposed by subdivision
  (b) of section eleven hundred five of this article, such term shall  not
  include  gas, electricity, refrigeration and steam. Such term shall also
  include pre-written  computer  software,  whether  sold  as  part  of  a
  package,  as  a  separate component, or otherwise, and regardless of the
  medium by means of which such software is conveyed to a purchaser.  Such
  term  shall  also  include  newspapers  and periodicals where the vendor
  ships or delivers the entire  edition  or  issue  of  the  newspaper  or
  periodical,  with  or  without  the  advertising  included  in the paper
  edition or issue, but not including anything,  other  than  advertising,
  not  in  such  paper  edition  or  issue,  to  the purchaser by means of
  telephony or telegraphy or other electronic media, but  only  where  the
  amount of the sale price to such purchaser of such newspaper or magazine
  or  the subscription price, in the case of a subscription to a newspaper
  or periodical, including any charge  by  such  vendor  for  shipping  or
  delivery  to  the  purchaser,  is  separately  stated to such purchaser.
  However, such term shall not include a modular home that is  permanently
  affixed  to  real  property,  provided  that, if a modular home is to be
  removed from the realty, whether as a whole or disassembled, it and  its
  component  parts shall be tangible personal property whether it is to be
  sold as a whole or as pieces.
    (7) Use. The exercise of any right or  power  over  tangible  personal
  property  or  over  any  of  the services which are subject to tax under
  section eleven hundred ten of this article or pursuant to the  authority
  of  article  twenty-nine  of this chapter, by the purchaser thereof, and
  includes, but is not limited to, the receiving, storage or  any  keeping
  or  retention  for  any  length  of  time,  withdrawal from storage, any
  installation, any affixation  to  real  or  personal  property,  or  any
  consumption of such property or of any such service subject to tax under
  such  section  eleven  hundred  ten or pursuant to the authority of such
  article twenty-nine. Without limiting  the  foregoing,  use  also  shall
  include  the  distribution  of  only tangible personal property, such as
  promotional materials, or of any such service subject to tax under  such
  section  eleven hundred ten or pursuant to the authority of such article
  twenty-nine.
    (8) Vendor. (i) The term "vendor" includes:
    (A) A person making sales of tangible personal property  or  services,
  the receipts from which are taxed by this article;
    (B)  A  person maintaining a place of business in the state and making
  sales, whether at such place of business or elsewhere, to persons within
  the state of tangible personal property or services, the use of which is
  taxed by this article;
    (C) A person who solicits business either:
    (I)  by  employees,   independent   contractors,   agents   or   other
  representatives; or
    (II)  by distribution of catalogs or other advertising matter, without
  regard to  whether  such  distribution  is  the  result  of  regular  or
  systematic  solicitation,  if such person has some additional connection


 with the state which satisfies  the  nexus  requirement  of  the  United
  States constitution;
  and  by  reason  thereof  makes  sales  to  persons  within the state of
  tangible personal property or services, the use of  which  is  taxed  by
  this article;
    (D)  A  person  who  makes  sales  of  tangible  personal  property or
  services, the use of which is taxed by this article, and  who  regularly
  or  systematically  delivers  such property or services in this state by
  means other than the United States mail or common carrier;
    (E) A person who regularly or systematically solicits business in this
  state by the distribution, without regard to  the  location  from  which
  such   distribution  originated,  of  catalogs,  advertising  flyers  or
  letters, or by any other means of solicitation of business,  to  persons
  in  this  state  and by reason thereof makes sales to persons within the
  state of tangible personal property, the use of which is taxed  by  this
  article,  if  such  solicitation  satisfies the nexus requirement of the
  United States constitution;
    (F) A person making sales of tangible personal property,  the  use  of
  which  is  taxed by this article, where such person retains an ownership
  interest in such property and where such property is brought  into  this
  state by the person to whom such property is sold and the person to whom
  such  property is sold becomes or is a resident or uses such property in
  any manner in carrying on in this state any employment, trade,  business
  or profession;
    (G)  Any  other  person  making  sales  to persons within the state of
  tangible personal property or services, the use of  which  is  taxed  by
  this  article, who may be authorized by the commissioner of taxation and
  finance to collect such tax by part IV of this article;
    (H) The state of New York, any  of  its  agencies,  instrumentalities,
  public  corporations (including a public corporation created pursuant to
  agreement  or  compact  with  another  state  or  Canada)  or  political
  subdivisions  when  such  entity  sells  services  or property of a kind
  ordinarily sold by private persons; and
    (I) A seller of tangible personal property or  services,  the  use  of
  which  is  taxed by this article if either (I) an affiliated person that
  is a vendor as otherwise defined in this paragraph  uses  in  the  state
  trademarks, service marks, or trade names that are the same as those the
  seller  uses;  or (II) an affiliated person engages in activities in the
  state that inure to the benefit of the seller,  in  its  development  or
  maintenance  of  a market for its goods or services in the state, to the
  extent that those activities of the affiliate are sufficient to  satisfy
  the nexus requirement of the United States constitution. For purposes of
  this  clause,  "affiliated person" has the same meaning as in clause (B)
  of subparagraph (v) of this paragraph. Nothing in this clause  shall  be
  construed  to narrow the scope of any other provision in this paragraph.
  Notwithstanding the provisions of this clause,  the  activities  in  the
  state  of an affiliated person in providing accounting or legal services
  or advice to a seller, or in  directing  the  activities  of  a  seller,
  including,  but  not  limited  to,  making decisions about (a) strategic
  planning, (b) marketing, (c) inventory, (d) staffing, (e)  distribution,
  or  (f)  cash  management, will not result in making the seller a vendor
  under this paragraph.
    (ii) (A) In addition, when in the opinion of the  commissioner  it  is
  necessary  for the efficient administration of this article to treat any
  salesman, representative, peddler or  canvasser  as  the  agent  of  the
  vendor,  distributor,  supervisor  or employer under whom he operates or
  from whom he obtains tangible personal property sold by him, or for whom
  he solicits business, the commissioner may,  in  his  discretion,  treat


 such  agent  as  the  vendor  jointly  responsible  with  his principal,
  distributor, supervisor or employer for the collection and payment  over
  of  the  tax. An unaffiliated person providing fulfillment services to a
  purchaser  shall  not  be  treated as a vendor by the commissioner under
  this paragraph with respect to  such  activity.  For  purposes  of  this
  clause,  persons are affiliated persons with respect to each other where
  one of such persons has an ownership interest of more than five percent,
  whether direct or indirect, in the other, or where an ownership interest
  of more than five percent, whether direct or indirect, is held  in  each
  of  such  persons by another person or by a group of other persons which
  are affiliated persons with respect to each other.
    (B) A person shall be deemed a vendor of the  services  enumerated  in
  paragraph nine of subdivision (c) of section eleven hundred five of this
  article,  liable  for  all  the  obligations  of a vendor, including the
  collection, reporting and remittance  of  the  tax  imposed  under  this
  article and possessing all the rights of a vendor including the right to
  an exclusion or a credit or refund of tax as provided in subdivision (e)
  of  section  eleven  hundred thirty-two of this article, with respect to
  such services which are provided by a vendor thereof and are subject  to
  taxation  under  this article, where such person, its affiliate or agent
  bills, on behalf of such vendor, either (I) as part of, or as a schedule
  to, the statement of such person to its purchasers  or  (II)  separately
  (without regard to whether or not such person has customers of its own),
  such  enumerated  services  provided  by such vendor. For the purpose of
  this paragraph, "affiliate" means an entity which  directly,  indirectly
  or  constructively  controls  a vendor of such enumerated services or is
  controlled by such vendor or is under the control of,  along  with  such
  vendor,  a  common  parent.  Provided,  however,  the provisions of this
  clause shall not in any way be construed to otherwise  limit  or  remove
  the  obligations  and  liabilities of any person with respect to the tax
  imposed by this article.
    (iii)  For  purposes  of  clause  (D)  of  subparagraph  (i)  of  this
  paragraph,  a person shall be presumed to be regularly or systematically
  delivering property or services in this state if  the  cumulative  total
  number  of  occasions  such  person  or his agent came into the state to
  deliver property or services exceeded twelve during the  preceding  four
  quarterly  periods  ending  on the last day of February, May, August and
  November, unless such person can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
  commissioner, that he cannot reasonably be expected  to  come  into  the
  state  for  such  purposes on more than twelve occasions during the next
  succeeding four quarterly periods ending on the last  day  of  February,
  May, August and November.
    (iv) For purposes of clause (E) of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph,
  a  person shall be presumed to be regularly or systematically soliciting
  business in this state if, for the immediately preceding four  quarterly
  periods  ending  on  the last day of February, May, August and November,
  the cumulative total of such  person's  gross  receipts  from  sales  of
  property  delivered  in this state exceeds five hundred thousand dollars
  and such person made more than one hundred sales of  property  delivered
  in  this  state, unless such person can demonstrate, to the satisfaction
  of the commissioner, that he cannot reasonably be expected to have gross
  receipts in excess of five hundred thousand dollars  or  more  than  one
  hundred  sales  of  property  delivered  in  this  state  for  the  next
  succeeding four quarterly periods ending on the last  day  of  February,
  May, August and November.
    (v)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the term vendor shall
  not include:


   (A) a person who is not otherwise a vendor who  purchases  fulfillment
  services  carried  on  in  New York by a person other than an affiliated
  person; or
    (B)  a person who is not otherwise a vendor who owns tangible personal
  property located on the premises of an  unaffiliated  person  performing
  fulfillment services for such person.
    For purposes of this subparagraph, persons are affiliated persons with
  respect  to  each  other  where  one  of  such  persons has an ownership
  interest of more than five percent, whether direct or indirect,  in  the
  other, or where an ownership interest of more than five percent, whether
  direct or indirect, is held in each of such persons by another person or
  by a group of other persons which are affiliated persons with respect to
  each other.
    (vi)  For  purposes of subclause (I) of clause (C) of subparagraph (i)
  of this paragraph, a person making sales of tangible  personal  property
  or  services  taxable under this article ("seller") shall be presumed to
  be soliciting  business  through  an  independent  contractor  or  other
  representative if the seller enters into an agreement with a resident of
  this  state  under  which  the  resident,  for  a  commission  or  other
  consideration,  directly  or  indirectly  refers  potential   customers,
  whether by a link on an internet website or otherwise, to the seller, if
  the  cumulative  gross receipts from sales by the seller to customers in
  the state who are referred to the seller by all residents with this type
  of an agreement with the seller is in excess  of  ten  thousand  dollars
  during  the  preceding  four quarterly periods ending on the last day of
  February, May, August, and November. This presumption may be rebutted by
  proof that the resident with whom the seller has an  agreement  did  not
  engage  in  any  solicitation  in the state on behalf of the seller that
  would satisfy the nexus requirement of the  United  States  constitution
  during   the  four  quarterly  periods  in  question.  Nothing  in  this
  subparagraph shall be  construed  to  narrow  the  scope  of  the  terms
  independent contractor or other representative for purposes of subclause
  (I) of clause (C) of subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.
    (9)  Capital  improvement.  (i)  An  addition  or  alteration  to real
  property which:
    (A)  Substantially  adds  to  the  value  of  the  real  property,  or
  appreciably prolongs the useful life of the real property; and
    (B) Becomes part of the real property or is permanently affixed to the
  real  property  so  that  removal  would  cause  material  damage to the
  property or article itself; and
    (C) Is intended to become a permanent installation.
    (ii) A mobile  home  shall  not  constitute  an  addition  or  capital
  improvement to real property, property or land, regardless of the nature
  of its installation.
    (iii)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  subparagraph  (i) of this
  paragraph: (A) Floor covering, such as carpet, carpet padding,  linoleum
  and  vinyl  roll  flooring,  carpet  tile, linoleum tile and vinyl tile,
  installed as the initial finished floor covering in new construction  or
  a new addition to or total reconstruction of existing construction shall
  constitute an addition or capital improvement to real property, property
  or land; and
    (B) Floor covering, such as carpet, carpet padding, linoleum and vinyl
  roll  flooring,  carpet  tile,  linoleum  tile and vinyl tile, installed
  other than as described in clause (A) of  this  subparagraph  shall  not
  constitute an addition or capital improvement to real property, property
  or land.
    (10) Mobile home. (i) A structure which is:
    (A) A type of manufactured housing; and


   (B) Not self-propelled; and
    (C) Transportable in one or more sections:
    (I)  that  may be folded, collapsed or telescoped when being towed and
  expanded later to provide additional cubic capacity, or
    (II) that may be separately towable and designed to be joined into one
  integral structure capable of being again separated  into  the  sections
  for repeated towing; and
    (D)  Built on a permanent chassis, comprised of frame and wheels, that
  is to be connected to utilities; and
    (E) Designed to be used as  a  permanent  dwelling,  with  or  without
  permanent foundation; and
    (F) Used for residential or commercial purposes.
    (ii)  The  term  "mobile  home" shall also include structures commonly
  called "double wides".
    (iii) The term "mobile home" shall not include:
    (A) Structures designed and constructed primarily for temporary living
  quarters, recreations, camping or travel; or
    (B)  Furniture,  fixtures,  furnishings,  appliances,  attachments  or
  similar  tangible  personal property not incorporated as component parts
  of a mobile home at the time of manufacture.
    (11) New mobile home. A mobile home which is sold for the  first  time
  at retail including all components incorporated into such mobile home at
  the time of manufacture and remaining unchanged at the time of the first
  retail sale thereof.
    (12)  Promotional materials. Any advertising literature, other related
  tangible  personal  property  (whether  or  not  personalized   by   the
  recipient's  name  or other information uniquely related to such person)
  and envelopes used exclusively to deliver the same. Such  other  related
  tangible  personal property includes, but is not limited to, free gifts,
  complimentary  maps  or  other  items  given  to  travel  club  members,
  applications,  order  forms  and  return  envelopes with respect to such
  advertising  literature,  annual  reports,   prospectuses,   promotional
  displays  and  Cheshire labels but does not include invoices, statements
  and the like. Promotional materials shall  also  include  paper  or  ink
  furnished  to  a printer for use in providing the services of producing,
  printing or imprinting promotional materials or in  producing,  printing
  or  imprinting  promotional materials, where such paper and ink become a
  physical component part of the promotional materials  and  such  printer
  sells  such  services  or  such  promotional materials to the person who
  furnished the paper and ink to such printer.
    (13) Telephone answering service. A service that  consists  of  taking
  messages by telephone and transmitting such messages to the purchaser of
  the  service  or  at  the  purchaser's direction, but not including such
  service if it is merely an incidental element of a  different  or  other
  service purchased by the customer.
    (14)  Pre-written  computer  software.  Computer  software  (including
  pre-written  upgrades  thereof)  which  is  not  software  designed  and
  developed  by  the  author  or  other creator to the specifications of a
  specific purchaser. The combining of two or  more  pre-written  computer
  software  programs  or  pre-written  portions thereof does not cause the
  combination to be other than pre-written computer software.  Pre-written
  software  also includes software designed and developed by the author or
  other creator to the specifications of a specific purchaser when  it  is
  sold  to  a person other than such purchaser. Where a person modifies or
  enhances computer software of which such person is  not  the  author  or
  creator, such person shall be deemed to be the author or creator only of
  such  person's  modifications or enhancements. Pre-written software or a
  pre-written portion thereof that is modified or enhanced to any  degree,


 where  such modification or enhancement is designed and developed to the
  specifications of a specific purchaser,  remains  pre-written  software;
  provided,  however,  that where there is a reasonable, separately stated
  charge  or  an  invoice  or  other  statement  of the price given to the
  purchaser for such modification or  enhancement,  such  modification  or
  enhancement shall not constitute pre-written computer software.
    (15)  Clothing  and  footwear. (i) Clothing and footwear to be worn by
  human beings, but not including costumes or rented formal wear, and (ii)
  fabric, thread, yarn, buttons, snaps,  hooks,  zippers  and  like  items
  which  are  used or consumed to make or repair such clothing (other than
  such costumes or  rented  formal  wear)  and  which  become  a  physical
  component  part of such clothing, but not including such items made from
  pearls,  precious  or  semi-precious  stones,  jewels  or   metals,   or
  imitations thereof.
    (16)  Commercial  vessel.  A  vessel  used  primarily (i) to transport
  persons or property, for hire, (ii) by the purchaser of  the  vessel  to
  transport  such  person's  tangible  personal property in the conduct of
  such person's business, or (iii) for both such purposes.
    (17) Commercial aircraft. Aircraft used  primarily  (i)  to  transport
  persons  or property, for hire, (ii) by the purchaser of the aircraft to
  transport such person's tangible personal property  in  the  conduct  of
  such  person's  business,  or (iii) for both such purposes. Transporting
  persons for  hire  does  not  include  transporting  agents,  employees,
  officers,   members,  partners,  managers  or  directors  of  affiliated
  persons. Persons are affiliated persons with respect to each other where
  one of the persons has an ownership interest of more than five  percent,
  whether direct or indirect, in the other, or where an ownership interest
  of  more  than five percent, whether direct or indirect, is held in each
  of the persons by another person or by a group of other persons that are
  affiliated persons with respect to each other. For an exception  to  the
  exclusions  from the definition of "retail sale" applicable to aircraft,
  see subdivision (q) of section eleven hundred eleven of this article.
    18. Fulfillment services. Any of the following services  performed  by
  an entity on its premises on behalf of a purchaser:
    (i)  the  acceptance  of  orders electronically or by mail, telephone,
  telefax or internet;
    (ii) responses to consumer correspondence and inquiries electronically
  or by mail, telephone, telefax or internet;
    (iii) billing and collection activities; or
    (iv) the shipment of orders from an inventory of products offered  for
  sale by the purchaser.
    (19)  Farming.  The term "farming" includes agriculture, floriculture,
  horticulture,  aquaculture  and  silviculture;  stock,  dairy,  poultry,
  fruit,  fur  bearing  animal, graping, truck and tree farming; ranching;
  operating nurseries, greenhouses, vineyard trellises  or  other  similar
  structures   used   primarily   for   the   raising   of   agricultural,
  horticultural,    vinicultural,    viticultural,    floricultural     or
  silvicultural  commodities;  operating  orchards;  raising,  growing and
  harvesting crops,  livestock  and  livestock  products,  as  defined  in
  subdivision  two  of  section  three  hundred one of the agriculture and
  markets law; and raising,  growing  and  harvesting  woodland  products,
  including, but not limited to, timber, logs, lumber, pulpwood, posts and
  firewood.
    (20)  Commercial  horse boarding operation. "Commercial horse boarding
  operation" shall have the same meaning that such term has in subdivision
  thirteen of section three hundred one of  the  agriculture  and  markets
  law.


   (22)  (A)  "Prepaid  telephone  calling  service"  means  the right to
  exclusively purchase telecommunication services, that must be  paid  for
  in  advance  and  enable  the  origination  of  one  or more intrastate,
  interstate or international telephone calls using an access number (such
  as a toll free network access number) and/or authorization code, whether
  manually or electronically dialed, for which payment to a vendor must be
  made  in  advance,  whether  or  not  that  right  is represented by the
  transfer by the vendor to the purchaser of an item of tangible  personal
  property.  Such  term, except with respect to the tax imposed by section
  one hundred eighty-six-e of article nine of  this  chapter,  includes  a
  prepaid  mobile  calling  service.  In  no  event  shall  a  credit card
  constitute a prepaid telephone calling service. If the sale or  recharge
  of  a  prepaid  telephone  calling  service  does  not take place at the
  vendor's place of business, it shall be conclusively determined to  take
  place  at  the  purchaser's  shipping  address  or,  if there is no item
  shipped, at the purchaser's billing address or the  location  associated
  with the purchaser's mobile telephone number, or, if the vendor does not
  have  the  address or the location associated with the customer's mobile
  telephone number, at such address, as approved by the commissioner, that
  reasonably reflects the customer's location at the time of the  sale  or
  recharge.
    (B)  "Prepaid  mobile  calling  service"  means  the  right  to  use a
  commercial mobile radio service, whether or not sold with other property
  or services, that must be paid for in advance and is sold for use over a
  specified period of time or  in  predetermined  units  or  dollars  that
  decline  with  use  in  a  known  amount,  whether  or not that right is
  represented by or includes the transfer to the purchaser of an  item  of
  tangible personal property.
    (23) Qualified empire zone enterprise. The term "qualified empire zone
  enterprise"  shall  have  the same meaning that such term has in section
  fourteen of this chapter  for  purposes  of  this  article  and  article
  twenty-nine of this chapter.
    (24)  "Mobile telecommunications service" shall mean commercial mobile
  radio service. "Mobile  telecommunications  service"  does  not  include
  prepaid  telephone calling service or air-ground radio telephone service
  as defined in  section  22.99  of  title  47  of  the  code  of  federal
  regulations as in effect on June first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine.
    (25) "Commercial mobile radio service" and "mobile service" shall have
  the  same meanings as in section 20.3 of title 47 of the code of federal
  regulations in effect on June first, nineteen  hundred  ninety-nine,  to
  wit:
    (i)  "Commercial  mobile  radio  service."  A  mobile service that is:
  (A)(I)  provided  for  profit,  i.e.,  with  the  intent  of   receiving
  compensation or monetary gain; (II) an interconnected service; and (III)
  available  to  the public, or to such classes of eligible users as to be
  effectively available to a substantial portion of the public; or (B) the
  functional equivalent of such a mobile service described in  clause  (A)
  of this subparagraph.
    (ii)  "Mobile  service."  A  radio  communications  service carried on
  between mobile stations or receivers and land stations,  and  by  mobile
  stations  communicating among themselves, and includes: (A) both one-way
  and two-way radio communications services; (B) a  mobile  service  which
  provides  a  regularly  interacting group of base, mobile, portable, and
  associated  control  and  relay  stations  (whether   licensed   on   an
  individual,  cooperative,  or  multiple  basis)  for  private one-way or
  two-way  land  mobile  radio  communications  by  eligible  users   over
  designated  areas  of operation; and (C) any service for which a license
  is required in a personal communications service under part 24 of  title


 47  of the code of federal regulations in effect on June first, nineteen
  hundred ninety-nine.
    (26)   "Place   of   primary   use"  shall  mean  the  street  address
  representative of where a mobile telecommunications  customer's  use  of
  the mobile telecommunications service primarily occurs, and must be: (i)
  the residential street address or the primary business street address of
  the  mobile  telecommunications  customer  and  (ii) within the licensed
  service area of the home service provider.
    (27)(i) "Mobile telecommunications customer" shall mean either  (A)  a
  person  or entity that contracts with a home service provider for mobile
  telecommunications  services;  or  (B)  if  the  end  user   of   mobile
  telecommunications  services  is not the contracting party, the end user
  of the mobile telecommunications service, but this  clause  (B)  applies
  only  for  the  purpose of determining the place of primary use. "Mobile
  telecommunications customer" does not include either (A) a  reseller  of
  mobile  telecommunications  service;  or  (B) a serving carrier under an
  arrangement to serve a mobile telecommunications  customer  outside  the
  home service provider's licensed service area.
    (ii)  "Home service provider" shall mean a facilities-based carrier or
  reseller as defined in subparagraph (iv) of this paragraph,  with  which
  the  mobile  telecommunications  customer contracts for the provision of
  mobile telecommunications service.
    (iii) "Licensed service area" shall mean the geographic area in  which
  a  home  service  provider  is  authorized by law or contract to provide
  mobile  telecommunications  service  to  a   mobile   telecommunications
  customer.
    (iv) "Reseller" shall mean a provider who purchases telecommunications
  service  from  another  telecommunications  service  provider  and  then
  resells, uses as a  component  part  of,  or  integrates  the  purchased
  services  into  a mobile telecommunications service. "Reseller" does not
  include a serving carrier with which a home  service  provider  arranges
  for  the services to its mobile telecommunications customers outside the
  home service provider's licensed service area.
    (v) "Serving carrier" shall mean a facilities-based carrier  providing
  mobile   telecommunications   service  to  a  mobile  telecommunications
  customer outside the home  service  provider's  or  reseller's  licensed
  service area.
    (28)  "Taxing  jurisdiction" shall mean any of the several states, the
  District of Columbia, or any  territory  or  possession  of  the  United
  States, any municipality, city, county, township, parish, transportation
  district, or assessment jurisdiction, or any other political subdivision
  within the territorial limits of the United States with the authority to
  impose a tax, charge, or fee.
    * (29)  "E85" shall have the same meaning as in subdivision twenty-two
  of section two hundred eighty-two of this chapter.
    * NB Repealed September 1, 2026
    * (30)  "B20"  shall  have  the  same  meaning   as   in   subdivision
  twenty-three of section two hundred eighty-two of this chapter.
    * NB Repealed September 1, 2026
    * (31) "CNG" shall have the same meaning as in subdivision twenty-four
  of section two hundred eighty-two of this chapter.
    * NB Repealed September 1, 2026
    * (32)  "Hydrogen"  shall  have  the  same  meaning  as in subdivision
  twenty-five of section two hundred eighty-two of this chapter.
    * NB Repealed September 1, 2026
    (33) Modular  home.  A  one-  to  three-family  residential  structure
  constructed  at  the  building site from modular home modules, where the
  modules are connected and such  structure  is  finished  using  building


 materials or other tangible personal property at the building site, such
  modular home conforms to the building and other codes applicable to one-
  to three-family site-built homes in the jurisdiction where such building
  site  is  located,  and such finished modular home constitutes a capital
  improvement. "Modular home" shall not include (i) a structure or portion
  of a  structure  built  on-site,  whether  built  by  the  modular  home
  installer  or  another person, using building materials delivered to the
  site, even if some of such materials  were  manufactured,  produced,  or
  assembled  off-site,  such  as,  by  way  of  example  and not by way of
  limitation, concrete blocks, windows, door units, wall or  roof  panels,
  trusses  and  dormers; (ii) a shed, gazebo, any unattached garage or the
  like (even if made or built by a manufacturer of modular home  modules);
  or (iii) a mobile home.
    (34)  Transportation service. The service of transporting, carrying or
  conveying a person or persons by livery service;  whether  to  a  single
  destination  or  to  multiple destinations; and whether the compensation
  paid by or on behalf of the passenger is based on  mileage,  trip,  time
  consumed  or  any  other  basis.  A service that begins and ends in this
  state is deemed intra-state even if it passes outside this state  during
  a  portion of the trip. However, transportation service does not include
  transportation of persons in connection  with  funerals.  Transportation
  service  includes  transporting,  carrying, or conveying property of the
  person being transported, whether owned  by  or  in  the  care  of  such
  person.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, transportation service shall not
  include a TNC prearranged trip, as  that  term  is  defined  in  article
  forty-four-B  of  the  vehicle  and  traffic law, that is subject to tax
  under article twenty-nine-B of this chapter.  In  addition  to  what  is
  included  in  the  definition  of  "receipt"  in paragraph three of this
  subdivision, receipts from the sale of transportation service subject to
  tax  include  any  handling,   carrying,   baggage,   booking   service,
  administrative,  mark-up,  additional,  or  other charge, of any nature,
  made in conjunction with  the  transportation  service.  Livery  service
  means  service  provided by limousine, black car or other motor vehicle,
  with a driver, but excluding (i) a taxicab, (ii) a bus, and (iii), in  a
  city of one million or more in this state, an affiliated livery vehicle,
  and  excluding any scheduled public service. Limousine means any vehicle
  with a seating capacity of up to fourteen persons, excluding the driver,
  and any vehicle with a seating capacity of between  fifteen  and  twenty
  persons,  excluding  the driver, that has only two axles and four tires.
  "Bus" means any motor vehicle  with  a  seating  capacity  of  at  least
  fifteen  persons,  excluding the driver, that does not otherwise qualify
  as a limousine. Black car means a for-hire  vehicle  dispatched  from  a
  central  facility.  "Affiliated  livery  vehicle" means a for-hire motor
  vehicle with a seating capacity of up  to  six  persons,  including  the
  driver,  other  than a black car or luxury limousine, that is authorized
  and licensed by the taxi and limousine  commission  of  a  city  of  one
  million  or  more  to  be dispatched by a base station located in such a
  city and regulated by  such  taxi  and  limousine  commission;  and  the
  charges  for service provided by an affiliated livery vehicle are on the
  basis of flat rate, time, mileage, or zones  and  not  on  a  garage  to
  garage basis.
    (35)  Modular  home  modules.  The  component  sections  that  will be
  installed on-site to construct a modular home, each of which sections is
  (i) engineered and manufactured in a factory, (ii) shipped or  delivered
  to the building site on a truck or other vehicle, (iii) installed at the
  site,  on a permanent foundation, to become part of the modular home and
  (iv) not by itself suitable for occupancy. Every group of  modules  that
  will be installed in this state as a modular home, or, if a modular home


 is to be built from a single module, that single module, shall, prior to
  shipment  from the place where it is made, bear the insignia of approval
  issued by the department of state pursuant to the authority  of  article
  eighteen  of  the  executive  law  and  regulations  thereunder; and the
  department of state shall cooperate with the  commissioner  and  furnish
  such  information as the commissioner requests to carry out this article
  and its purposes. A modular home module shall include tangible  personal
  property  shipped  or  delivered with the module from the factory by the
  manufacturer at the same time the module is shipped or  delivered,  such
  as  exterior  siding,  roof  shingles,  roof  vent  pipes, interior trim
  pieces, paint, and interior doors, and supplies  required  and  used  to
  install  them,  but only if that property (i) was engineered or designed
  to be an integral component part of the  module,  (ii)  matches,  or  is
  essential  to the functioning of, the module, (iii) was not installed in
  the module at the time the module was made  only  because  it  would  be
  damaged during, or interfere with, shipping or delivery of the module to
  the  building  site, (iv) will be permanently installed in the module at
  the building site by the manufacturer or by the purchaser of the  module
  or  by  the  contractor  of either of them, (v) is listed in full on the
  contract, bill of sale, invoice or other memorandum of  price  given  to
  the  purchaser or buyer, or in an addendum thereto, true copies of which
  the manufacturer shall retain as part of the records required to be kept
  by this article and make available on request, and (vi) is  included  in
  the  sale  price of the module, without any additional charge. A modular
  home module shall not  include  (i)  furniture,  fixtures,  furnishings,
  appliances,  attachments  or  similar  tangible  personal  property  not
  incorporated as component parts  of  the  module  at  the  time  of  its
  manufacture  or  (ii)  building  materials  or  other  tangible personal
  property used to connect the modules or finish the modular home  at  the
  building site.
    (36) New modular home module. A modular home module sold for the first
  time at retail.
    (37)  Electronic  news  service. (i) A service delivered, furnished or
  provided to or accessed by the  purchaser  electronically  or  digitally
  that meets all of the following conditions:
    (A)  The  service's  predominant  purpose  is the presentation of news
  content, which it prominently features;
    (B) The service's news content  (I)  includes  general  news  that  is
  accessible  without use of a search function; (II) is newly published or
  updated at least daily unless the service specifies some other interval,
  provided, however, that the  news  content  must  be  newly  updated  or
  published  within a twenty-four hour period that precedes or immediately
  follows a time when the non-news content is newly published or  updated;
  and  (III)  is  predominantly purchased from contracted wire services or
  written or produced by the employees or engaged independent  contractors
  of  the  person  providing  the  service, including, but not limited to,
  employees or engaged independent contractors of any  affiliate  of  such
  person;
    (C) The service is available to the public;
    (D)  The  service  holds  itself out as a "news service," "newspaper,"
  "magazine," "periodical," "journal," "post," or words of similar  import
  and  does  not hold itself out as something other than one of such terms
  or a term of similar import.
    (E) The service has continuity as to its title and the general  nature
  of its content over time;
    (F)  The  service  is not, in whole or in substantial part, a listing,
  catalog, database, or compilation;


   (G)  The  only  search  function  the   service   offers   without   a
  separately-stated,  reasonable charge is a search of the service's or of
  any of its affiliates' present or past news content. Provided, a service
  that satisfies all the clauses of this subparagraph except  this  clause
  may  still  qualify  as  an electronic news service for purposes of this
  paragraph if the provider of the service  can  show  that  the  non-news
  content  available  through  the search function is merely an incidental
  part of the service, including, for example, by showing that the cost to
  the person providing the  service  of  any  non-news  content  available
  through  the  search  function  is  less than the cost to that person of
  providing the news content  available  through  the  service.  Provided,
  further,  that a purchaser's access to the service's search function for
  which there is a separately-stated, reasonable charge to  the  purchaser
  shall  be  treated  separately  and  is  not relevant as to whether this
  clause is satisfied.
    (ii) The following definitions  apply  to  subparagraph  (i)  of  this
  paragraph and subdivision (gg) of section eleven hundred fifteen of this
  article:
    (A)  "News  content"  means  the  articles, photographs, and video and
  audio material concerning general news or specialized news and does  not
  include  listings, advertisements, catalogs, compilations, databases, or
  the like.
    (B) "Non-news content" means any information other than news content.
    (C) "Article"  means  a  prose  composition,  including  commentaries,
  reviews,  editorials, op-eds, letters to the editor, and reader comments
  on  articles.  The  term  does  not  include  listings,  advertisements,
  catalogs, compilations, databases, or the like.
    (D)  "General  news"  means matters of general interest and reports of
  current events.
    (E) "Specialized news" means matters of a specialized  interest,  such
  as   legal,   mercantile,  financial,  theatrical,  entertainment  news,
  political, religious, or sporting matters.
    (F) "Cap amount" means three hundred percent of the annualized average
  daily newsstand price of the three newspapers  with  the  largest  total
  paid  national  daily  circulation. The commissioner shall determine the
  cap  amount  annually  and  shall  cause  it  to  be  published  on  the
  department's  website and give other appropriate general notice thereof.
  The commissioner shall determine and publish the cap amount annually  by
  April  first based on prices charged during the first week of January of
  that year, which cap amount shall apply for the succeeding  twelve-month
  period   commencing   June   first  and  ending  May  thirty-first.  The
  calculation and publication of the cap amount under  this  clause  shall
  not  be  included within paragraph (a) of subdivision two of section one
  hundred two of the state administrative procedure act  relating  to  the
  definition of a rule.
    (G)  "Affiliate"  means,  with respect to any person, any other person
  that,  directly  or  indirectly  through  one  or  more  intermediaries,
  controls,  or  is  controlled  by, or is under common control with, such
  person, and the term "control" (including the terms "controlled by"  and
  "under   common   control  with")  means  the  possession,  directly  or
  indirectly, of the power  to  direct  or  cause  the  direction  of  the
  management  and  policies  of  such person, whether through ownership of
  voting securities, by contract or otherwise.
    (38) Electronic periodical. (i) A publication delivered, furnished  or
  provided  to  or  accessed  by the purchaser electronically or digitally
  that meets all of the following conditions:
    (A) The publication's predominant purpose is the presentation of  news
  content, which it prominently features;


   (B)  The  publication  is  published  at stated intervals, at least as
  frequently as four times a year but no more frequently than weekly,  and
  is  not  updated  between  issues.  However, the incidental provision of
  additional news content between issues will not prevent the  requirement
  in  this  clause  from  being satisfied. In determining whether the news
  content added between  issues  is  incidental,  among  the  factors  the
  commissioner  is  to  consider  is  the amount of the news content added
  between issues relative to the news content in preceding issues and  the
  frequency  of  the  provision of additional news content between issues.
  Provided that the display of reader comments or letters  to  the  editor
  between issues does not affect whether this clause is satisfied.
    (C)  The  publication's news content is purchased from contracted wire
  services or  written  or  produced  by  multiple  employees  or  engaged
  independent   contractors  of  the  person  providing  the  publication,
  including,  but  not  limited  to,  employees  or  engaged   independent
  contractors of any affiliate of such person;
    (D) The publication is available to the public;
    (E)  The publication holds itself out as a "magazine," "periodical" or
  words of similar import and does not hold itself out as something  other
  than a "magazine," "periodical," or words of similar import;
    (F)  The  publication  has  continuity as to its title and the general
  nature of its content over time;
    (G) The publication is  not,  in  whole  or  in  substantial  part,  a
  listing, catalog, database, or compilation; and
    (H)  The  only  search  function  the  publication  offers  without  a
  separately-stated, reasonable charge is a search of the publication's or
  of an affiliate's  present  or  past  news  content.  However:  (I)  the
  publication's  provision of access, at no additional charge, to a search
  engine that, apart from the  service,  is  otherwise  available  to  the
  public  for free is not relevant as to whether this clause is satisfied;
  and (II) the publication's provision of access to a search function  for
  which  there  is a separately-stated, reasonable charge to the purchaser
  shall be treated separately and is  not  relevant  as  to  whether  this
  clause is satisfied.
    (ii)  For  purposes  of  subparagraph  (i)  of  this paragraph and the
  exemption provided for electronic periodicals  in  subdivision  (gg)  of
  section  eleven hundred fifteen of this article, "articles" has the same
  meaning as in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph thirty-seven of subdivision
  (b) of this section and "news content" means articles, photographs,  and
  video  and audio material devoted to literature, the sciences, the arts,
  news, an industry, profession, sport or other  field  of  endeavor,  and
  does  not  include  listings,  advertisements,  catalogs,  compilations,
  databases, or the like.
    (c) When used in this article for the  purposes  of  the  tax  imposed
  under  subdivision  (e)  of  section  eleven hundred five, the following
  terms shall mean:
    (1) Hotel. A building or portion of it which  is  regularly  used  and
  kept  open  as such for the lodging of guests. The term "hotel" includes
  an apartment hotel, a motel, boarding house  or  club,  whether  or  not
  meals are served.
    (2)  Occupancy.  The  use  or  possession,  or the right to the use or
  possession, of any room in a hotel. "Right to  the  use  or  possession"
  includes the rights of a room remarketer as described in paragraph eight
  of this subdivision.
    (3)  Occupant.  A person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or
  has the right to use or possess, any room in a hotel  under  any  lease,
  concession,  permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement,


 or otherwise. "Right to use or possess" includes the rights  of  a  room
  remarketer as described in paragraph eight of this subdivision.
    (4)  Operator. Any person operating a hotel. Such term shall include a
  room remarketer and such room remarketer shall be deemed  to  operate  a
  hotel,  or  portion  thereof,  with respect to which such person has the
  rights of a room remarketer.
    (5) Permanent resident. Any occupant of any room or rooms in  a  hotel
  for  at  least  ninety  consecutive days shall be considered a permanent
  resident with regard to the period of such occupancy.
    (6) Rent. The consideration  received  for  occupancy,  including  any
  service or other charge or amount required to be paid as a condition for
  occupancy,  valued  in money, whether received in money or otherwise and
  whether received by the operator or a room remarketer or another  person
  on behalf of either of them.
    (7)  Room.  Any  room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of a
  hotel, which is available for or let out for any purpose  other  than  a
  place of assembly.
    (8)  Room remarketer. A person who reserves, arranges for, conveys, or
  furnishes occupancy, whether directly or indirectly, to an occupant  for
  rent  in  an  amount  determined  by  the  room  remarketer, directly or
  indirectly, whether pursuant to  a  written  or  other  agreement.  Such
  person's  ability  or  authority  to  reserve,  arrange  for, convey, or
  furnish  occupancy,  directly  or  indirectly,  and  to  determine  rent
  therefor,  shall be the "rights of a room remarketer". A room remarketer
  is not a permanent resident with respect to a room for which such person
  has the rights of a room remarketer.
    (d) When used in this article for purposes of the  tax  imposed  under
  subdivision  (f)  of  section  eleven  hundred five, the following terms
  shall mean:
    (1) Active annual member. A member who is not a life  member  but  who
  enjoys full club privileges as distinguished from the privileges enjoyed
  by  a  person holding a nonresident membership, an associate membership,
  or other partial or restricted membership.
    (2) Admission charge. The amount paid  for  admission,  including  any
  service  charge and any charge for entertainment or amusement or for the
  use of facilities therefor.
    (3) Amusement charge. Any admission charge, dues  or  charge  of  roof
  garden, cabaret or other similar place.
    (4)  Charge  of  a  roof  garden,  cabaret or other similar place. Any
  charge made for admission, refreshment, service,  or  merchandise  at  a
  roof garden, cabaret or other similar place.
    (5)  Dramatic  or  musical arts admission charge. Any admission charge
  paid for admission to a theatre, opera house, concert hall or other hall
  or place of assembly for  a  live  dramatic,  choreographic  or  musical
  performance.
    (6)  Dues.  Any  dues  or  membership  fee  including  any assessment,
  irrespective of the purpose for which made, and any charges  for  social
  or sports privileges or facilities, except charges for sports privileges
  or facilities offered to members' guests which would otherwise be exempt
  if paid directly by such guests.
    (7)  Initiation fee. Any payment, contribution, or loan, required as a
  condition  precedent  to  membership,  whether  or  not  such   payment,
  contribution  or  loan  is  evidenced  by  a  certificate of interest or
  indebtedness or share of  stock,  and  irrespective  of  the  person  or
  organization to whom paid, contributed or loaned.
    (8)  Lessor.  Any  person  who is the owner, licensee or lessee of any
  place of amusement or roof garden, cabaret or other similar place  which


 he  leases,  subleases  or  grants a license to use to other persons who
  make amusement charges or admission charges.
    (9)  Patron.  Any  person  who  pays  an  amusement  charge  or who is
  otherwise required to pay the tax imposed under such subdivision (f)  of
  section eleven hundred five.
    (10)   Place   of  amusement.  Any  place  where  any  facilities  for
  entertainment, amusement, or sports are provided.
    (11) Recipient. Any person who collects or receives or is under a duty
  to collect an amusement charge.
    (12) Roof garden, cabaret or other similar  place.  Any  roof  garden,
  cabaret  or other similar place which furnishes a public performance for
  profit, but not including a place where merely live dramatic or  musical
  arts performances are offered in conjunction with the serving or selling
  of  food, refreshment or merchandise, so long as such serving or selling
  of food,  refreshment  or  merchandise  is  merely  incidental  to  such
  performances.
    (13)  Social  or  athletic  club.  Any club or organization of which a
  material purpose or activity is social or athletic.
    (14) Honorary member. A membership granted in  a  social  or  athletic
  club  without  payment  of  dues  which may provide full or partial club
  privileges.
    (e) When used in this article for the purposes of  the  taxes  imposed
  under subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred five of this article and
  by section eleven hundred ten of this article, the following terms shall
  mean:
    (1)  Marketplace provider. A person who, pursuant to an agreement with
  a marketplace seller, facilitates sales of tangible personal property by
  such marketplace seller or sellers. A  person  "facilitates  a  sale  of
  tangible  personal  property"  for  purposes  of this paragraph when the
  person meets both of the following conditions: (A) such person  provides
  the  forum  in  which, or by means of which, the sale takes place or the
  offer of sale is  accepted,  including  a  shop,  store,  or  booth,  an
  internet  website,  catalog, or similar forum; and (B) such person or an
  affiliate of such person collects the receipts paid by a customer  to  a
  marketplace  seller  for  a  sale  of  tangible  personal  property,  or
  contracts with a third party to collect such receipts. For  purposes  of
  this paragraph, a "sale of tangible personal property" shall not include
  the  rental  of  a  passenger car as described in section eleven hundred
  sixty of this chapter but shall include a lease described in subdivision
  (i) of section eleven hundred eleven of this  article  and  peer-to-peer
  car sharing as described in section nine hundred of the general business
  law.  For  purposes  of  this  paragraph,  persons are affiliated if one
  person has an ownership interest of  more  than  five  percent,  whether
  direct  or  indirect, in another, or where an ownership interest of more
  than five percent, whether direct or indirect, is held in each  of  such
  persons  by  another  person  or  by  a  group of other persons that are
  affiliated persons with respect to each other. Notwithstanding  anything
  in  this paragraph, a person who is not otherwise registered pursuant to
  section eleven hundred thirty-four of this article is not a  marketplace
  provider  if  such  person has no physical presence in New York and, for
  the immediately preceding four quarterly periods ending on the last  day
  of  February,  May,  August  and  November, can show that the cumulative
  total gross receipts of sales it has made  or  facilitated  of  property
  delivered in this state does not exceed five hundred thousand dollars or
  that such person has not made or facilitated more than one hundred sales
  of  property  delivered in this state. However, such person may elect to
  register as a  marketplace  provider,  and,  once  registered,  will  be
  subject to the provisions of this article.


   (2)  Marketplace  seller.  Any  person,  whether or not such person is
  required to obtain a  certificate  of  authority  under  section  eleven
  hundred  thirty-four  of  this  article,  who  has  an  agreement with a
  marketplace  provider  under  which  the   marketplace   provider   will
  facilitate sales of tangible personal property by such person within the
  meaning of paragraph one of this subdivision.




   §  1102.  Prepayment of sales tax on motor fuel and diesel motor fuel.
  (a) * (1) Every distributor of motor fuel shall pay, as a prepayment  on
  account  of  the  taxes  imposed  by  this  article  and pursuant to the
  authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter, a tax on  each  gallon
  of  motor  fuel  (i) which he imports or causes to be imported into this
  state for use, distribution, storage or sale in the state  or  produces,
  refines,  manufactures or compounds in this state or (ii) if the tax has
  not been imposed prior to its sale in this state, which he sells  (which
  acts  shall  in  regard  to  motor  fuel  hereinafter in this article be
  encompassed by the phrase "imported, manufactured or sold"), except when
  imported, manufactured or sold under circumstances  which  preclude  the
  collection  of  such tax by reason of the United States constitution and
  of the laws of the  United  States  enacted  pursuant  thereto  or  when
  imported  or  manufactured by an organization described in paragraph one
  or two of subdivision (a) of section  eleven  hundred  sixteen  of  this
  article  or  a  hospital  included  in  the  organizations  described in
  paragraph four of such subdivision for its own use and  consumption  and
  except  kero-jet  fuel  when  imported  by  an  airline  for  use in its
  airplanes, and except CNG, and except  hydrogen,  and  except  E85  when
  delivered  to  a  filling  station  and placed in a storage tank of such
  filling station for such E85 to  be  dispensed  directly  into  a  motor
  vehicle  for  use  in the operation of such vehicle, and except aviation
  gasoline sold for  use  in  commercial  aircraft  and  general  aviation
  aircraft.
    * NB Effective until September 1, 2026
    * (1)  Every  distributor  of motor fuel shall pay, as a prepayment on
  account of the taxes  imposed  by  this  article  and  pursuant  to  the
  authority  of  article twenty-nine of this chapter, a tax on each gallon
  of motor fuel (i) which he imports or causes to be  imported  into  this
  state  for  use, distribution, storage or sale in the state or produces,
  refines, manufactures or compounds in this state or (ii) if the tax  has
  not  been imposed prior to its sale in this state, which he sells (which
  acts shall in regard to  motor  fuel  hereinafter  in  this  article  be
  encompassed by the phrase "imported, manufactured or sold"), except when
  imported,  manufactured  or  sold under circumstances which preclude the
  collection of such tax by reason of the United States  constitution  and
  of  the  laws  of  the  United  States  enacted pursuant thereto or when
  imported or manufactured by an organization described in  paragraph  one
  or  two  of  subdivision  (a)  of section eleven hundred sixteen of this
  article or  a  hospital  included  in  the  organizations  described  in
  paragraph  four  of such subdivision for its own use and consumption and
  except kero-jet fuel  when  imported  by  an  airline  for  use  in  its
  airplanes,  and  except  aviation  gasoline  sold  for use in commercial
  aircraft and general aviation aircraft.
    * NB Effective September 1, 2026
    * (2)  Every  distributor  of  diesel  motor  fuel  shall  pay,  as  a
  prepayment  on account of the taxes imposed by this article and pursuant
  to the authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter, a tax upon  the
  sale  or  use  of  diesel  motor  fuel  in  this state. The tax shall be
  computed based upon the number of gallons of diesel motor fuel  sold  or
  used.  Provided, however, if the tax has not been imposed prior thereto,
  it shall be imposed on the removal of highway diesel motor fuel  from  a
  terminal,  other than by pipeline, barge, tanker or other vessel, or the
  delivery  of  diesel  motor  fuel  to  a  retail  service  station.  The
  collection  of  such tax shall not be made applicable to the sale or use
  of diesel motor fuel under circumstances which preclude  the  collection
  of  such  tax by reason of the United States constitution and of laws of
  the United States enacted pursuant thereto. The prepaid  tax  on  diesel


 motor  fuel  shall not apply to (i) the sale of non-highway Diesel motor
  fuel to a person registered as a distributor of Diesel motor fuel  other
  than  a  sale  to  such  person  which  involves a delivery at a filling
  station  or  into  a  repository  which is equipped with a hose or other
  apparatus by which such fuel can be dispensed into the fuel  tank  of  a
  motor  vehicle;  (ii)  the  sale  to or delivery at a filling station or
  other retail  vendor  of  water-white  kerosene  provided  such  filling
  station  or  other  retail  vendor  only sells such water-white kerosene
  exclusively for heating purposes in containers of no  more  than  twenty
  gallons  or to the sale of CNG or hydrogen; (iii) the sale of previously
  untaxed qualified biodiesel, as defined in subdivision  twenty-three  of
  section  two  hundred eighty-two of this chapter, to a person registered
  under article twelve-A of this chapter as a distributor of Diesel  motor
  fuel  other  than (A) a retail sale to such person or (B) a sale to such
  person which involves  a  delivery  at  a  filling  station  or  into  a
  repository  which  is  equipped  with a hose or other apparatus by which
  such qualified biodiesel can be dispensed into the fuel tank of a  motor
  vehicle;  or  (iv)  the  sale of previously untaxed highway diesel motor
  fuel by a person registered under article twelve-A of this chapter as  a
  distributor  of  diesel  motor  fuel  to  a person registered under such
  article twelve-A as a distributor of diesel motor fuel where the highway
  diesel motor fuel is either: (A) being delivered by  pipeline,  railcar,
  barge,  tanker  or  other  vessel  to  a terminal, the operator of which
  terminal is registered under section two hundred eighty-three-b of  this
  chapter,  or  (B) within such a terminal where it has been so delivered.
  Provided, however, that the exemption set  forth  in  this  subparagraph
  shall not apply to any highway diesel motor fuel if it is removed from a
  terminal, other than by pipeline, barge, tanker or other vessel.
    * NB Effective until September 1, 2026
    * (2)  Every  distributor  of  diesel  motor  fuel  shall  pay,  as  a
  prepayment on account of the taxes imposed by this article and  pursuant
  to  the authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter, a tax upon the
  sale or use of diesel motor  fuel  in  this  state.  The  tax  shall  be
  computed  based  upon the number of gallons of diesel motor fuel sold or
  used. Provided, however, if the tax has not been imposed prior  thereto,
  it  shall  be imposed on the removal of highway diesel motor fuel from a
  terminal, other than by pipeline, barge, tanker or other vessel, or  the
  delivery  of  diesel  motor  fuel  to  a  retail  service  station.  The
  collection of such tax shall not be made applicable to the sale  or  use
  of  diesel  motor fuel under circumstances which preclude the collection
  of such tax by reason of the United States constitution and of  laws  of
  the  United  States  enacted pursuant thereto. The prepaid tax on diesel
  motor fuel shall not apply to (i) the sale of non-highway  Diesel  motor
  fuel  to a person registered as a distributor of Diesel motor fuel other
  than a sale to such person  which  involves  a  delivery  at  a  filling
  station  or  into  a  repository  which is equipped with a hose or other
  apparatus by which such fuel can be dispensed into the fuel  tank  of  a
  motor  vehicle;  (ii)  the  sale  to or delivery at a filling station or
  other retail  vendor  of  water-white  kerosene  provided  such  filling
  station  or  other  retail  vendor  only sells such water-white kerosene
  exclusively for heating purposes in containers of no  more  than  twenty
  gallons;  (iii)  the  sale of previously untaxed qualified biodiesel, as
  defined in subdivision twenty-three of section two hundred eighty-two of
  this chapter to a person  registered  under  article  twelve-A  of  this
  chapter  as  a  distributor of Diesel motor fuel other than (A) a retail
  sale to such person or (B) a  sale  to  such  person  which  involves  a
  delivery  at  a  filling  station or into a repository which is equipped
  with a hose or other apparatus by which such qualified biodiesel can  be


 dispensed  into  the  fuel  tank of a motor vehicle; or (iv) the sale of
  previously untaxed highway diesel motor  fuel  by  a  person  registered
  under  article twelve-A of this chapter as a distributor of diesel motor
  fuel to a person registered under such article twelve-A as a distributor
  of  diesel motor fuel where the highway diesel motor fuel is either: (A)
  being delivered by pipeline, railcar, barge, tanker or other vessel to a
  terminal, the operator of which terminal is registered under section two
  hundred eighty-three-b of this chapter, or (B) within  such  a  terminal
  where  it  has  been so delivered. Provided, however, that the exemption
  set forth in this subparagraph shall not apply  to  any  highway  diesel
  motor  fuel  once it is removed from a terminal, other than by pipeline,
  barge, tanker or other vessel.
    * NB Effective September 1, 2026
    (3) The amount  of  such  prepayment  per  gallon  shall  be  computed
  pursuant  to the provisions of subdivision (e) of section eleven hundred
  eleven of this article. Provided, further, no motor fuel or diesel motor
  fuel shall be included in the measure of the tax  under  clause  (i)  of
  paragraph one and paragraph two of this subdivision unless it shall have
  previously  come  to  rest  within the meaning of federal decisional law
  interpreting the United States constitution.
    (b) The taxes required to be prepaid pursuant to this section shall be
  administered and collected in a like manner  as  the  taxes  imposed  by
  sections eleven hundred five and eleven hundred ten of this article. All
  the  provisions  of  this  article  relating  to  or  applicable  to the
  administration, collection and disposition of the taxes imposed by  such
  sections  shall  apply  to  the  tax  required  to be prepaid under this
  section so far as  such  provisions  can  be  made  applicable  to  such
  prepayments  of  tax  with such limitations as set forth in this article
  and such modifications as may  be  necessary  in  order  to  adapt  such
  language  to  the tax so imposed, provided, however, that the provisions
  of  paragraph  one  of  subdivision  (c)  of  section   eleven   hundred
  thirty-seven of this article and the reference in section eleven hundred
  thirty-seven-A  of this article to such paragraph one of subdivision (c)
  of section eleven hundred thirty-seven shall not be applicable  to  such
  tax  required  to  be  prepaid under this section. Such provisions shall
  apply with the same force  and  effect  as  if  the  language  of  those
  provisions  had  been  set  forth  in full in this section except to the
  extent that any provision is either inconsistent  with  a  provision  of
  this  section  or  is  not relevant to the tax required to be prepaid by
  this section. For purposes  of  this  section,  any  reference  in  this
  article  to  the tax or taxes imposed by this article shall be deemed to
  refer to the tax required to be prepaid pursuant to this section  unless
  a different meaning is clearly required. Provided, further, that, except
  as  otherwise  provided  in  subdivision  (j)  of section eleven hundred
  fifteen of this article and except as otherwise  provided  in  paragraph
  five  of  subdivision  (b)  of  section  eleven  hundred sixteen of this
  article, the exemptions provided  in  such  sections  (other  than  that
  provided  in  paragraph  nine  of subdivision (a) of such section eleven
  hundred fifteen with respect to purchases of kero-jet  fuel)  shall  not
  apply to the tax required to be prepaid under this section.
    (c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the payment
  of the tax required to be prepaid pursuant to  this  section  more  than
  once  upon  motor  fuel or diesel motor fuel sold within the state. When
  the foregoing prepaid tax imposed pursuant to this section  is  paid  it
  shall  have been so paid on account of the taxes imposed by this article
  or pursuant to the authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter with
  respect to the retail sale or use of motor fuel or  diesel  motor  fuel.
  Nothing  in  this  section  shall  modify or affect the taxes imposed by


 sections eleven hundred five and eleven hundred ten of this  article  as
  applied to receipts from the sale or use of such fuel.
    (d)  Deposit  and disposition of revenue. (1) Consistent with sections
  eleven hundred forty-eight and twelve hundred sixty-one of this chapter,
  the taxes imposed pursuant to this section and  interest  and  penalties
  thereon  received  by the commissioner, after deducting the amount which
  the commissioner of taxation and finance or his delegate shall determine
  to  be  necessary  for  reasonable  costs   of   the   commissioner   in
  administering,   collecting   and  distributing  such  taxes,  shall  be
  deposited daily with such responsible banks,  banking  houses  or  trust
  companies, as may be designated by the comptroller, to the credit of the
  comptroller.  Of  the  total  revenue  collected  or received under this
  section, the comptroller shall retain in his hands such  amount  as  the
  commissioner  of  taxation and finance may determine to be necessary for
  refunds under this article and pursuant  to  the  authority  of  article
  twenty-nine of this chapter.
    (2)  On  or before the twelfth day of each month, after reserving such
  amount for  such  refunds  and  such  costs,  the  commissioner  or  the
  commissioner's  delegate  shall certify to the comptroller the amount of
  all revenues so received during the prior  month  as  a  result  of  the
  taxes,  interest and penalties so imposed and, in addition, on or before
  the last day of June and December the  commissioner  or  delegate  shall
  certify  the  amount  of  such  moneys received during and including the
  first twenty-five days of said months.  At  the  time  the  commissioner
  prepares  such  certification,  the  commissioner  or the commissioner's
  delegate shall determine the receipts attributable to  the  amount,  and
  number of gallons, of motor fuel and diesel motor fuel sold at retail in
  each  county  and  city  and in the metropolitan commuter transportation
  district subject to the taxes imposed by sections  eleven  hundred  five
  and  eleven  hundred  ten  of  this  article  and the like taxes imposed
  pursuant to the authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter and the
  commissioner or delegate shall certify the portion of such receipts  and
  gallons  from  the  total  payments  that  represents the prepaid tax on
  account of the taxes  imposed  by  this  article  and  pursuant  to  the
  authority  of  article  twenty-nine  of this chapter (determined without
  regard to the taxes imposed by this section and any like  taxes  imposed
  pursuant  to the authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter) based
  upon the retail sales or uses of  such  fuel  in  such  jurisdiction  or
  district.  The  amount  of  revenues so certified shall be deposited and
  distributed by the comptroller in accordance therewith. Where the amount
  so certified in any distribution is more or less than  the  amount  due,
  the  amount  of  the  overpayment or underpayment shall be determined as
  soon after the discovery  of  the  overpayment  or  underpayment  as  is
  reasonably  possible  and  subsequent  certifications to the comptroller
  shall be adjusted by subtracting the amount of any such overpayment from
  or by adding the amount of any  such  underpayment  to  such  number  of
  subsequent  payments  as  the  comptroller  and  the  commissioner shall
  consider reasonable  in  view  of  the  amount  of  the  overpayment  or
  underpayment and all other pertinent facts and circumstances.
    (e)  For  the  purposes  of  this section and article twelve-A of this
  chapter the term "use" shall mean, in addition to the meaning set  forth
  in  paragraph  seven of subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred one of
  this article, the exercise of any right or  power  over  motor  fuel  or
  diesel  motor fuel by any person, whether or not a purchaser, including,
  but not limited to, the receiving, the withdrawal from  storage  or  any
  consumption of such fuel.
    (f)  Every  wholesaler  of  motor  fuel,  as  such  term is defined by
  subdivision twenty-seven of  section  two  hundred  eighty-two  of  this


 chapter,  shall  pay  or  be  entitled  to a credit or refund of the tax
  imposed by this section on gallons of motor fuel under the circumstances
  set forth in paragraph  three  of  subdivision  (e)  of  section  eleven
  hundred eleven of this article.
    *(g)  The  tax  imposed  by  this section must be charged on the sale,
  other than a retail sale or a sale that is otherwise exempt  under  this
  article, of each gallon of motor fuel or Diesel motor fuel. If the taxes
  imposed  by  this  section  have not already been assumed or paid by the
  distributor on any quantity of such fuel for any reason, including,  but
  not  limited  to,  the expansion of such fuel as a result of temperature
  fluctuation, the distributor must remit such taxes to  the  commissioner
  on the return for the period in which such sale was made.
    * NB Effective September 1, 2023






	   §  1103. Prepayment of sales tax on cigarettes. (a)(1) Every cigarette
  agent shall pay, as a prepayment on account of the taxes imposed by this
  article and pursuant to the authority of  article  twenty-nine  of  this
  chapter, a tax on cigarettes possessed for sale or use in this state and
  to  which  an  agent  is  required  to  affix cigarette tax stamps under
  article twenty of this chapter, at the time that the agent  is  required
  to  purchase  and  affix  such stamps (or as otherwise prescribed by the
  commissioner pursuant to such article twenty) and the provisions of such
  article twenty in relation to the use of stamps to evidence  payment  of
  the  tax  imposed  by  such  article  twenty  shall be applicable to the
  prepayment imposed by this section, except no tax shall be  required  to
  be  prepaid  on  cigarettes  sold under circumstances that this state is
  without power to impose such prepayment or sold to the United States  or
  sold  to  or  by  a  voluntary  unincorporated organization of the armed
  forces of the United States operating a place  for  the  sale  of  goods
  pursuant  to regulations promulgated by the appropriate executive agency
  of the United States, to the extent provided  in  such  regulations  and
  written policy statements of such an agency applicable to such sales.
    (2) The tax imposed by this section shall be paid at the same time and
  in  the  same  manner  as  the  tax  imposed by such article twenty with
  respect to cigarettes.  The  commissioner  may,  in  the  commissioner's
  discretion, permit an agent to pay the tax imposed under this section at
  the same time that the agent pays for cigarette tax stamps under article
  twenty  of  this chapter and may require any such agent to file with the
  department  a  bond  issued  by  a  surety  company  approved   by   the
  superintendent  of  financial services as to solvency and responsibility
  and authorized to transact business  in  the  state  or  other  security
  acceptable  to  the commissioner, in such amount as the commissioner may
  fix, to secure the payment of any sums due from such agent  pursuant  to
  this  section.  If  securities  are  deposited  as  security  under this
  subdivision, such securities  shall  be  kept  in  the  custody  of  the
  commissioner and may be sold by the commissioner if it becomes necessary
  to  do  so  in order to recover any sums due from such agent pursuant to
  this section, but no such sale shall be had until after such agent shall
  have had an opportunity to litigate the validity of  any  prepayment  of
  tax  if  it  elects  to  do so. Upon any such sale, the surplus, if any,
  above the sums due under this section shall be returned to  such  agent.
  Any  bond  or  security  required  under  this  section  may  be jointly
  administered with the bond or  security  required  of  the  agent  under
  section four hundred seventy-two of this chapter and in such event shall
  secure  payment of the sums due under such article twenty and under this
  section. The tax imposed by this section and the portion of the cost  of
  any stamp which evidences payment of the tax imposed by this section and
  which  is  attributable  to the tax imposed by this section shall not be
  included in the term "basic cost of cigarettes" as such term is  defined
  in section four hundred eighty-three of this chapter.
    (3)  Every  person other than an agent shall prepay the tax imposed by
  this section at the same time and in the same  manner  as  the  use  tax
  imposed  by  section  four  hundred  seventy-one-a  of this chapter. The
  commissioner may require any compensating use  tax  imposed  by  section
  eleven  hundred ten and pursuant to the authority of article twenty-nine
  of this chapter to be paid at such time after allowing  for  the  credit
  provided by subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred twenty-one of this
  article.
    (4)  The  amount  of  the  prepayment  for  cigarettes imposed by this
  section shall be computed pursuant to the provisions of subdivision  (j)
  of section eleven hundred eleven of this article.


   (b)  Except  as otherwise provided in this section, the taxes required
  to be prepaid  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be  administered  and
  collected  in  a  like  manner  as  the taxes imposed by sections eleven
  hundred five and eleven hundred ten of this article. All the  provisions
  of  this  article  relating  to  or  applicable  to  the administration,
  collection and disposition of the taxes imposed by such  sections  shall
  apply  to  the  tax  required to be prepaid under this section so far as
  such provisions can be made applicable to such prepayments of  tax  with
  such  limitations as set forth in this article and such modifications as
  may be necessary in order to adapt such language to the tax so  imposed;
  provided,  however,  that the provisions of paragraph one of subdivision
  (c) of section eleven hundred thirty-seven of this article shall not  be
  applicable  to  such tax required to be prepaid under this section. Such
  provisions shall apply with the same force and effect as if the language
  of those provisions had been set forth in full in this section except to
  the extent that any provision is either inconsistent with a provision of
  this section or is not relevant to the tax required  to  be  prepaid  by
  this  section.  For  purposes  of  this  section,  any reference in this
  article to the tax or taxes imposed by this article shall be  deemed  to
  refer  to the tax required to be prepaid pursuant to this section unless
  a different meaning is clearly required.
    (c) Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the  payment
  of  the  tax  required  to be prepaid pursuant to this section more than
  once upon cigarettes possessed for sale or used within the  state.  When
  the  prepaid tax imposed pursuant to this section is paid, it shall have
  been so paid on account  of  the  taxes  imposed  by  this  article  and
  pursuant  to  the  authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter with
  respect to the retail sale or the use of  cigarettes.  Nothing  in  this
  section  shall  modify  or  affect  the taxes imposed by sections eleven
  hundred five and eleven hundred  ten  of  this  article  as  applied  to
  receipts from the sale, or to the use, of such cigarettes.
    (d)  Deposit  and disposition of revenue. (1) Consistent with sections
  eleven hundred forty-eight of this article and twelve hundred  sixty-one
  of  this  chapter,  the  taxes  required  to be prepaid pursuant to this
  section and interest and penalties thereon received by the commissioner,
  after deducting the amount which the commissioner shall determine to  be
  necessary  for  reasonable  costs  of the commissioner in administering,
  collecting, and distributing such taxes, shall be deposited  daily  with
  such  responsible  banks,  banking  houses or trust companies, as may be
  designated by the comptroller, to the credit of the comptroller. Of  the
  total  revenue collected or received under this section, the comptroller
  shall retain in the comptroller's hands such amount as the  commissioner
  may  determine  to  be  necessary  for  refunds  under  this article and
  pursuant to the authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter.
    (2) On or before the twelfth day of each month, after  reserving  such
  amount for such refunds and such costs, the commissioner shall determine
  the  amount  of  all  revenues  so  received during the prior month as a
  result of the taxes, interest and penalties so imposed and, in addition,
  on or before the last day of June and December  the  commissioner  shall
  determine  in  like manner the amount of such moneys received during and
  including the first twenty-five days of said  months.  The  commissioner
  shall  determine the proportion of revenues attributable to receipts for
  the period for which the determination is made pursuant to the preceding
  sentence from taxes on sales and uses of property and services and  rent
  and  amusement  charges  imposed  by  this  article  and pursuant to the
  authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter and administered by the
  commissioner which is payable to each  jurisdiction  determined  without
  regard to this section. The amount of revenues so determined pursuant to


 this  section  shall  be deposited and distributed by the comptroller in
  accordance with the same percentage amount to which  a  jurisdiction  is
  entitled  determined without regard to this section. Where the amount so
  determined  in  any  distribution  from  such  taxes (other than the tax
  imposed by this section) is more or less than the amount due, the amount
  of the overpayment or underpayment shall be determined as soon after the
  discovery of the overpayment or underpayment as is  reasonably  possible
  and  subsequent  determinations  shall  be  adjusted  by subtracting the
  amount of any such overpayment from or by adding the amount of any  such
  underpayment  to  such  number of subsequent payments as the comptroller
  and the commissioner shall consider reasonable in view of the amount  of
  the  overpayment  or  underpayment  and  all  other  pertinent facts and
  circumstances. The commissioner shall not be liable for any overestimate
  or underestimate of the  amount  of  the  distribution.  Nor  shall  the
  commissioner  be  liable  for  any  inaccuracy in any determination with
  respect to the amount of the distribution  or  any  required  adjustment
  with  respect to the distribution, but the commissioner shall as soon as
  practicable after discovery of any error adjust the  next  determination
  under this section to reflect any such error.




   §  1104. Convention center hotel unit fee. (a) Imposition. In addition
  to any other fee or tax imposed by this article or any other law, on and
  after April first, two thousand five, there is hereby imposed within the
  territorial limits of a city with a population of a million or more  and
  there  shall  be paid a unit fee on every occupancy of a unit in a hotel
  in such city at the rate of one dollar and fifty cents per unit per day,
  except that such unit fee shall not be imposed upon (1) occupancy  by  a
  permanent  resident  or  (2) where the rent per unit is not more than at
  the rate of two dollars per day.
    (b) Administration and enforcement.  The  unit  fee  imposed  by  this
  section  shall be administered and collected in a like manner as the tax
  imposed by subdivision (e)  of  section  eleven  hundred  five  of  this
  article.  All  the  provisions  of  this article (except sections eleven
  hundred seven, eleven hundred eight and eleven hundred nine),  including
  the  definition  and  exemption provisions, relating to or applicable to
  the administration, collection and disposition of  the  tax  imposed  by
  subdivision  (e)  of  such  section  eleven hundred five of this article
  shall apply to the unit fee imposed by  this  section  so  far  as  such
  provisions can be made applicable to such unit fee with such limitations
  as  are  set  forth  in  this article, and such modifications as are set
  forth in this section and as may be necessary in  order  to  adopt  such
  language  to  the  unit fee so imposed. Such provisions shall apply with
  the same force and effect as if the language  of  those  provisions  had
  been  incorporated in full in this section and had expressly referred to
  the unit fee imposed by this section, except  to  the  extent  that  any
  provision  is either inconsistent with a provision of this section or is
  not relevant to the unit fee imposed by this section.  For  purposes  of
  this  section,  unless  a different meaning is clearly required: (1) any
  reference in this article to the tax or taxes imposed  by  this  article
  shall  be  deemed to refer also to the unit fee imposed by this section;
  and (2) any reference to tax, taxes or sales  tax  in  section  eighteen
  hundred  seventeen  of this chapter shall be deemed to refer also to the
  unit fee imposed by this section.
    (c) Transitional provision. The unit fee imposed by this section shall
  be paid on any occupancy on or after April  first,  two  thousand  five,
  although  such occupancy is pursuant to a prior contract, lease or other
  arrangement. Where the charge for occupancy is paid on a weekly, monthly
  or other term basis, the occupancy shall be  subject  to  the  unit  fee
  imposed by this section to the extent that it covers any day on or after
  April  first, two thousand five. Where a person occupies a unit for less
  than a full day and pays less than the rent for a full day, the unit fee
  due pursuant to this section shall nevertheless be the  same  amount  as
  would  be  due  had  such person occupied the unit for a full day at the
  rent for a full day.
    (d) Deposit  and  disposition  of  revenue.  (1)  Notwithstanding  any
  provision  of  law  to  the  contrary,  the fees, interest and penalties
  imposed  by  this  section  and  received  by  the  commissioner,  after
  deducting  the  amount  which  the  commissioner  shall  determine to be
  necessary for reasonable costs to  administer,  collect  and  distribute
  such  fees,  penalties  and interest, shall be deposited daily with such
  responsible  banks,  banking  houses  or  trust  companies,  as  may  be
  designated  by  the comptroller, to the credit of the comptroller, to be
  held  in  trust  for  the  convention  center  development   corporation
  established  by  chapter  thirty-five  of  the  laws of nineteen hundred
  seventy-nine, as amended. Such an account may be established in  one  or
  more  of  such  depositories.  Such  deposits shall be kept separate and
  apart from all other money in the possession  of  the  comptroller.  The
  comptroller  shall require adequate security from all such depositories.


 Of the total revenue collected  or  received  under  this  section,  the
  comptroller  shall  retain in the comptroller's hands such amount as the
  commissioner may determine  to  be  necessary  for  refunds  under  this
  section.
    (2)  On  or  before the twelfth day of each month: (A) after reserving
  such amount for such refunds and  such  costs,  the  commissioner  shall
  certify to the comptroller the amount of all revenues so received during
  the  prior  month  as  a  result  of the fees, interest and penalties so
  imposed; and (B) the amount of revenues so certified shall  be  paid  by
  the  comptroller  to  the  chief fiscal officer of the convention center
  development corporation established by chapter thirty-five of  the  laws
  of  nineteen  hundred  seventy-nine,  as amended, for disposition in the
  convention  center  development  fund  established   by   such   chapter
  thirty-five of the laws of nineteen hundred seventy-nine, as amended.
    (e)  Termination  of  unit  fee. (1) At the end of the last day of the
  month in which all the bonds, secured in whole or in part by  such  fee,
  issued by such convention center development corporation, established by
  chapter  thirty-five  of  the  laws of nineteen hundred seventy-nine, as
  amended, shall have been fully paid and discharged or  shall  have  been
  deemed  to be paid under the resolution authorizing such bonds, together
  with interest thereon and interest on unpaid installments  of  interest,
  the  unit  fee  imposed  by  this  section shall terminate. Despite such
  termination,  the  provisions  of  this  section  and  any   regulations
  promulgated   thereunder,  including  the  provisions  with  respect  to
  assessment, payment, termination, collection and refund  of  such  fees,
  penalties   and   interest,   the   requirements   for  filing  returns,
  preservation of records and disposition of  revenue  shall  continue  in
  full  force  and  effect with respect to all such fees accrued up to the
  effective date of such termination.
    (2) At least ninety days prior to  the  date  that  the  unit  fee  is
  imposed  by this section shall have terminated pursuant to paragraph one
  of this subdivision, the chief  executive  officer,  or  such  officer's
  delegate,   of   such  development  corporation  shall  provide  written
  notification to the commissioner of the date  by  which  such  unit  fee
  shall  have  terminated,  so  that  such  commissioner can timely notify
  persons required to collect  tax,  as  defined  by  subdivision  one  of
  section  eleven  hundred thirty-one of this article, of such termination
  and take such other steps as are necessary or  desirable  to  administer
  such  termination. Provided that failure by such chief executive officer
  or such officer's delegate to provide such notice shall not  affect  the
  termination of such unit fee.




   §  1105.  Imposition  of  sales tax. On and after June first, nineteen
  hundred seventy-one, there is hereby imposed and there shall be  paid  a
  tax of four percent upon:
    (a) The receipts from every retail sale of tangible personal property,
  except as otherwise provided in this article.
    (b)  (1) The receipts from every sale, other than sales for resale, of
  the following: (A) gas, electricity, refrigeration and steam,  and  gas,
  electric,  refrigeration and steam service of whatever nature, including
  the transportation, transmission or distribution of gas or  electricity,
  even  if sold separately; (B) telephony and telegraphy and telephone and
  telegraph service of whatever nature except interstate and international
  telephony and telegraphy and telephone and telegraph service and  except
  any  telecommunications  service the receipts from the sale of which are
  subject to tax under paragraph two of this subdivision; (C) a  telephone
  answering service; and (D) a prepaid telephone calling service.
    (2)  The receipts from every sale of mobile telecommunications service
  provided by a home service provider, other than sales for  resale,  that
  are  voice  services,  or  any  other  services  that  are taxable under
  subparagraph (B) of paragraph one of this subdivision, sold for a  fixed
  periodic  charge (not separately stated), whether or not sold with other
  services.
    (3) The tax  imposed  pursuant  to  this  subdivision  is  imposed  on
  receipts  from  charges for intrastate mobile telecommunications service
  of whatever  nature  in  any  state  if  the  mobile  telecommunications
  customer's place of primary use is in this state.
    (4)  (A)  For the purpose of subparagraph (B) of paragraph one of this
  subdivision, receipts from the sale of telephony  or  telephone  service
  constituting the actual delivery of telephony or telephone service under
  a  prepaid  telephone calling service (for instance, when the receipt is
  represented by a debit to a prepaid account) shall be excluded from  the
  receipts subject to tax under such subparagraph; and (B) for purposes of
  subparagraph (B) of paragraph one and paragraph two of this subdivision,
  a  particular  sale  of  telephony or telephone service to a vendor that
  resells such telephony or telephone service as a component of a  prepaid
  telephone calling service shall be deemed a sale for resale of telephony
  or telegraph service.
    (c)  The receipts from every sale, except for resale, of the following
  services:
    (1)  The  furnishing  of  information  by  printed,  mimeographed   or
  multigraphed  matter  or by duplicating written or printed matter in any
  other  manner,  including  the  services  of  collecting,  compiling  or
  analyzing  information  of  any  kind  or  nature and furnishing reports
  thereof to other persons, but excluding the  furnishing  of  information
  which is personal or individual in nature and which is not or may not be
  substantially  incorporated  in  reports furnished to other persons, and
  excluding the services of advertising or other agents, or other  persons
  acting  in  a  representative capacity, and information services used by
  newspapers, electronic news services, radio broadcasters and  television
  broadcasters  in the collection and dissemination of news, and excluding
  meteorological services.
    (2)  Producing,  fabricating,  processing,  printing   or   imprinting
  tangible  personal  property,  performed  for  a  person who directly or
  indirectly furnishes the tangible personal property,  not  purchased  by
  him for resale, upon which services are performed.
    (3) Installing tangible personal property, excluding a mobile home, or
  maintaining,   servicing   or   repairing  tangible  personal  property,
  including a mobile home, not held for sale  in  the  regular  course  of
  business, whether or not the services are performed directly or by means


 of coin-operated equipment or by any other means, and whether or not any
  tangible  personal  property  is  transferred  in conjunction therewith,
  except:
    (i) such services rendered by an individual who is engaged directly by
  a  private home owner or lessee in or about his residence and who is not
  in a regular trade or business offering his services to the public; and
    (ii) any receipts from laundering, dry-cleaning,  tailoring,  weaving,
  pressing, shoe repairing and shoe shining; and
    (iii)  for  installing property which, when installed, will constitute
  an addition or capital improvement to real property, property  or  land,
  as  the  terms  real  property, property or land are defined in the real
  property tax  law  as  such  term  capital  improvement  is  defined  in
  paragraph  nine of subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred one of this
  chapter; and
    (iv) such services rendered with respect  to  commercial  vessels  and
  property  used  by  or  purchased  for  the use of such vessels, as such
  vessels and property are specified in paragraph eight of subdivision (a)
  of section eleven hundred fifteen of this article; and
    (v) such  services  rendered  with  respect  to  commercial  aircraft,
  machinery  or equipment and property used by or purchased for the use of
  such aircraft as such aircraft, machinery or equipment, and property are
  specified in paragraph twenty-one of subdivision (a) of  section  eleven
  hundred fifteen of this article; and
    (vi) such services rendered with respect to tangible personal property
  for  use  or consumption predominantly either in the production for sale
  of tangible personal property  by  farming  or  in  a  commercial  horse
  boarding  operation,  or  in both, as such tangible personal property is
  specified in paragraph six of subdivision (a) of section eleven  hundred
  fifteen of this article.
    (vii)  such  services  rendered  with  respect  to fishing vessels and
  property used by or purchased for  such  vessels  as  such  vessels  are
  specified  in paragraph twenty-four of subdivision (a) of section eleven
  hundred fifteen of this article.
    (viii) such services rendered with respect to railroad  rolling  stock
  primarily  engaged  in  carrying  freight  in  intrastate, interstate or
  foreign commerce, but not  including  any  charge  for  parts  or  other
  tangible  personal  property whether such property has become a physical
  component part of the property upon which the services are performed  or
  has  been  transferred  to  the purchaser of the services in conjunction
  with the performance of the services subject to the tax.
    (ix) such services rendered with respect to tangible property used  or
  consumed directly and predominantly in the production for sale of gas or
  oil  by  manufacturing,  processing,  generating,  assembling, refining,
  mining, or extracting.
    (x) such services rendered  with  respect  to  property  described  in
  paragraph  twelve-a of subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred fifteen
  of this article.
    * (xi) Such services rendered with respect to  property  described  in
  paragraph twelve-b of section eleven hundred fifteen of this article.
    * NB Expired September 1, 2003
    Provided,  however,  that  nothing  contained  in this paragraph three
  shall be construed to exclude from tax under  this  paragraph  or  under
  subdivision  (b) of this section any charge, made by a person furnishing
  service subject to tax  under  subdivision  (b)  of  this  section,  for
  installing  property  at  the  premises of a purchaser of such a taxable
  service for use in connection with such service.


   (4) Storing all tangible personal property not held for  sale  in  the
  regular  course  of  business  and  the  rental of safe deposit boxes or
  similar space.
    (5)  Maintaining,  servicing  or  repairing real property, property or
  land, as such terms are defined in the real property  tax  law,  whether
  the services are performed in or outside of a building, as distinguished
  from  adding  to or improving such real property, property or land, by a
  capital improvement as such  term  capital  improvement  is  defined  in
  paragraph  nine of subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred one of this
  article, but excluding (i) services rendered by an individual who is not
  in a regular trade or business offering his services to the public, (ii)
  services rendered directly with respect to real  property,  property  or
  land  used  or consumed directly and predominantly in the production for
  sale of gas or oil by manufacturing, processing, generating, assembling,
  refining, mining, or extracting, (iii) services rendered with respect to
  real property, property or land used or consumed predominantly either in
  the production of tangible personal property, for sale, by farming or in
  a commercial horse boarding operation, or in both and (iv)  services  of
  removal  of  waste  material  from  a  facility  regulated as a transfer
  station or construction and demolition debris processing facility by the
  department  of  environmental  conservation,  provided  that  the  waste
  material to be removed was not generated by the facility.
    (6)  Providing  parking,  garaging  or  storing  for motor vehicles by
  persons operating a garage  (other  than  a  garage  which  is  part  of
  premises  occupied  solely  as  a  private  one or two family dwelling),
  parking lot or other place of business  engaged  in  providing  parking,
  garaging or storing for motor vehicles provided, however, this paragraph
  shall  not  apply  to  such  facilities  owned  and operated by a public
  corporation, as defined by section sixty-six of the general construction
  law, other than a public benefit corporation, as defined by such section
  sixty-six, created by interstate compact  or  at  least  half  of  whose
  members  are appointed by the governor, or any agency or instrumentality
  of a municipal corporation or district corporation as  defined  by  such
  section sixty-six. Provided, however, receipts for such services paid to
  a  homeowner's association by its members or receipts paid by members of
  a homeowner's association to a person leasing the parking facility  from
  the  homeowner's  association shall not be subject to the tax imposed by
  this  paragraph.  For  purposes  of  this   paragraph,   a   homeowner's
  association  is  an  association  (including  a  cooperative  housing or
  apartment  corporation)  (i)  the  membership  of  which  is   comprised
  exclusively  of  owners  or  residents  of  residential  dwelling units,
  including owners of units in a condominium, and  including  shareholders
  in  a cooperative housing or apartment corporation, where such units are
  located in a defined geographical area such as a housing development  or
  subdivision  and  (ii)  which  owns or operates a garage, parking lot or
  other place of  business  engaged  in  providing  parking,  garaging  or
  storing  for motor vehicles located in such area for use (whether or not
  exclusive) by such owners or residents.
    (7) Interior decorating and designing services,  (whether  or  not  in
  conjunction  with the sale of tangible personal property), by whomsoever
  performed, including interior decorators and  designers,  architects  or
  engineers;  notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  such  services  shall  not
  include services which consist  of  the  practice  of  architecture,  as
  defined  in  section  seventy-three hundred one of the education law, or
  the practice of engineering, as defined in section  seventy-two  hundred
  one  of the education law, if the services are performed by an architect
  or engineer having a license or permit under the education law.


   (8) Protective and detective services, including, but not limited  to,
  all services provided by or through alarm or protective systems of every
  nature,  including,  but  not  limited  to, protection against burglary,
  theft, fire, water damage or any malfunction of industrial processes  or
  any  other  malfunction  of  or damage to property or injury to persons,
  detective agencies, armored car services and guard, patrol and  watchman
  services  of every nature other than the performance of such services by
  a port watchman licensed  by  the  waterfront  commission  of  New  York
  harbor,  whether  or  not  tangible  personal property is transferred in
  conjunction therewith.
    (9) (i) The furnishing or provision of an entertainment service or  of
  an  information  service  (but not an information service subject to tax
  under paragraph one of this subdivision), which is furnished,  provided,
  or  delivered  by  means  of  telephony  or  telegraphy  or telephone or
  telegraph service (whether intrastate or interstate) of whatever nature,
  such as entertainment or information services provided  through  800  or
  900  numbers  or  mass  announcement services or interactive information
  network services. Provided, however, that in  no  event  (i)  shall  the
  furnishing  or  provision  of an information service be taxed under this
  paragraph unless  it  would  otherwise  be  subject  to  taxation  under
  paragraph  one  of  this  subdivision  if  it were furnished by printed,
  mimeographed or multigraphed matter or by duplicating written or printed
  matter in any other  manner  nor  (ii)  shall  the  provision  of  cable
  television service to customers be taxed under this paragraph.
    (ii)  Notwithstanding  the  rate  and  date  set  forth in the opening
  undesignated paragraph of this section and notwithstanding  the  opening
  undesignated  paragraph  of  this  subdivision,  on  and after September
  first, nineteen hundred ninety-three,  in  addition  to  any  other  tax
  imposed  under  this  section,  and  in addition to any other tax or fee
  imposed under any other provision of law, there is  hereby  imposed  and
  there  shall  be paid an additional tax at the rate of five percent upon
  the receipts which are subject to tax under  subparagraph  (i)  of  this
  paragraph  on  the  furnishing  or  provision  of  an  entertainment  or
  information service which is received by the customer exclusively in  an
  aural manner. Such additional tax shall not be imposed by section eleven
  hundred  seven,  eleven  hundred  eight  or  eleven hundred nine of this
  article and shall not be included  among  the  taxes  authorized  to  be
  imposed  pursuant  to  the  authority  of  article  twenty-nine  of this
  chapter.
    (10) Transportation service, whether  or  not  any  tangible  personal
  property  is  transferred  in  conjunction  therewith, and regardless of
  whether the charge is paid in this state or out of state so long as  the
  service is provided in this state.
    Wages,  salaries  and  other  compensation  paid  by an employer to an
  employee for  performing  as  an  employee  the  services  described  in
  paragraphs  (1)  through  (9)  of  this subdivision (c) are not receipts
  subject to the taxes imposed under such subdivision.
    (d) (i) The receipts from every sale, other than sales for resale,  of
  beer,  wine  or  other  alcoholic  beverages  or  any other drink of any
  nature, or from every sale, other than sales for  resale,  of  food  and
  drink  of  any  nature or of food alone, when sold in or by restaurants,
  taverns or other establishments in this state, or by caterers, including
  in the amount of such receipts  any  cover,  minimum,  entertainment  or
  other  charge  made to patrons or customers (except those receipts taxed
  pursuant to subdivision (f) of this section):
    (1) in all instances where the sale is for consumption on the premises
  where sold;


   (2) in those instances where the vendor or any person  whose  services
  are  arranged for by the vendor, after the delivery of the food or drink
  by or on behalf of the vendor for consumption off the  premises  of  the
  vendor,  serves  or  assists  in serving, cooks, heats or provides other
  services with respect to the food or drink; and
    (3)  in  those  instances  where  the  sale  is made through a vending
  machine that is activated by use of coin, currency, credit card or debit
  card (except the sale of drinks in a heated state made  through  such  a
  vending  machine)  or is for consumption off the premises of the vendor,
  except where food (other than sandwiches) or drink or both are (A)  sold
  in  an  unheated  state  and,  (B)  are  of  a  type  commonly  sold for
  consumption off the  premises  and  in  the  same  form  and  condition,
  quantities  and packaging, in establishments which are food stores other
  than those principally engaged in selling foods prepared and ready to be
  eaten.
    (ii) The tax imposed by this subdivision shall not apply to:
    (A) food or drink which is sold to an air line for  consumption  while
  in flight;
    (B) food or drink sold to a student of a nursery school, kindergarten,
  elementary  or  secondary school at a restaurant or cafeteria located on
  the premises of such a school, or food or drink, other than beer,  wine,
  or  other  alcoholic  beverages,  sold  at a restaurant, tavern or other
  establishment located on the premises of  a  college,  university  or  a
  school  (other  than  a  nursery  school,  kindergarten,  elementary  or
  secondary school) to a student enrolled therein who purchases such  food
  or  drink  under  a contractual arrangement whereby the student does not
  pay cash at the time he is  served,  provided  the  school,  college  or
  university  described  in  this  subparagraph  is  operated by an exempt
  organization described in subdivision  (a)  of  section  eleven  hundred
  sixteen,  or  is  created,  incorporated, registered, or licensed by the
  state legislature or pursuant to the education law or the regulations of
  the commissioner of education, or is incorporated by the regents of  the
  university of the State of New York or with their consent or the consent
  of  the  commissioner  of  education  as provided in section two hundred
  sixteen of the education law; and
    (C) Sales by  a  brewery  licensed  under  section  fifty-one  of  the
  alcoholic beverage control law, or a farm brewery licensed under section
  fifty-one-a  of  such  law,  of  no  more  than four samples of beer not
  exceeding four fluid ounces each, and each sample shall be  a  different
  beer  than  the  others.  Only  a  customer's first purchase during each
  calendar day  at  each  licensed  entity  shall  be  exempt  under  this
  subparagraph.
    (e)  (1) The rent for every occupancy of a room or rooms in a hotel in
  this state, except that  the  tax  shall  not  be  imposed  upon  (i)  a
  permanent  resident, or (ii) where the rent is not more than at the rate
  of two dollars per day.
    (2) Except as provided in subdivision (r) of  section  eleven  hundred
  eleven   of  this  part,  when  occupancy  is  provided,  for  a  single
  consideration, with property, services, amusement charges, or any  other
  items,  the  separate  sale  of  which  is not subject to tax under this
  article, and the rent paid for such occupancy does not qualify  for  the
  exemption  in subdivision (kk) of section eleven hundred fifteen of this
  article, the entire consideration shall be treated as  rent  subject  to
  tax  under  paragraph  one  of this subdivision; provided, however, that
  where the amount of the rent for occupancy is stated separately from the
  price of such property, services, amusement charges, or other items,  on
  any sales slip, invoice, receipt, or other statement given the occupant,
  and  such  rent is reasonable in relation to the value of such property,


 services, amusement charges or other items, only such separately  stated
  rent will be subject to tax under paragraph one of this subdivision.
    (f)  (1) Any admission charge where such admission charge is in excess
  of ten cents to or for the use of any place of amusement in  the  state,
  except charges for admission to combative sports which charges are taxed
  under  any  other  law  of  this  state,  or  dramatic  or  musical arts
  performances, or live circus performances, or motion  picture  theaters,
  and  except  charges to a patron for admission to, or use of, facilities
  for sporting activities in which such patron is  to  be  a  participant,
  such  as  bowling  alleys  and swimming pools. For any person having the
  permanent use or possession of a box or seat or a lease  or  a  license,
  other  than  a season ticket, for the use of a box or seat at a place of
  amusement, the tax shall be upon the amount for which a similar  box  or
  seat is sold for each performance or exhibition at which the box or seat
  is used or reserved by the holder, licensee or lessee, and shall be paid
  by the holder, licensee or lessee.
    (2)  (i) The dues paid to any social or athletic club in this state if
  the dues of an active annual member, exclusive of  the  initiation  fee,
  are  in excess of ten dollars per year, and on the initiation fee alone,
  regardless of the amount of dues, if such initiation fee is in excess of
  ten dollars. Where the tax  on  dues  applies  to  any  such  social  or
  athletic club, the tax shall be paid by all members, other than honorary
  members,  thereof  regardless  of the amount of their dues, and shall be
  paid on all dues or initiation fees for a period commencing on or  after
  August  first,  nineteen  hundred  sixty-five.  In  the  case  of a life
  membership, the tax shall be upon the amount  paid  as  life  membership
  dues,  however,  a life member, other than an honorary member, paying an
  annual sales tax, based on the dues of an active  annual  member,  shall
  continue  such payments until the total amount of such tax paid is equal
  to the amount of tax that would have otherwise been due had the tax been
  imposed at the time such paid life membership has been purchased and  at
  the then applicable rate.
    (ii)  Dues  and  initiation  fees  paid  to the following shall not be
  subject to the tax imposed by this paragraph:
    (A) A fraternal society, order  or  association  operating  under  the
  lodge system;
    (B) Any fraternal association of students of a college or university;
    (C)  A  homeowners  association.  For purposes of this subparagraph, a
  homeowners  association  is  an  association  (including  a  cooperative
  housing  or  apartment  corporation)  (I)  the  membership  of  which is
  comprised exclusively of owners or  residents  of  residential  dwelling
  units,  including  owners  of  units  in  a  condominium,  and including
  shareholders in a cooperative housing or  apartment  corporation,  where
  such  units are located in a defined geographical area such as a housing
  development or subdivision and (II) which operates  social  or  athletic
  facilities  located  in  such area for use (whether or not exclusive) by
  such owners or residents.
    (3) The amount paid as charges of a  roof  garden,  cabaret  or  other
  similar place in the state.


   §  1105-A.  Reduced  tax  rate on certain energy sources and services.
  (a) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article,  but  not  for
  purposes  of  the  taxes imposed by section eleven hundred eight of this
  part or authorized pursuant to the authority of article  twenty-nine  of
  this  chapter,  the  taxes  imposed by subdivision (a) or (b) of section
  eleven hundred five of this part on the receipts from the retail sale of
  fuel oil and coal used for residential purposes; the receipts  from  the
  retail  sale  of  wood  used  for  residential heating purposes; and the
  receipts from every sale, other than for resale, of propane (except when
  sold in containers of  less  than  one  hundred  pounds),  natural  gas,
  electricity,  steam  and  gas,  electric  and  steam  services  used for
  residential purposes shall be paid at the rate of three percent for  the
  period  commencing  January  first,  nineteen  hundred  seventy-nine and
  ending December thirty-first, nineteen hundred seventy-nine; at the rate
  of two and one-half percent for the  period  commencing  January  first,
  nineteen hundred eighty and ending September thirtieth, nineteen hundred
  eighty,  and  at  the  rate  of zero percent on and after October first,
  nineteen hundred eighty. The provisions of  this  subsection  shall  not
  apply  to  a  sale  of  diesel motor fuel which involves a delivery at a
  filling station or into a repository which is equipped with  a  hose  or
  other  apparatus  by which such fuel can be dispensed into the fuel tank
  of a motor vehicle.
    (b) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, but  not  for
  purposes  of  the  taxes imposed by section eleven hundred eight of this
  part or pursuant  to  the  authority  of  article  twenty-nine  of  this
  chapter,  for  purposes  of  clauses  (A)  and (H) of subdivision (a) of
  section eleven hundred ten  of  this  part,  the  compensating  use  tax
  imposed  by  such  section  on  the  use  of  the  property and services
  described in subsection (a) of this section shall be at the rate of zero
  percent.
    (c) (1) For the period  commencing  January  first,  nineteen  hundred
  seventy-nine   and   ending   December  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred
  seventy-nine the three percent rates set forth  in  this  section  shall
  apply  to  receipts  from  all  retail  sales and uses described in this
  section made, rendered or arising therefrom on or after  January  first,
  nineteen  hundred  seventy-nine  although made or rendered under a prior
  contract, if a delivery or transfer of possession of  such  property  or
  services is made after said date. Where such property or service is sold
  on  a  monthly,  quarterly  or  other  term basis and the bills for such
  property or service are based on meter readings, the amount received  on
  each  bill  for such property or service for a month or quarter or other
  term shall be a receipt subject to the reduced  three  percent  rate  of
  tax, but such rate shall be applicable to all bills based on meters read
  on  or  after  January  first, nineteen hundred seventy-nine, only where
  more than one-half of the number of days included in the month or  other
  period  bills  are  days  subsequent  to December thirty-first, nineteen
  hundred seventy-eight. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed
  to exempt from tax under section eleven  hundred  five  any  transaction
  which  may  not  be subject to the reduced rate of tax set forth in this
  section in effect on January first, nineteen hundred seventy-nine.
    (2) For the period commencing January first, nineteen  hundred  eighty
  and  ending  September  thirtieth,  nineteen  hundred eighty the two and
  one-half percent rates set forth in this section shall apply to receipts
  from all retail sales and uses described in this section made,  rendered
  or  arising therefrom on or after January first, nineteen hundred eighty
  although made on or rendered under a prior contract, if  a  delivery  or
  transfer  of  possession of such property or services is made after said
  date. Where such property or service is sold on a monthly, quarterly  or


 other term basis and the bills for such property or service are based on
  meter  readings,  the  amount received on each bill for such property or
  service for a month, quarter or other term shall be a receipt subject to
  the reduced two and one-half percent rate of tax, but such rate shall be
  applicable  to all bills based on meters read on or after January first,
  nineteen hundred eighty only where more than one-half of the  number  of
  days included in the month or other period billed are days subsequent to
  December  thirty-first, nineteen hundred seventy-nine. Nothing contained
  in this section shall be deemed to exempt from tax under section  eleven
  hundred  five  any  transaction  which may not be subject to the reduced
  rate of tax set forth in  this  section  in  effect  on  January  first,
  nineteen hundred eighty.
    (3) Commencing October first, nineteen hundred eighty the zero percent
  rates  set forth in this section shall apply to receipts from all retail
  sales and uses described in  this  section  made,  rendered  or  arising
  therefrom  on  or  after October first, nineteen hundred eighty although
  made on or rendered under a prior contract, if a delivery or transfer of
  possession of such property or services is made after said  date.  Where
  such  property  or service is sold on a monthly, quarterly or other term
  basis, and the bills for such property or service  are  based  on  meter
  readings,  the amount received on each bill for such property or service
  for a month, quarter or other term shall be a  receipt  subject  to  the
  reduced  rate  of  tax,  but  such rate shall be applicable to all bills
  based on meters read on or after October first, nineteen hundred  eighty
  only  where  more  than  one-half  of the number of days included in the
  month or other period billed are days subsequent to September thirtieth,
  nineteen hundred eighty. Nothing contained  in  this  section  shall  be
  deemed  to  exempt  from  tax  under  section  eleven  hundred  five any
  transaction which may not be subject to the  reduced  rate  of  tax  set
  forth  in  this  section  in  effect  on October first, nineteen hundred
  eighty.
    (d) Where a residence is a  part  of  a  multiple  dwelling  or  other
  premises consisting of residential and non-residential units, or where a
  portion  of  a residence is used for non-dwelling purposes including the
  conduct of a trade or business,  the  commissioner  may  establish  such
  rules  and  regulations as may be necessary in order to allocate to such
  residence the portion of the sale or use of energy sources  or  services
  attributable to the residential portion.
    (e)  The tax commission may prescribe a certificate to be taken by the
  vendor of the energy sources or services specified in subsection (a)  of
  this  section  from  the  purchaser  of such energy sources or services.
  Where a certificate is required, unless such vendor shall have  received
  such  certificate  in  such  form  as  the tax commission may prescribe,
  signed by the purchaser and setting forth his name and address, together
  with such other information as such commission may require, stating that
  the premises, for which such energy sources or services  are  purchased,
  is  used solely as a residence or identifying the residential portion of
  premises, for which  such  energy  sources  or  services  are  purchased
  including  instances  where  a  multiple dwelling unit or other premises
  consists of residential and nonresidential units or where a portion of a
  residence is used for non-dwelling purposes, such as the  conduct  of  a
  trade  or  business,  the provisions of this section shall not apply and
  the tax shall be imposed at the rate provided  for  in  sections  eleven
  hundred  five  and  eleven  hundred  ten. No further certificate need be
  furnished  for  any  subsequent  purchase  for  such  premises  if   the
  information  set  forth in the certificate last furnished the vendor has
  not materially changed.


   (f) The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of  this  section  shall
  not apply to the tax imposed pursuant to section eleven hundred seven of
  this  part  unless  the  city council of a city with a population of one
  million or more adopts a local law or resolution pursuant to subdivision
  (o) of section twelve hundred ten of this chapter.


   §  1105-B.  Exemptions for certain parts, tools, supplies and services
  relating to tangible personal property used or consumed  in  production.
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article:  (a) Receipts from
  the  retail sales of parts with a useful life of one year or less, tools
  and supplies for use or consumption directly and  predominantly  in  the
  production    of   tangible   personal   property,   gas,   electricity,
  refrigeration  or  steam  for   sale   by   manufacturing,   processing,
  generating,  assembling,  refining, mining or extracting shall be exempt
  from the tax imposed by subdivision (a) of section eleven  hundred  five
  of this article.
    (b) Receipts from every sale of the services of installing, repairing,
  maintaining  or  servicing  the  tangible personal property described in
  paragraph twelve of subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred fifteen of
  this article, including the parts with a useful  life  of  one  year  or
  less,  tools  and supplies described in subdivision (a) of this section,
  to the extent subject to such tax, shall be exempt from the tax on sales
  imposed under subdivision (c) of section eleven  hundred  five  of  this
  article.
    (c)  Parts  with a useful life of one year or less, tools and supplies
  described in subdivision (a) of this section and services  described  in
  subdivision  (b)  of  this section shall be exempt from the compensating
  use tax imposed by section eleven hundred ten of this article.




   §   1106.   Transitional  provisions.  (a)  The  taxes  imposed  under
  subdivisions (a), (c) and (d) of section eleven hundred  five  shall  be
  paid upon all sales made and services rendered on or after August first,
  nineteen  hundred  sixty-five although made on or rendered under a prior
  contract, except as provided in section  eleven  hundred  nineteen,  and
  except  that  a  delivery or transfer of possession of tangible personal
  property made after said date pursuant to an agreement for the  sale  of
  said property made before April first, nineteen hundred sixty-five shall
  not  be  subject  to  tax  if:  (1)  such agreement for the sale of said
  property was made in writing,  (2)  the  particular  item  or  items  of
  property  so  sold  or  agreed  to be sold were segregated, before April
  first, nineteen hundred sixty-five, from any other similar  property  in
  the  possession of the vendor and identified as having been appropriated
  to such sale or agreement of sale, and (3) the purchaser, before  August
  first,  nineteen  hundred  sixty-five  shall have paid to the vendor not
  less than ten percent of the sale price of said property.
    (b) The tax imposed under subdivision (b) of  section  eleven  hundred
  five  shall  be  paid  with respect to receipts for property or services
  sold on or after August first, nineteen hundred sixty-five although made
  under a prior contract. Where property or service is sold on a  monthly,
  quarterly or other term basis and the bills for such property or service
  are  based  on meter readings, the amount received on each bill for such
  property or service for a month or other term shall be a receipt subject
  to the tax, but such tax shall be  applicable  to  all  bills  based  on
  meters  read  on or after August first, nineteen hundred sixty-five only
  where more than one-half of the number of days included in the month  or
  other  period  billed are days subsequent to July thirty-first, nineteen
  hundred sixty-five; provided, however, that where  such  bills  are  for
  telephone  or  telegraph  service the tax shall apply to all receipts on
  such bills dated on or after August first, nineteen hundred  sixty-five,
  for which no previous bill was rendered, excepting, however, charges for
  services furnished before the date of the first of such bills.
    (c)  The  tax  imposed under subdivision (e) of section eleven hundred
  five shall be paid  upon  any  occupancy  on  and  after  August  first,
  nineteen  hundred  sixty-five,  although such occupancy is pursuant to a
  prior contract, lease or other arrangement. Where  rent  is  paid  on  a
  weekly,  monthly  or  other term basis, the rent shall be subject to the
  tax imposed under such subdivision (e) to the extent that it covers  any
  period  on  and after August first, nineteen hundred sixty-five and such
  rent shall be apportioned on the basis of the ratio  of  the  number  of
  days  falling  within  said  period  to the total number of days covered
  thereby.
    (d) Except as otherwise hereinafter provided, the  tax  imposed  under
  subdivision  (f)  of  section eleven hundred five shall be applicable to
  any admission to or the use  of  facilities  of  a  place  of  amusement
  occurring on or after August first, nineteen hundred sixty-five, whether
  or not the admission charge has been paid prior to such date, unless the
  tickets  were  actually sold and delivered (other than for resale) prior
  to August first, nineteen hundred sixty-five to a person  attending  the
  performance occurring on or after such date.
    (e)  A  refund  or  credit  equal  to  the  amount  of  the  sales  or
  compensating use tax paid on  the  sale  or  use  of  tangible  personal
  property, under a local law, ordinance or resolution imposed pursuant to
  the  authority  of  chapter  eight  hundred seventy-three of the laws of
  nineteen  hundred  thirty-four,  as  amended,  or  chapter  two  hundred
  seventy-eight  of  the laws of nineteen hundred forty-seven, as amended,
  shall be allowed, upon application to the tax commission as provided for
  herein, where such property has been used by the purchaser  or  user  in


 performing  the  services  subject to tax under paragraphs (1), (2), (3)
  and (5) of subdivision (c) of  section  eleven  hundred  five  and  such
  property has become a physical component part of the property upon which
  the  services  are performed or has been transferred to the purchaser of
  the service in conjunction with the performance of the  service  subject
  to  tax,  except  that such refund or credit may not exceed the combined
  state and local taxes, if any, paid, pursuant to this article and  under
  a  tax  imposed pursuant to the authority of article twenty-nine of this
  chapter, on the sale or use of the service in connection with which such
  property was used. Any refund or credit under this subdivision shall  be
  paid  out  of  or charged against the sales and use tax revenues derived
  from the taxes imposed under this article and pursuant to the  authority
  of  article  twenty-nine  of  this chapter in the same proportion as the
  respective rates of such state and local taxes bear to the combined rate
  of both such taxes. The amount to be paid  out  of  or  charged  against
  sales  and use tax revenues of localities derived from the taxes imposed
  pursuant to the authority of article twenty-nine of this  chapter  shall
  be  paid  out  of or charged against such revenues of the locality which
  imposes the tax on the sale or use of the  service  in  connection  with
  which  such  property  was used. An application for the refund or credit
  provided for herein may not be made until the tax on the sale or use  of
  the service has been reported to the tax commission in the return of the
  vendor or the return of the customer, where such return is required, and
  such  application  must  be made within three years of the time such tax
  was payable to the tax commission. Where an application for  credit  has
  been filed, the applicant may immediately take such credit on the return
  which  is due coincident with or immediately subsequent to the time that
  he files his application for credit. However, the taking of  the  credit
  on  the return shall be deemed to be part of the application for credit.
  The procedure for granting or denying such applications  for  refund  or
  credit  and  review  of  such  determinations  shall  be  as provided in
  subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred thirty-nine. No interest shall
  be allowed or paid upon any refund made or credit  allowed  pursuant  to
  this subdivision.
    (f)  With  respect  to  the  additional  tax  of  one  percent imposed
  effective April first, nineteen hundred sixty-nine,  the  provisions  of
  subdivisions  (a),  (b),  (c), (d) and (e) of this section apply, except
  that for the purposes  of  this  subdivision,  all  references  in  said
  subdivisions  (a),  (b),  (c)  and (d) to August first, nineteen hundred
  sixty-five shall be read as referring to April first,  nineteen  hundred
  sixty-nine,  all  references  in  said  subdivision  (a) to April first,
  nineteen hundred sixty-five shall  be  read  as  referring  to  December
  first,   nineteen   hundred  sixty-eight,  and  the  reference  in  said
  subdivision (b) to July thirty-first, nineteen hundred sixty-five  shall
  be read as referring to March thirty-first, nineteen hundred sixty-nine.
  Nothing  herein contained shall be deemed to exempt from tax at the rate
  in  effect  prior  to  April  first,  nineteen  hundred  sixty-nine  any
  transaction  which  may  not  be  subject  to the additional tax imposed
  effective on that date.
    (g) With  respect  to  the  additional  tax  of  one  percent  imposed
  effective  June  first,  nineteen hundred seventy-one, the provisions of
  subdivisions (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) of this  section  apply,  except
  that  for  the  purposes  of  this  subdivision,  all references in said
  subdivisions (a), (b), (c) and (d) to  August  first,  nineteen  hundred
  sixty-five  shall  be  read as referring to June first, nineteen hundred
  seventy-one, all references in said  subdivision  (a)  to  April  first,
  nineteen  hundred  sixty-five  shall  be  read  as referring to February
  first,  nineteen  hundred  seventy-one,  and  the  reference   in   said


 subdivision  (b) to July thirty-first, nineteen hundred sixty-five shall
  be read as referring to May thirty-first, nineteen hundred  seventy-one.
  Nothing  herein contained shall be deemed to exempt from tax at the rate
  in  effect  prior  to  June  first,  nineteen  hundred  seventy-one  any
  transaction which may not be  subject  to  the  additional  tax  imposed
  effective on that date.
    (h)  With  respect to the tax imposed under subdivision (a) of section
  eleven hundred five on retail sales of floor covering, such  as  carpet,
  carpet  padding, linoleum and vinyl roll flooring, carpet tile, linoleum
  tile and vinyl tile, made  on  or  after  the  effective  date  of  this
  subdivision,  the  tax  imposed  under subdivision (c) of section eleven
  hundred five on the service of installing floor covering rendered on  or
  after  such  effective  date  and the compensating use tax imposed under
  section eleven hundred ten on taxable uses of floor  covering  occurring
  on  or  after  such effective date, the provisions of subdivision (a) of
  this section apply, except that for the purposes  of  this  subdivision,
  all references in said subdivision (a) to August first, nineteen hundred
  sixty-five,  shall  be  read  as referring to the effective date of this
  subdivision and all references in said subdivision (a) to  April  first,
  nineteen hundred sixty-five, shall be read as referring to the date four
  months  prior  to such effective date. Nothing herein contained shall be
  deemed to change the taxable status of any sale or use which occurred or
  service which was rendered prior to such effective date.
    (i) The taxes imposed under  paragraph  five  of  subdivision  (c)  of
  section  eleven  hundred  five  with  respect  to  interior cleaning and
  maintenance services performed on a regular contractual basis for a term
  of not less than thirty days and under paragraphs six through  eight  of
  such  subdivision  shall be paid with respect to receipts from all sales
  of services rendered after May thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety,
  although rendered under a prior contract.
    (j)  (i)  The  tax imposed under subparagraph (i) of paragraph nine of
  subdivision (c) of section  eleven  hundred  five  shall  be  paid  with
  respect  to  receipts  from  all sales of services rendered after August
  thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety, although rendered under  a  prior
  contract. Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to change the taxable
  status  of  any  service  which  was  rendered prior to September first,
  nineteen hundred ninety.
    (ii) The tax imposed under subparagraph  (ii)  of  paragraph  nine  of
  subdivision  (c)  of  section  eleven  hundred  five  shall be paid with
  respect  to  the  furnishing  or  provision  of  services  after  August
  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-three,  although  furnished  or
  provided under a prior contract.
    (l) The tax imposed by paragraph ten of  subdivision  (c)  of  section
  eleven  hundred  five of this part must be paid with respect to receipts
  from all sales of services on  or  after  the  effective  date  of  such
  paragraph  although  rendered  or  agreed  to  be rendered under a prior
  contract. Where a service is sold on a monthly,  quarterly,  yearly,  or
  other  term basis, the charge for the service will be subject to the tax
  imposed by that paragraph to the extent that the charge is applicable to
  any period on or after the date  the  tax  becomes  effective,  and  the
  charge  must  be  apportioned on the basis of the ratio of the number of
  days falling within the period to the total number of days in  the  full
  term or period.




   §  1107.  Temporary  municipal  assistance  sales and compensating use
  taxes for cities of one million or more. (a) General. On the  first  day
  of  the  first month following the month in which a municipal assistance
  corporation is created under article ten of the public  authorities  law
  for  a  city of one million or more, in addition to the taxes imposed by
  sections eleven hundred five and eleven hundred  ten,  there  is  hereby
  imposed  on  such  date, within the territorial limits of such city, and
  there shall be paid, additional taxes, at  the  rate  of  four  percent,
  which  except  as  provided in subdivision (b) of this section, shall be
  identical to the taxes imposed  by  sections  eleven  hundred  five  and
  eleven  hundred  ten.  Such  sections  and  the  other  sections of this
  article, including the definition and exemption provisions, shall  apply
  for purposes of the taxes imposed by this section in the same manner and
  with  the same force and effect as if the language of those sections had
  been incorporated in full into this section and had  expressly  referred
  to the taxes imposed by this section.
    (b)  Exceptions. (1) The exemptions provided for in subdivision (c) of
  section  eleven  hundred  fifteen  shall  not  apply   to   fuel,   gas,
  electricity,  refrigeration  and steam, and gas, electric, refrigeration
  and steam service of whatever nature for use or consumption directly and
  exclusively in the production  of  gas,  electricity,  refrigeration  or
  steam.  (2)  The  transitional  provisions  contained  in section eleven
  hundred six shall not apply to the taxes imposed by  this  section.  (3)
  Where  a  sale  of  tangible personal property or services, including an
  agreement therefor, is made in a city in  which  the  taxes  imposed  by
  subdivision  (a)  of  this  section  apply,  but  the property sold, the
  property upon which the services were performed or such  service  is  or
  will  be  delivered  to  the  purchaser elsewhere, such sale will not be
  subject to taxes imposed by such subdivision (a). However,  if  delivery
  occurs  or  will  occur  in  any  city  where  the  tax  imposed by such
  subdivision (a) applies, a vendor will be required to collect  from  the
  purchaser  the  sales or compensating use taxes imposed by this section.
  For the purposes of this section delivery shall  be  deemed  to  include
  transfer  of  possession  to  the  purchaser  and  the  receiving of the
  property or of the service by  the  purchaser.  (4)  The  provisions  of
  section twelve hundred fourteen shall be applicable to this section, but
  any  reference  in that section to a local sales or use tax imposed by a
  city shall mean the additional taxes imposed by subdivision (a)  hereof.
  (5)  Where  a retail sales tax or a compensating use tax was legally due
  and paid to any municipal corporation in this state, without  any  right
  to  a  refund  or  credit  thereof,  with  respect to the sale or use of
  tangible personal property or any of the services subject  to  sales  or
  compensating  use  tax,  if the use of such property or services is then
  subject to the compensating use tax imposed by this section and such tax
  is at a higher rate than the rate  of  tax  imposed  by  such  municipal
  corporation,  the  tax imposed by this section shall also apply but only
  to the extent of the difference in such rates. (6) For purposes of  this
  section, for periods of continuous occupancy first commencing after June
  third,  nineteen hundred eighty, the term "permanent resident" means any
  occupant of any room or rooms in a hotel for at least one hundred eighty
  consecutive days shall be considered a permanent resident with regard to
  the period of such  occupancy.  For  purposes  of  this  subdivision,  a
  payment  to  the  tax  commission  of  a  tax  imposed  by  a  municipal
  corporation shall be deemed a payment to such municipal corporation. (7)
  The provision for  a  refund  or  credit  contained  in  clause  six  of
  subdivision  (a) of section eleven hundred nineteen shall not apply. (8)
  The tax imposed by subdivision (a) of this section shall not be  imposed
  on:  (i)  receipts  from  interior  cleaning  and  maintenance  services


 performed on a regular contractual basis for a term  of  not  less  than
  thirty  days  subject  to tax under paragraph five of subdivision (c) of
  section eleven hundred five other than window cleaning, rodent and  pest
  control  and  trash removal from buildings or receipts from the services
  described in paragraph  eight  of  subdivision  (c)  of  section  eleven
  hundred  five  to the extent a tax is imposed on such services by a city
  with a population of one million or more pursuant to  the  authority  of
  subdivision  (f)  of section twelve hundred twelve-A of this chapter and
  (ii) receipts from the services described in paragraph six or  seven  of
  subdivision  (c) of section eleven hundred five. (9) Except as otherwise
  provided by law, the exemption  provided  for  in  paragraph  thirty  of
  subdivision  (a)  of section eleven hundred fifteen relating to clothing
  and footwear shall not  apply.  (10)  The  exemptions  provided  for  in
  paragraph forty-one of subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred fifteen
  of  this article shall not apply.  (11) Notwithstanding any provision of
  law to the contrary, clothing and footwear and any item used or consumed
  to make or repair such clothing and which becomes a  physical  component
  part  of  such  clothing  shall be exempt from the taxes imposed by this
  section.
    (c) Tax on sale of service of parking, garaging or  storing  of  motor
  vehicles.  On  the  first  day of the first month following the month in
  which a municipal assistance corporation is created under article ten of
  the public authorities law for  a  city  of  one  million  or  more,  in
  addition  to  the  taxes imposed by sections eleven hundred five, eleven
  hundred ten and subdivision (a) of this section, there is hereby imposed
  on such date, within the territorial limits  of  such  city,  and  there
  shall  be  paid, additional taxes at the rate of six percent on receipts
  from every sale of the service of providing parking, garaging or storing
  for motor vehicles by persons operating a garage (other  than  a  garage
  which is part of premises occupied solely as a private one or two family
  dwelling),  parking  lot or other place of business engaged in providing
  parking, garaging or storing of motor vehicles provided,  however,  that
  this  subdivision  shall not apply to such facilities owned and operated
  by such city or an agency or instrumentality of such city  or  a  public
  corporation  the  majority  of  whose members are appointed by the chief
  executive officer of such city or the legislative body of such  city  or
  both of them; provided, however, that receipts for such services paid to
  a  homeowner's association by its members or receipts paid by members of
  a homeowner's association to a person leasing the parking facility  from
  the  homeowner's  association shall not be subject to the tax imposed by
  this subdivision.  For  purposes  of  this  subdivision,  a  homeowner's
  association  is  an  association  (including  a  cooperative  housing or
  apartment  corporation)  (i)  the  membership  of  which  is   comprised
  exclusively  of  owners  or  residents  of  residential  dwelling units,
  including owners of units in a condominium, and  including  shareholders
  in  a cooperative housing or apartment corporation, where such units are
  located in a defined geographical area such as a housing development  or
  subdivision;  and  (ii)  which owns or operates a garage, parking lot or
  other place of  business  engaged  in  providing  parking,  garaging  or
  storing  for motor vehicles located in such area for use (whether or not
  exclusive) by such owners or residents. All provisions set forth in this
  article applicable to the taxes imposed  under  section  eleven  hundred
  five, including the definition and exemption provisions of this article,
  shall apply with respect to a tax imposed under this subdivision, except
  as  to  rate  and  except as otherwise provided herein. The transitional
  provisions contained in section eleven hundred six shall  not  apply  to
  the taxes imposed by this section.


   (d) Termination of taxes. At the later of: (1) the end of the last day
  of  the  month  in  which  all  the  notes  and  bonds of such municipal
  assistance corporation  shall  have  been  fully  paid  and  discharged,
  together  with  interest  thereon and interest on unpaid installments of
  interest,  or  (2)  July first, two thousand eight, the taxes imposed by
  this section shall terminate. Despite such termination,  the  provisions
  of  this  section  and any regulations promulgated thereunder, including
  the  provisions  with  respect  to  assessment,  payment,   termination,
  collection  and  refund  of  such  taxes,  penalties  and  interest, the
  requirements for filing returns, preservation of records and disposition
  of revenue shall continue in full force and effect with respect  to  all
  such taxes accrued up to the effective date of such termination.




   §  1108.  Temporary  municipal  assistance  sales and compensating use
  taxes for cities of under one million. (a) General. On the first day  of
  the  first  month  following  the  month in which a municipal assistance
  corporation is created under article ten of the public  authorities  law
  for a city of less than one million, in addition to the taxes imposed by
  sections  eleven  hundred  five  and eleven hundred ten, there is hereby
  imposed on such date, within the territorial limits of  such  city,  and
  there  shall  be  paid,  additional taxes, at the rate of three percent,
  which except as provided in subdivision (b) of this  section,  shall  be
  identical  to  the  taxes  imposed  by  sections eleven hundred five and
  eleven hundred ten.  Such  sections  and  the  other  sections  of  this
  article,  including the definition and exemption provisions, shall apply
  for purposes of the taxes imposed by this section in the same manner and
  with the same force and effect as if the language of those sections  had
  been  incorporated  in full into this section and has expressly referred
  to the taxes imposed by this section.
    (b) Exceptions. (1)  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  law  to  the
  contrary,  the  receipts from the following shall be exempt from the tax
  on retail sales and the compensating use tax imposed  by  this  section:
  All  sales of tangible personal property for use or consumption directly
  and predominantly in the production of tangible personal property,  gas,
  electricity,   refrigeration  or  steam,  for  sale,  by  manufacturing,
  processing, generating, assembling, refining, mining or extracting;  and
  all   sales  of  tangible  personal  property  for  use  or  consumption
  predominantly either in the production of  tangible  personal  property,
  for  sale, by farming or in a commercial horse boarding operation, or in
  both.
    (2) The transitional provisions contained in  section  eleven  hundred
  six shall not apply to the taxes imposed by this section.
    (3)  Where a sale of tangible personal property or services, including
  an agreement therefor, is made in a city in which the taxes  imposed  by
  subdivision  (a)  of  this  section  apply,  but  the property sold, the
  property upon which the services were performed or such  service  is  or
  will  be  delivered  to  the  purchaser elsewhere, such sale will not be
  subject to taxes imposed by such subdivision (a). However,  if  delivery
  occurs  or  will  occur  in  any  city  where  the  tax  imposed by such
  subdivision (a) applies, a vendor will be required to collect  from  the
  purchaser,  the sales or compensating use taxes imposed by this section.
  For the purposes of this section delivery shall  be  deemed  to  include
  transfer  of  possession  to  the  purchaser  and  the  receiving of the
  property or of the service by the purchaser.
    (4) The  provisions  of  section  twelve  hundred  fourteen  shall  be
  applicable to this section, but any reference in that section to a local
  sales  or  use  tax  imposed  by  a city shall mean the additional taxes
  imposed by subdivision (a) hereof.
    (5) Where a retail sales tax or a compensating use tax was legally due
  and paid to any municipal corporation in this state, without  any  right
  to  a  refund  or  credit  thereof,  with  respect to the sale or use of
  tangible personal property or any of the services subject  to  sales  or
  compensating  use  tax,  if the use of such property or services is then
  subject to the compensating use tax imposed by this section and such tax
  is at a higher rate than the rate  of  tax  imposed  by  such  municipal
  corporation,  the  tax imposed by this section shall also apply but only
  to the extent of the difference in such  rates.  For  purposes  of  this
  subdivision,  a  payment  to  the  tax  commission of a tax imposed by a
  municipal corporation shall  be  deemed  a  payment  to  such  municipal
  corporation.


   (c)  Termination  of taxes. At the end of the last day of the month in
  which all the notes and bonds of such municipal  assistance  corporation
  shall  have  been  fully  paid  and  discharged,  together with interest
  thereon and interest on  unpaid  installments  of  interest,  the  taxes
  imposed  by  this section shall terminate. Despite such termination, the
  provisions of this section and any regulations  promulgated  thereunder,
  including   the   provisions   with   respect  to  assessment,  payment,
  termination, collection and refund of such taxes, the  requirements  for
  filing  returns,  preservations  of  records  and disposition of revenue
  shall continue in full force and effect with respect to all  such  taxes
  accrued up to the effective date of such termination.




   § 1109. Sales and compensating use taxes for the metropolitan commuter
  transportation  district.  (a) General. In addition to the taxes imposed
  by sections eleven hundred five and eleven hundred ten of this  article,
  there   is   hereby   imposed  within  the  territorial  limits  of  the
  metropolitan commuter transportation district  created  and  established
  pursuant  to  section twelve hundred sixty-two of the public authorities
  law, and  there  shall  be  paid,  additional  taxes,  at  the  rate  of
  three-eighths  of  one  percent,  which  shall be identical to the taxes
  imposed by sections eleven hundred five and eleven hundred ten  of  this
  article. Such sections and the other sections of this article, including
  the definition and exemption provisions, shall apply for purposes of the
  taxes imposed by this section in the same manner and with the same force
  and effect as if the language of those sections had been incorporated in
  full  into  this section and had expressly referred to the taxes imposed
  by this section.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the tax imposed by this
  section shall not apply  to  admissions  to  race  tracks  or  simulcast
  facilities.
    (b)  Transitional  provisions.  (1)  With  respect  to  the one-fourth
  percent  rate  imposed  effective  September  first,  nineteen   hundred
  eighty-one,  the  transitional provisions contained in subdivisions (a),
  (b), (c) and (d) of section eleven hundred six  of  this  article  shall
  apply  to  the taxes imposed by this section, except that all references
  in such subdivisions (a), (b), (c) and (d)  to  August  first,  nineteen
  hundred  sixty-five  shall  be  read  as  referring  to September first,
  nineteen hundred eighty-one, all references in such subdivision  (a)  to
  April  first,  nineteen hundred sixty-five shall be read as referring to
  May first, nineteen  hundred  eighty-one,  and  the  reference  in  such
  subdivision  (b) to July thirty-first, nineteen hundred sixty-five shall
  be  read  as  referring  to  August   thirty-first,   nineteen   hundred
  eighty-one.
    (2) With respect to the one-eighth percent rate imposed effective June
  first,  two  thousand  five,  the  transitional  provisions contained in
  subdivisions (a), (b), (c) and (d) of section eleven hundred six of this
  article shall apply to the taxes imposed by this  section,  except  that
  all  references  in  such  subdivisions  (a), (b), (c) and (d) to August
  first, nineteen hundred sixty-five, shall be read as referring  to  June
  first,  two  thousand  five,  all  references in such subdivision (a) to
  April first, nineteen hundred sixty-five, shall be read as referring  to
  February first, two thousand five, and the reference in such subdivision
  (b)  to July thirty-first, nineteen hundred sixty-five, shall be read as
  referring to May thirty-first, two thousand five.
    (c) Deliveries outside the district; deliveries within the district of
  property sold or serviced elsewhere. Where a sale of  tangible  personal
  property  or  services,  including an agreement therefor, is made in the
  district in which the taxes imposed  by  this  section  apply,  but  the
  property  sold,  the  property upon which the services were performed or
  such service is or will be delivered to the  purchaser  elsewhere,  such
  sale  will  not be subject to taxes imposed by this section. However, if
  delivery occurs or will occur in the district where the tax  imposed  by
  this  section  applies,  a  vendor  will be required to collect from the
  purchaser the sales or compensating use taxes imposed by  this  section.
  For  the  purposes  of this section, delivery shall be deemed to include
  transfer of possession  to  the  purchaser  and  the  receiving  of  the
  property  or  of the service by the purchaser. The provisions of section
  twelve hundred fourteen of this chapter  shall  be  applicable  to  this
  section,  but  any reference in that section to a local sales or use tax
  imposed by a city, county or school district shall mean  the  additional
  taxes imposed by this section.


   (d)  Deposit  and  disposition of revenue. (1) The taxes, interest and
  penalties imposed pursuant to this  section  and  received  by  the  tax
  commission,  after  deducting  the  amount  which  the  commissioner  of
  taxation and finance shall determine  to  be  necessary  for  reasonable
  costs   of   the   tax   commission  in  administering,  collecting  and
  distributing such taxes, shall be deposited daily with such  responsible
  banks,  banking  houses  or trust companies, as may be designated by the
  comptroller, to the credit of the comptroller. Such an  account  may  be
  established  in one or more of such depositories. Such deposits shall be
  kept separate and apart from all other money in the  possession  of  the
  comptroller.  The  comptroller  shall require adequate security from all
  such depositories. Of the total revenue collected or received under this
  section, the comptroller shall retain in his hands such  amount  as  the
  commissioner  of  taxation and finance may determine to be necessary for
  refunds under this section.
    (2) On or before the twelfth day of each month, after  reserving  such
  amount for such refunds and such costs, the commissioner of taxation and
  finance  shall  certify to the comptroller the amount of all revenues so
  received during the prior month as a result of the taxes,  interest  and
  penalties  so  imposed and in addition on or before the last day of June
  the commissioner shall certify the  amount  of  such  revenues  received
  during  and  including the first twenty-five days of June. The amount of
  revenues so certified shall be deposited by the comptroller in the  mass
  transportation   operating   assistance   fund  established  by  section
  eighty-eight-a  of  the  state  finance  law  to  the  credit   of   the
  metropolitan mass transportation operating assistance account therein.
    (e)  The  provision  for a refund or credit contained in clause six of
  subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred nineteen shall not apply.
    (f) The exemption contained in paragraph thirty of subdivision (a)  of
  section eleven hundred fifteen of this article shall not apply.
    (g)  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  state  or  local law,
  ordinance or resolution to the contrary: (1) In the event that a county,
  city  or  school  district  located   in   the   metropolitan   commuter
  transportation  district  imposes  taxes  pursuant  to  the authority of
  subpart B of part I of article twenty-nine of this chapter and elects to
  provide the clothing and footwear exemption authorized in paragraph  one
  of subdivision (a) of section twelve hundred ten of this chapter, or the
  taxes  provided  for in section eleven hundred eight of this article are
  in effect in a city located in such district, the exemption provided  by
  paragraph thirty of subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred fifteen of
  this  article  shall  be  applicable in such portion of the metropolitan
  commuter transportation district in which such county,  city  or  school
  district  which  elects  to  provide the clothing and footwear exemption
  authorized in paragraph one of subdivision (a) of section twelve hundred
  ten of this chapter is located, or  where  the  taxes  provided  for  in
  section  eleven  hundred  eight  of  this  part  are in effect in a city
  located in such district. The commissioner shall determine  and  certify
  to  the  comptroller  the  amount  of  revenue  forgone  at  the rate of
  three-eighths of one percent under this section in such county, city  or
  school  district  on  account  of sales of clothing and footwear in such
  county, city or school district.
    (2) Commencing with the sales tax quarterly period which commences  on
  March   first,   two   thousand,   the   commissioner  shall  make  such
  determinations and certifications  on  the  twelfth  day  of  the  month
  following  the  month in which sales tax quarterly returns are due under
  section eleven hundred thirty-six of this article with respect  to  such
  quarterly  period  for  as long as such clothing and footwear exemptions
  from such taxes imposed pursuant to the authority of article twenty-nine


 of this chapter or by section eleven hundred eight of this part  are  in
  effect.  Neither  the  commissioner  nor  the  comptroller shall be held
  liable for any inaccuracy in  such  determinations  and  certifications.
  Such  determinations and certifications may be based on such information
  as may be available to the commissioner at the time such  determinations
  and  certifications  must  be  made  under  this  subdivision and may be
  estimated on the basis of percentages or other indices  calculated  from
  distributions  from  prior periods. The commissioner shall be authorized
  to require such information  as  the  commissioner  deems  necessary  to
  comply  with  the requirements of this subdivision from persons required
  to file returns under such section eleven  hundred  thirty-six  of  this
  article.
    (3)  By  the  fifteenth day of the month in which the commissioner has
  made the certifications to the comptroller described in paragraph two of
  this subdivision, the comptroller shall bill any county, city or  school
  district  in  such  metropolitan  commuter transportation district which
  provides such clothing and footwear exemption,  and  any  city  in  such
  district  in  which the taxes imposed by section eleven hundred eight of
  this part are in effect, an amount  equal  to  one-half  of  the  amount
  certified  to  the  comptroller  by  the commissioner in respect of such
  county, city or  school  district;  and  such  county,  city  or  school
  district  shall  pay  the  amount of such bill to the comptroller by the
  twenty-fifth day of such month. The comptroller shall deposit  any  such
  amounts  received  in  the mass transportation operating assistance fund
  established by section eighty-eight-a of the state finance  law  to  the
  credit  of  the  metropolitan  mass  transportation operating assistance
  account therein.
    (4) In the event that a county, city or school district  imposing  tax
  pursuant  to the authority of subpart B of part I of article twenty-nine
  of this chapter does not pay in full a bill described in paragraph three
  of this subdivision by the twenty-fifth day of the  month  described  in
  paragraphs  two  and  three  of  this subdivision, the comptroller shall
  deduct any amount not paid from  the  amount  of  the  next  payment  or
  payments   due   such  county,  city  or  school  district  pursuant  to
  subdivision (c) of section twelve  hundred  sixty-one  of  this  chapter
  until  such  amount  not  paid has been recovered. The comptroller shall
  deposit the amounts so deducted and recovered in the mass transportation
  operating assistance fund to be credited as provided in paragraph  three
  of this subdivision.
    (5)  In  the  event  that a city in which the taxes imposed by section
  eleven hundred eight of this article are in effect does not pay in  full
  a  bill  described  in  paragraph  three  of  this  subdivision  by  the
  twenty-fifth day of the month described in paragraphs two and  three  of
  this  subdivision, the comptroller shall deduct any amount not paid from
  the amount of any other moneys due such city from the  comptroller,  not
  otherwise  pledged, dedicated or encumbered pursuant to other state law,
  until such amount not paid has been  recovered.  The  comptroller  shall
  deposit the amounts so deducted and recovered in the mass transportation
  operating  assistance fund to be credited as provided in paragraph three
  of this subdivision.
    (6) The commissioner shall certify the amount of any over  calculation
  or  under  calculation  of  any certification required to be made to the
  comptroller under paragraph three of this subdivision as soon after  its
  discovery  as reasonably possible and subsequent bills to a city, county
  or school district to which the over calculation  or  under  calculation
  relates shall be adjusted accordingly, provided that the comptroller may
  adjust such number of subsequent bills as the comptroller shall consider


 reasonable  in  view of the amount of the adjustment and all other facts
  and circumstances.
    (7)  On  the  same  date  that  the  comptroller is required to bill a
  county, city or school district an amount as provided in paragraph three
  of this subdivision, the comptroller shall, after having first made  any
  deposits  required  by section ninety-two-r of the state finance law and
  only to the extent that there are moneys  remaining  after  having  made
  such  required  deposits, withdraw from the state treasury, to the debit
  of the general fund, an  amount  equal  to  the  total  of  the  amounts
  required  to be billed to counties, cities and school districts pursuant
  to such subdivision three and deposit such  total  amount  in  the  mass
  transportation  operating  assistance fund to be credited as provided in
  such paragraph three. The  amount  of  any  over  calculation  or  under
  calculation  determined  in  paragraph  six  of  this  subdivision shall
  likewise be applied to the amounts required to be deposited  under  this
  paragraph,  so that the amounts deposited under this paragraph equal the
  total of the amounts required to  be  billed  to  counties,  cities  and
  school  districts  under  such paragraph three, as adjusted, pursuant to
  paragraph six of this subdivision.
    (h) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary:
    (1) The commissioner shall determine and certify  to  the  comptroller
  the  amount  of revenue foregone as a result of the cents per gallon tax
  in paragraph two of subdivision (m) of section eleven hundred eleven  of
  this part in lieu of tax at the rate provided in subdivision (a) of this
  section.
    (2)  Commencing  with the sales tax quarterly period beginning on June
  first, two thousand six, the commissioner shall make such determinations
  and certifications on the twelfth day of the month following  the  month
  in  which  sales  tax  quarterly  returns  are  due under section eleven
  hundred thirty-six of  this  article  with  respect  to  such  quarterly
  period.  Such  determinations  and  certifications  may be based on such
  information as may be available to the commissioner  at  the  time  such
  determinations  and  certifications must be made under this subdivision.
  The commissioner shall be authorized to require such information as  the
  commissioner  deems  necessary  to  comply with the requirements of this
  subdivision from persons required to file  returns  under  such  section
  eleven hundred thirty-six.
    (3)  The  comptroller  shall,  after  having  first  made any deposits
  required by section ninety-two-r of the state finance law  and  only  to
  the  extent  that  there  are  moneys  remaining  after having made such
  required deposits, withdraw from the state treasury, to the debit of the
  general fund, and shall deposit the amount certified by the commissioner
  as such revenue foregone in the mass transportation operating assistance
  fund established by section eighty-eight-a of the state finance  law  to
  the  credit of the metropolitan mass transportation operating assistance
  account therein.
    (4) Neither the commissioner nor the comptroller shall be held  liable
  for  any  inaccuracy  in  such  determinations  and  certifications. The
  commissioner shall certify the amount of any over calculation  or  under
  calculation  of any certification required to be made to the comptroller
  under this  subdivision  as  soon  after  its  discovery  as  reasonably
  possible.




   §  1110.  Imposition of compensating use tax. (a) Except to the extent
  that property or services have already been or will be  subject  to  the
  sales  tax under this article, there is hereby imposed on every person a
  use tax for the use within this state on and after June first,  nineteen
  hundred seventy-one except as otherwise exempted under this article, (A)
  of  any  tangible  personal  property  purchased  at  retail, (B) of any
  tangible personal property (other than computer  software  used  by  the
  author  or  other  creator)  manufactured, processed or assembled by the
  user, (i) if items of the same kind of tangible  personal  property  are
  offered  for  sale  by  him in the regular course of business or (ii) if
  items are used as such or incorporated into  a  structure,  building  or
  real  property  by  a contractor, subcontractor or repairman in erecting
  structures or  buildings,  or  building  on,  or  otherwise  adding  to,
  altering,  improving, maintaining, servicing or repairing real property,
  property or land, as the terms  real  property,  property  or  land  are
  defined  in the real property tax law, if items of the same kind are not
  offered for sale as such by such contractor, subcontractor or  repairman
  or  other  user  in  the  regular  course of business, (C) of any of the
  services described in paragraphs (1), (7) and (8) of subdivision (c)  of
  section  eleven  hundred five of this part, (D) of any tangible personal
  property, however acquired, where not acquired for purposes  of  resale,
  upon  which any of the services described in paragraphs (2), (3) and (7)
  of subdivision (c) of section eleven hundred five of this part have been
  performed,  (E)  of  any  telephone  answering  service   described   in
  subdivision  (b) of section eleven hundred five of this part, (F) of any
  computer software written or otherwise created by the user if  the  user
  offers  software  of  a  similar kind for sale as such or as a component
  part of other property in the regular course of  business,  (G)  of  any
  prepaid  telephone  calling  service,  and (H) of any gas or electricity
  described in subdivision (b) of section  eleven  hundred  five  of  this
  part.
    (b) For purposes of clause (A) of subdivision (a) of this section, the
  tax  shall  be at the rate of four percent of the consideration given or
  contracted to be given for  such  property,  or  for  the  use  of  such
  property, including any charges for shipping or delivery as described in
  paragraph  three  of  subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred one, but
  excluding any credit for tangible personal  property  accepted  in  part
  payment and intended for resale.
    (c)  For purposes of subclause (i) of clause (B) of subdivision (a) of
  this section, the tax shall be at the rate of four percent of the  price
  at  which  items  of  the  same  kind  of tangible personal property are
  offered for sale by the user, and the mere storage,  keeping,  retention
  or  withdrawal  from storage of tangible personal property by the person
  who manufactured, processed or assembled  such  property  shall  not  be
  deemed  a  taxable  use by him; provided, however, that if the user uses
  such an item itself on its own premises (not including making a gift  of
  such  tangible  personal  property), solely in the conduct of the user's
  own business operations, and the  item  retains  its  characteristic  as
  tangible  personal  property when so used, the tax shall be at the rate,
  and on the consideration, described in subdivision (d) of this section.
    (d) For purposes of subclause (ii) of clause (B) of subdivision (a) of
  this section, the tax shall be at  the  rate  of  four  percent  of  the
  consideration  given or contracted to be given for the tangible personal
  property manufactured, processed or assembled into the tangible personal
  property the use of which is subject to tax, including any  charges  for
  shipping  or delivery as described in paragraph three of subdivision (b)
  of section eleven hundred one.


   (e) Notwithstanding the foregoing, provisions  of  this  section,  for
  purposes  of  clause (B) of subdivision (a) of this section, there shall
  be no tax on any portion of such price which represents the value  added
  by  the  user  to  tangible  personal  property  which he fabricates and
  installs  to the specifications of an addition or capital improvement to
  real property, property or land, as the terms real property, property or
  land are defined in the real  property  tax  law,  over  and  above  the
  prevailing  normal  purchase  price  prior  to  such fabrication of such
  tangible personal property which a manufacturer, producer  or  assembler
  would  charge  an  unrelated  contractor  who  similarly  fabricated and
  installed such tangible personal property to the  specifications  of  an
  addition or capital improvement to such real property, property or land.
    (f)  For  purposes  of clauses (C), (D), and (E) of subdivision (a) of
  this section, the tax shall be at  the  rate  of  four  percent  of  the
  consideration given or contracted to be given for the service, including
  the  consideration  for  any  tangible  personal property transferred in
  conjunction with the performance of the service and also  including  any
  charges  for shipping and delivery of the property so transferred and of
  the tangible personal property upon which the service was  performed  as
  such  charges  are  described  in  paragraph three of subdivision (b) of
  section eleven hundred one.
    (g) For purposes of clause (F) of subdivision (a) of this section, the
  tax shall be at the rate of four percent of the consideration  given  or
  contracted  to  be  given  for  the  tangible  personal  property  which
  constitutes  the  blank  medium,  such  as  disks  or  tapes,  used   in
  conjunction  with the software, or for the use of such property, and the
  mere storage, keeping, retention or withdrawal from storage of  computer
  software  described  in  such  clause (F) by its author or other creator
  shall not be deemed a taxable use by such person.
    (h) For purposes of clause (G) of subdivision (a) of this section, the
  tax shall be at the rate of four percent of the consideration  given  or
  contracted  to be given for the service, including the consideration for
  any tangible personal  property  transferred  in  conjunction  with  the
  service  and also including any charges for shipping and delivery of the
  property so transferred as such charges are described in paragraph three
  of subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred one; provided that, if  the
  user  offers  like  services for sale in the regular course of business,
  the tax shall be at the rate of four percent of the price at  which  the
  user offers such like services for sale.
    (i) For purposes of clause (H) of subdivision (a) of this section, the
  tax  shall  be at the rate of four percent of the consideration given or
  contracted to be given for, or for the use of, the gas  or  electricity,
  including   the   consideration   for  any  tangible  personal  property
  transferred in conjunction with the performance thereof,  and  including
  any  charges  described in paragraph three of subdivision (b) of section
  eleven hundred one of this article.




   §  1111.  Special rules for computing receipts and consideration.  (a)
  The retail sales tax imposed under subdivision  (a)  of  section  eleven
  hundred  five  of  this  part and the compensating use tax imposed under
  section eleven hundred ten of this part, when  computed  in  respect  to
  tangible personal property wherever manufactured, processed or assembled
  and  used  by  such  manufacturer, processor or assembler in the regular
  course of business within this state, shall be based  on  the  price  at
  which  items  of the same kind of tangible personal property are offered
  for sale by him, except to the extent otherwise provided in this section
  or section eleven hundred ten of this part.
    (b) Tangible personal property, which has been purchased by a resident
  of New York state outside of this state for use outside  of  this  state
  and  subsequently  becomes  subject  to the compensating use tax imposed
  under this article, shall be taxed on the basis of the purchase price of
  such property, provided, however:
    (1) That where a taxpayer affirmatively shows that  the  property  was
  used outside such state by him for more than six months prior to its use
  within  this state, such property shall be taxed on the basis of current
  market value of the property at the time of its first  use  within  this
  state.  The  value  of such property, for compensating use tax purposes,
  may not exceed its cost.
    (2) That the compensating use tax on such tangible  personal  property
  brought  into  this  state  (other  than for complete consumption or for
  incorporation into real property located in this state) and used in  the
  performance  of  a  contract  or  sub-contract  within  this  state by a
  purchaser or user for a period of less than six months may be based,  at
  the  option  of  the taxpayer, on the fair rental value of such property
  for the period of use within this state.
    (c) For the amount and timing of tax in respect to property leased, or
  sold under a contract deferring payments,  see  section  eleven  hundred
  thirty-two.  For  the  amount  and  timing  of tax in respect to certain
  leased property, see subdivision (i) of this section.
    (d) The commissioner is authorized and  empowered  to  prescribe  and,
  from  time  to  time,  to  amend  schedules  of  the amount of tax to be
  collected upon each gallon of motor fuel and diesel motor fuel  sold  at
  retail  and upon each gallon of such fuel subject to the tax required to
  be prepaid pursuant to section eleven hundred two  of  this  article  or
  upon  each package of cigarettes sold at retail and upon each package of
  cigarettes subject to the tax  required  to  be  prepaid  under  section
  eleven  hundred  three  of  this  article,  as  the  commissioner  shall
  determine  is  approximately  equal  to  the  average   rate   otherwise
  applicable, considering the regional average retail sales prices of such
  fuel,  the  amount  of  the  prepaid  tax  per  package of cigarettes in
  accordance with subdivision (j) of this section and, in the  case  of  a
  sale  at retail, the ordinary price ranges for such fuel and cigarettes,
  in lieu of the regular schedule based  on  total  receipts.  Such  rates
  shall  be  uniform  in  each  county  but  may vary as between counties,
  depending on the general price ranges in  effect  in  each  county,  but
  counties  wholly within a city shall have a uniform rate. If a political
  subdivision of a county imposes a retail sales  and  use  tax,  separate
  rates may be prescribed for it. Such schedules with reference to the tax
  required  to  be prepaid on motor fuel and diesel motor fuel pursuant to
  section eleven hundred two of this article or the  tax  required  to  be
  prepaid on cigarettes under section eleven hundred three of this article
  may fix the rate per gallon or per package of cigarettes in multiples of
  one-tenth  of  one  cent,  depending,  in  the case of such fuel, on the
  regional average retail sales prices where such fuel is, as the case may
  be, imported, manufactured, sold or used. Such schedules with  reference


 to such fuel or cigarettes sold at retail may fix the rate per gallon or
  per  package,  as the case may be, in multiples of one-tenth of one cent
  depending on the price at which such fuel or cigarettes are sold.  Where
  schedules  fixing  the  rate per gallon in multiples of one-tenth of one
  cent have been promulgated, the price shown on any metered pump or other
  dispensing device from which such fuel is sold to a  purchaser  of  such
  fuel, to be delivered directly to a vehicle propelled by any power other
  than  muscular,  shall  include  the  tax  at the rate so fixed, and the
  commissioner may by regulation prescribe the manner in which the  amount
  of  tax  shall  be  shown  for  the information of customers by signs or
  placards on the premises where such fuel is sold. When  determining  tax
  required  to  be  collected  on  the retail sale of motor fuel or diesel
  motor fuel or cigarettes, the receipts on which tax  is  computed  shall
  not include the amount of tax required to be prepaid pursuant to section
  eleven hundred two of this article with respect to such fuel or pursuant
  to  section  eleven  hundred  three of this article with respect to such
  cigarettes.
    (e) (1) There are hereby created  and  established  within  the  state
  three  regions for purposes of the payment of the tax imposed by section
  eleven hundred two of this article. (i) the first region  shall  consist
  of  the  localities included in the metropolitan commuter transportation
  district created and established  pursuant  to  section  twelve  hundred
  sixty-two  of  the  public  authorities  law,  excluding  all localities
  included in the counties of Nassau and Suffolk. (ii) The  second  region
  shall  consist  of the localities included in the counties of Nassau and
  Suffolk. (iii) The third region shall consist of the area of  the  state
  outside  the  regions  referred to in subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this
  paragraph.
    (2) (i) Where the motor fuel is imported, manufactured or sold in,  or
  diesel  motor  fuel  is  sold  or  used  in  the  region  referred to in
  subparagraph (i) of paragraph one of this subdivision, the tax  required
  to  be prepaid pursuant to section eleven hundred two of this article on
  each gallon of such fuel shall be sixteen cents.
    (ii) Where motor fuel is imported, manufactured or sold in, or  diesel
  motor  fuel  is  sold  or used in the region referred to in subparagraph
  (ii) of paragraph one of  this  subdivision,  the  tax  required  to  be
  prepaid  pursuant  to section eleven hundred two of this article on each
  gallon of such fuel shall be sixteen cents.
    (iii) Where motor fuel is imported, manufactured or sold in, or diesel
  motor fuel is sold or used in the region  referred  to  in  subparagraph
  (iii)  of  paragraph  one  of  this  subdivision, the tax required to be
  prepaid pursuant to section eleven hundred two of this article  on  each
  gallon of such fuel shall be fifteen cents.
    (3)  When  a wholesaler of motor fuel sells motor fuel in a region, as
  defined in paragraph one of this subdivision, different from the  region
  in which such motor fuel was purchased:
    (i)  if  the  region  in  which  it  sells the motor fuel has a higher
  prepaid rate as set forth in this subdivision than the region  in  which
  the  wholesaler purchased the motor fuel in, the wholesaler shall pay to
  the department the difference in the rates for the gallonage sold.
    (ii) if the region in which it  sells  the  motor  fuel  has  a  lower
  prepaid  rate  as set forth in this subdivision than the region in which
  the wholesaler  purchased  the  motor  fuel,  the  wholesaler  shall  be
  entitled  to  a credit or refund for the difference in the rates for the
  gallonage sold.
    (4) The commissioner is authorized to adjust the  rates  in  paragraph
  two of this subdivision and shall prescribe a schedule of such rates for


 each  region  described in paragraph one of this subdivision as provided
  in this paragraph.
    (i)  The  schedule  required  by  this  paragraph  shall  be  reviewed
  semiannually during the months  of  April  and  October  of  each  year,
  beginning  in  October,  two  thousand seventeen. The commissioner shall
  determine a tentative rate of tax that would be required to  be  prepaid
  pursuant to section eleven hundred two of this article on each gallon of
  motor fuel or diesel motor fuel sold or used by multiplying the regional
  average  retail  sales prices for such fuel for each region described in
  paragraph one of this subdivision  by  a  number  that  is  seventy-five
  percent  of  the  average  local  sales tax rate in each such region and
  adding to the product thereof the taxes imposed by  paragraphs  one  and
  two  of  subdivision  (m)  of  this section. The regional average retail
  sales price shall be determined for purposes of this  subdivision  using
  data regarding sales prices, which shall include, but not be limited to,
  sales  prices as compiled by government or industry surveys and sources,
  taking into consideration with respect to motor fuel,  the  volumes  and
  prices  of  unleaded  motor  fuels, including reformulated or like motor
  fuels, sold in this state and with respect to both motor fuel and diesel
  motor fuel, the volume and prices of such fuels sold at full service and
  self-service pumps for  such  fuels,  during  an  immediately  preceding
  period  of  up to twelve months ending the last day of March in the case
  of the April semiannual review and ending the last day of  September  in
  the  case  of the October semiannual review; provided, however, that the
  regional average retail sales prices for  both  motor  fuel  and  diesel
  motor  fuel  shall  represent the retail sales prices upon which the tax
  under this article and pursuant to the authority of article  twenty-nine
  of  this  chapter  is  computed (including all federal and state and any
  local taxes included in such price) for such period.
    (ii) If upon such review, it is determined that the tentative rate  of
  tax  that would be required to be prepaid for motor fuel or diesel motor
  fuel  in  any  of  the  regions  described  in  paragraph  one  of  this
  subdivision  would increase or decrease the rate for such region then in
  effect by two or more cents per gallon, the  commissioner  shall  adjust
  such  rate to be equal to the tentative rate, which shall take effect on
  the first day of June  or  the  first  day  of  December,  respectively.
  Provided,  however,  the commissioner shall set the rate of tax required
  to be prepaid in the region described in subparagraph (ii) of  paragraph
  one  of this subdivision equal to the rate set forth in subparagraph (i)
  of such paragraph, unless the regional average retail sales price in the
  metropolitan commuter transportation district exceeds four  dollars  per
  gallon.  In  such  event,  the commissioner is authorized to establish a
  separate rate in the region described  in  such  subparagraph  (ii)  and
  shall compute such rate by multiplying the regional average retail sales
  prices  for  motor fuel and diesel motor fuel in such region by a number
  that is eighty-five percent of the average local sales tax rate in  such
  region and adding to the product thereof the taxes imposed by paragraphs
  one and two of subdivision (m) of this section.
    (iii) The commissioner shall cause to be published on the department's
  website  the  schedule  of  rates  and the regional average retail sales
  prices of motor fuel and diesel motor fuel fixed  by  this  section,  no
  later  than  ten  days  prior  to  the  effective  date  of  such rates.
  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  law,  the  calculation   and
  publication  of  the  rates  so  fixed by the provisions of this section
  shall not be included within paragraph (a) of subdivision two of section
  one hundred two of the state administrative procedure  act  relating  to
  the definition of a rule.


   (5)  Where  a new rate of tax required to be prepaid for motor fuel or
  diesel motor fuel is determined by the commissioner,  (i)  if  such  new
  rate  is less than the rate then in effect, on the date the rate becomes
  effective (A) a registered distributor shall be entitled to a credit  in
  an  amount equal to the difference between the amount of the prepaid tax
  paid or incurred by him or her with respect to motor fuel  which  he  or
  she  imported  and which he or she has in inventory at the time such new
  rate becomes effective and the amount of tax which would be due on  such
  inventory  if  the prepaid tax were calculated based on such new average
  price for the region in which such motor fuel was imported and (B)  such
  inventory  shall then be deemed to have been taxed based on the rate and
  all certifications of tax payment given by the distributor with  respect
  to  motor  fuel  in  such inventory shall indicate a pass through of the
  prepaid tax based on such new price, (ii) if such new  rate  is  greater
  than  the existing rate, on the date such new rate becomes effective (A)
  such distributor shall become liable to pay an additional tax  equal  to
  the difference between the amount of tax which would be due with respect
  to  motor  fuel  which  he  or  she  imported and which he or she has in
  inventory at the time such new rate becomes effective if the prepaid tax
  on such motor fuel were calculated based on such new average  price  for
  the  region  in  which  such  motor  fuel was imported and the amount of
  prepaid tax paid or actually incurred by such distributor  with  respect
  to  such  motor fuel and (B) such inventory shall then be deemed to have
  been taxed based on the new rate and all certifications of  tax  payment
  given  by  the  distributor with respect to motor fuel in such inventory
  shall indicate a pass through of the prepaid tax based on such new rate.
  Such credit shall be allowed with respect to or such tax shall  be  paid
  with  the  return  covering the month immediately preceding the month in
  which such new rate becomes  effective.  Any  carryover  credit  may  be
  applied  to  subsequent periods. The amount to be reported as additional
  tax shall be paid and disposed of in the same manner as the tax required
  to be prepaid by section  eleven  hundred  two  of  this  article.  Such
  additional  tax shall be determined, assessed, collected and enforced in
  the same manner as the tax required to  be  prepaid  by  section  eleven
  hundred two of this article.
    (f)  The  retail  sales  tax  imposed under subdivision (a) of section
  eleven hundred five and the compensating use tax imposed  under  section
  eleven hundred ten, when computed in respect to a new mobile home, shall
  be  computed  on  seventy percent of the receipts or consideration given
  therefor by the purchaser or user.
    (g) The sale of race horses made through  claiming  races  within  the
  state,  shall  be  subject to sales tax but only on such portions of the
  total purchase price that exceed  the  highest  of  any  prior  purchase
  prices  paid for the same horse during the same calendar year within the
  state. Where no previous purchases have  been  made  within  a  calendar
  year,  the  full  purchase price shall be taxable. Officials of all race
  tracks in the state shall maintain and make available,  upon  reasonable
  request, accurate and detailed lists of such sales.
    (h)  Receipts  subject  to tax under subdivision (a) of section eleven
  hundred five on retail sales of  cigarettes  and  tobacco  products  and
  consideration given or contracted to be given for cigarettes and tobacco
  products  the  uses  of  which  are  subject to tax under section eleven
  hundred ten shall be deemed to include any tax imposed on cigarettes and
  tobacco products by article twenty of this chapter and any  tax  imposed
  on  cigarettes by chapter thirteen of title eleven of the administrative
  code of the city of New York.
    (i) (A) Notwithstanding any contrary provisions  of  this  article  or
  other  law,  with respect to any lease for a term of one year or more of


 (1) a motor vehicle, as defined in section one  hundred  twenty-five  of
  the vehicle and traffic law, with a gross vehicle weight of ten thousand
  pounds  or  less,  or  (2)  a  vessel,  as defined in section twenty-two
  hundred  fifty  of such law (including any inboard or outboard motor and
  any trailer, as defined in section one hundred fifty-six  of  such  law,
  leased  in conjunction with such a vessel), or an option to renew such a
  lease  or  a  similar  contractual  provision,  all  receipts   due   or
  consideration  given  or  contracted to be given for such property under
  and for the entire period of such lease,  option  to  renew  or  similar
  provision,  or combination of them, shall be deemed to have been paid or
  given and shall be subject to  tax,  and  any  such  tax  due  shall  be
  collected,  as  of the date of first payment under such lease, option to
  renew or similar provision, or combination of them, or as of the date of
  registration of such property with the commissioner of  motor  vehicles,
  whichever  is  earlier.  Notwithstanding  any inconsistent provisions of
  subdivision (b) of this section or of section eleven  hundred  seventeen
  of this article or of other law, for purposes of such a lease, option to
  renew  or  similar provision originally entered into outside this state,
  by a lessee (1) who was a  resident  of  this  state,  and  leased  such
  property  for  use  outside  the  state and who subsequently brings such
  property into this state for use here or (2) who was a  nonresident  and
  subsequently  becomes a resident and brings the property into this state
  for use here, any remaining receipts due or consideration  to  be  given
  after  such lessee brings such property into this state shall be subject
  to tax as if the lessee had entered into or exercised such lease, option
  to renew or similar provision, or combination  thereof,  for  the  first
  time  in  this  state  and  the  relevant  provisions of sections eleven
  hundred ten concerning imposition and computation of tax, eleven hundred
  eighteen concerning exemption from use  tax  for  tax  paid  to  another
  jurisdiction,   eleven  hundred  thirty-two  concerning  presumption  of
  taxability  and  conditions  for   registration   and   eleven   hundred
  thirty-nine  concerning refunds, of this article, shall be applicable to
  any sales or compensating use tax paid by the lessee before  the  lessee
  brought the property into this state, except to the extent that any such
  provision  is  inconsistent  with  a  provision of this subdivision. For
  purposes of this subdivision, (1) a lease for a term of one year or more
  shall include any lease for a shorter term which includes an  option  to
  renew  or other like provision (or more than one of such option or other
  provision) where the cumulative period that the lease, with  or  without
  such  option or provision, may be in effect upon exercise of such option
  or provision is one year or more and (2) receipts due and  consideration
  given  or contracted to be given under any such lease or other provision
  for excess mileage charges shall be subject to tax as and when  paid  or
  due.
    (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding   any   inconsistent  provisions  of  this
  subdivision, with respect to a lease of a  motor  vehicle  described  in
  paragraph  (A)  of this subdivision for a term of one year or more which
  includes an indeterminate number of options to renew  or  other  similar
  contractual  provisions  or  which  includes  thirty-six or more monthly
  options to renew beyond the initial term,  and  under  which  lease  the
  lessee  of  such motor vehicle has certified in the writing described in
  clause (i) of subparagraph (C) of paragraph two  of  subsection  (h)  of
  section  7701  of  the  internal  revenue code of 1986, under penalty of
  perjury, that the lessee intends that more than fifty percent of the use
  of such vehicle is to be in a trade  or  business  of  the  lessee,  all
  receipts due or consideration given or contracted to be given under such
  lease for the first thirty-two months, or the period of the initial term
  if greater, of such lease shall be deemed to have been paid or given and


 shall  be  subject  to  tax  in  accordance  with the provisions of this
  subdivision.
    For each such option to renew, or similar provision, or combination of
  them, exercised after the first thirty-two months, or the period of such
  initial  term,  if longer, of any such lease, tax due under this article
  shall be collected  and  paid  or  paid  over  without  regard  to  this
  subdivision.
    (2)  If at the termination of a lease described in subparagraph one of
  this  paragraph  the  lessor  refunds  a  portion  of  the  receipt   or
  consideration  to the lessee as required by a terminal rental adjustment
  clause of such lease, either: (i) the  lessee  may  claim  a  refund  or
  credit   for  the  sales  tax  it  paid  on  such  refunded  receipt  or
  consideration; or (ii) the lessor may claim a refund or  credit  of  the
  sales  tax  paid by the lessee on such refunded receipt or consideration
  if it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the commissioner  that  it
  first refunded such tax to the lessee. Notwithstanding the provisions of
  subdivision  (c)  of section eleven hundred thirty-nine of this article,
  such claim for refund or credit shall be considered timely if it is made
  within three years  after  the  tax  was  paid  by  the  lessor  to  the
  commissioner  or  one  year  after  such  receipt  or  consideration was
  refunded to the lessee, whichever is later; provided, however,  that  no
  interest  shall  be  paid  on  a  refund or credit made pursuant to this
  subparagraph.
    (C) Any receipts due or consideration given or contracted to be  given
  under  an  option  to renew a lease of a motor vehicle described in this
  subdivision or similar contractual provision, or  combination  of  them,
  exercised as part of any such lease between the same lessor and the same
  lessee  with  respect  to the same motor vehicle or vehicles, where such
  lease or any  option  to  renew  such  a  lease  or  any  other  similar
  contractual  provision  was  subject  to  tax  in  accordance  with  the
  provisions of this subdivision, shall not be subject to the tax  imposed
  under the provisions of article twenty-eight-A of this chapter.
    (j)  (1)  The  tax  required  to be prepaid pursuant to section eleven
  hundred three of this article shall be computed by multiplying the  base
  retail  price  by  a  tax  rate of eight percent and rounding the result
  thereof to the nearest whole cent per package.
    (2) For purposes of this subdivision, the base retail price shall mean
  for the period September first, nineteen  hundred  ninety-five,  through
  August  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred ninety-six, one dollar for each
  package of cigarettes containing ten cigarettes or fraction thereof, and
  two dollars for each package of cigarettes containing twenty  cigarettes
  or  fraction  thereof  in  excess of ten and, if a package contains more
  than twenty cigarettes, the base retail  price  shall  be  increased  by
  fifty  cents  for  each five cigarettes or fraction thereof in excess of
  twenty. Effective for the twelve-month period commencing  on  the  first
  day  of  September  of  each  year,  the  base retail price for any such
  package shall be adjusted as follows: As soon as practicable after  June
  first of each year, the base retail price in effect for the twelve-month
  period  commencing on the immediately preceding September first shall be
  multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is  the  total  of  the
  sums  of  the  manufacturers'  list price for a carton of standard brand
  cigarettes containing ten packages of twenty cigarettes and  the  amount
  of  cigarette  tax  imposed  by  subdivision one of section four hundred
  seventy-one of this chapter on such a carton of cigarettes, in effect on
  the first day of each month, for each of the twelve  consecutive  months
  ending  with  such  month  of  June, and the denominator of which is the
  total of the sums of the manufacturers' list price for such a carton  of
  cigarettes and the amount of cigarette tax imposed by subdivision one of


 section  four  hundred  seventy-one  of this chapter on such a carton of
  cigarettes, in effect on the first day of each month, for  each  of  the
  twelve  consecutive  months  ending  with  the  month  of  June  of  the
  immediately  preceding  year.  Provided,  however,  for  purposes of the
  adjustment to any  such  base  retail  price  required  for  the  period
  commencing  September  first, two thousand two, the denominator shall be
  such total with respect to the twelve consecutive months ending with the
  month of June, nineteen hundred ninety-seven.  The  manufacturers'  list
  price  for a carton of standard brand cigarettes containing ten packages
  of twenty cigarettes in effect on the first day  of  a  month  shall  be
  determined  by  calculating  a  weighted  average  of  each of the major
  manufacturer's list prices for such a carton of cigarettes in effect  on
  the  frist  day  of  such month, as such list prices are reported to the
  department by such manufacturers, in the department's  determination  of
  the cost of cigarettes under article twenty-A of this chapter, and using
  the  most recently published annual national market shares of such major
  manufacturers. The commissioner shall  cause  to  be  published  in  the
  section  for miscellaneous notices in the state register, and give other
  appropriate  general  notice  of,  the  base  retail  price   adjustment
  calculation  and  the  resulting base retail price fixed by this section
  for the  period  commencing  September  first  of  each  year  beginning
  September   first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-six,  no  later  than  the
  immediately  preceding  first  day  of  August.  The   calculation   and
  publication  of  the  base  retail  price so fixed by provisions of this
  section shall not be included within the definition of "rule" as defined
  in paragraph (a) of subdivision two of section one hundred  two  of  the
  state  administrative  procedure  act. The base retail prices determined
  pursuant to this paragraph shall be rounded to the nearest one-tenth  of
  one cent for each package containing ten cigarettes or fraction thereof,
  for  each package containing twenty cigarettes and, if packages are sold
  in excess of twenty cigarettes and stamps have been issued therefor, for
  each such package.
    (k) Receipts subject to tax under subdivision (a)  of  section  eleven
  hundred five of this article on retail sales of motor fuel, diesel motor
  fuel   and  residual  petroleum  product,  and  consideration  given  or
  contracted to be given for motor fuel, diesel motor  fuel  and  residual
  petroleum  product,  the  uses of which are subject to tax under section
  eleven hundred ten of this article, shall be deemed to include  any  tax
  imposed  on or with respect to motor fuel, diesel motor fuel or residual
  petroleum product under article thirteen-A of this chapter.
    (l) (1) Receipts from the sale of  mobile  telecommunications  service
  provided  by  a  home service provider shall include "charges for mobile
  telecommunications services." Such term shall mean any charge by a  home
  service  provider  to  its  mobile  telecommunications  customer for (A)
  commercial mobile radio service, and shall include property and services
  that are ancillary to the provision of commercial mobile  radio  service
  (such   as   dial  tone,  voice  service,  directory  information,  call
  forwarding, caller-identification and call-waiting), and (B) any service
  and property provided therewith.
    (2) With respect to services or property described in subparagraph (B)
  of paragraph one of  this  subdivision,  internet  access  service,  any
  mobile  telecommunications  service  which the mobile telecommunications
  customer originates in a foreign country to the extent included  in  the
  fixed  periodic  charge,  any  interstate  or international telephony or
  telegraphy or telephone or telegraph service of whatever nature which is
  not a voice service, and any property or service which is not  telephony
  or  telegraphy  or  telephone or telegraph service of whatever nature, a
  home service provider shall collect and  pay  over  tax,  and  a  mobile


 telecommunications  customer  shall  pay  such tax, on receipts from any
  charge that is aggregated with and  not  separately  stated  from  other
  charges  for  mobile  telecommunications  service. Provided, however, if
  such  home service provider uses an objective, reasonable and verifiable
  standard for identifying each of the components of the charge for mobile
  telecommunications  service,  then  such  home  service   provider   may
  separately  account  for  and quantify the amount of each such component
  charge. If a home service provider chooses to so separately account  for
  and quantify and separately sells any such property or service, then the
  charge  for  such  property or service shall be based upon the price for
  such property or service as separately sold. If a home service  provider
  chooses  to  so  separately  account  for  and  quantify  and  does  not
  separately sell such property or  service,  then  the  charge  for  such
  property  or  service shall be based upon the prevailing retail price of
  comparable property or service sold separately  by  other  home  service
  providers. In any case, the charge for such property or service shall be
  reasonable   and  proportionate  to  the  total  charge  to  the  mobile
  telecommunications customer. Such charges for such services or property,
  as the case may be, will not constitute receipts from charges for mobile
  telecommunications services subject to  tax  under  subdivision  (b)  of
  section  eleven  hundred  five  of this article. Nothing herein shall be
  construed to exempt from tax or subject  to  tax  any  such  service  or
  property otherwise subject to tax or exempt from tax under this article.
    (3) (A) Any charge for a service or property billed by or for a mobile
  telecommunications  customer's  home service provider shall be deemed to
  be provided by such mobile telecommunications  customer's  home  service
  provider.
    (B) Charges for mobile telecommunications service that are provided or
  deemed  to  be  provided  by a mobile telecommunications customer's home
  service provider shall be sourced to the taxing jurisdiction  where  the
  mobile  telecommunications  customer's  place of primary use is located,
  regardless of where the mobile  telecommunications  service  originates,
  terminates or passes through.
    (m) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary:
    (1) The sales tax imposed by subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred
  five  of  this  article  and the compensating use tax imposed by section
  eleven hundred ten of this article, in regard to retail sales  of  motor
  fuel and diesel motor fuel, shall be eight cents per gallon.
    (2) The sales and compensating use taxes imposed by subdivision (a) of
  section  eleven  hundred nine of this article, in regard to retail sales
  of motor fuel and diesel motor fuel, shall be three-quarters of one cent
  per gallon.
    (3) Paragraph one of this subdivision shall not apply to the sales and
  compensating use taxes imposed by  subdivision  (a)  of  section  eleven
  hundred  seven  of  this article in regard to retail sales of motor fuel
  and diesel motor fuel. However, the legislative body of a city in  which
  the taxes imposed by such section eleven hundred seven are in effect, by
  local  law, ordinance, or resolution in exactly the form prepared by the
  commissioner, may elect that such taxes, in regard to  retail  sales  of
  motor  fuel  and  diesel motor fuel, shall be computed, as determined by
  the commissioner, at a rate of cents per gallon, rounded to the  nearest
  cent,  equal to two or three dollars, as determined by the municipality,
  multiplied by the percentage rate of such taxes within the municipality.
    (4) Paragraph one of this subdivision shall not apply to the sales and
  compensating use taxes imposed by a local law, ordinance  or  resolution
  of  a municipality pursuant to the authority of subpart B of part one of
  article twenty-nine of this chapter, in regard to retail sales of  motor
  fuel and diesel motor fuel. The legislative body of such a municipality,


 by  local  law,  ordinance or resolution in exactly the form prepared by
  the commissioner, may elect that its sales and compensating  use  taxes,
  in  regard to the retail sale of motor fuel and diesel motor fuel, shall
  be  computed,  as determined by the commissioner, at a rate of cents per
  gallon, rounded to the  nearest  cent,  equal  to  two,  three  or  four
  dollars, as determined by the municipality, multiplied by the percentage
  rate of such taxes within the municipality.
    (5)(i)  Prior  to the start of any sales tax quarter, the commissioner
  shall apply the local percentage sales tax rate of each county  or  city
  that  has elected a cents per gallon rate pursuant to paragraph three or
  four of this subdivision to the average price of motor fuel  and  diesel
  motor  fuel,  not including sales tax and the motor fuel excise tax, for
  three consecutive months beginning four months prior to the start of any
  sales tax quarter. If the result of this computation is  less  than  the
  elected cents per gallon rate for a county or city, the cents per gallon
  rate  for  such  county  or  city  shall be adjusted to be equal to such
  computation, rounded to the  nearest  one  cent.  Such  rates  shall  be
  published by the commissioner and effective in the next succeeding sales
  tax quarter.
    (ii)  Prior  to  the  start of any sales tax quarter, the commissioner
  shall also adjust in a like manner the cents per gallon rates prescribed
  by paragraphs one and two of this subdivision based on percentage  sales
  tax  rates  of four percent and three-eighths of a percent respectively.
  Provided, however,  adjustments  made  to  the  cents  per  gallon  rate
  prescribed  by paragraph two of this subdivision shall be rounded to the
  nearest one-tenth of one cent.
    (6) A local law,  ordinance  or  resolution  making  or  revoking  the
  election  made  pursuant  to paragraph three or four of this subdivision
  must go into effect in accordance with the  provisions  of  subdivisions
  (d) and (e) of section twelve hundred ten of this chapter.
    (7)  Notwithstanding  any  foregoing  provision of this subdivision or
  other law to the contrary, this subdivision, subdivision (h) of  section
  eleven hundred nine of this part and subdivision (n) of section eighteen
  hundred seventeen of this chapter, section three hundred ninety-two-i of
  the  general  business  law  and  other provisions of law which refer or
  relate to this subdivision shall apply only to (A) motor fuel or  diesel
  motor  fuel  sold  for  use  directly and exclusively in the engine of a
  motor vehicle and (B) motor  fuel  or  diesel  motor  fuel,  other  than
  water-white kerosene sold exclusively for heating purposes in containers
  of  no  more  than  twenty  gallons,  sold  by a retail gas station. For
  purposes of this subdivision and such other provisions of  law,  "retail
  gas  station"  shall  mean  a  filling station where such fuel is stored
  primarily for sale by delivery directly  into  the  ordinary  fuel  tank
  connected  with  the  engine  of  a  motor vehicle to be consumed in the
  operation of such motor vehicle or where such fuel is  stored  primarily
  for sale by delivery directly into the ordinary fuel tank connected with
  the  engine  of a vessel to be consumed in the operation of such vessel.
  The commissioner is hereby authorized to require the use of certificates
  or other documents,  and  procedures  related  thereto,  to  effect  the
  purposes of this subdivision; and any such certificate or other document
  so required by the commissioner for a purchaser to tender to a vendor to
  purchase  such fuel subject to tax on the reduced base established by or
  pursuant to this  subdivision  is  hereby  deemed  to  be  an  exemption
  certificate  as  such  term is used in subdivision (c) of section eleven
  hundred thirty-two of this article and as  if  the  provisions  of  such
  subdivision  (c)  referred  to  such  a certificate or document required
  pursuant to this subdivision.


   * (n) The sales and compensating use taxes imposed by this article and
  pursuant to the authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter on  B20
  shall  be  imposed at eighty percent of the rate of the cents per gallon
  taxes described in subdivision (m) of this section. However, if a county
  or  city  does not make the cents per gallon election authorized by such
  subdivision (m), the taxes of such county or city  imposed  pursuant  to
  the authority of such article twenty-nine or the taxes imposed in a city
  of  one  million or more by section eleven hundred seven of this article
  shall be imposed on eighty percent of the receipts from the retail  sale
  of  or the consideration given or contracted to be given for, or for the
  use of, such B20.
    * NB Repealed September 1, 2026
    (o) (1) If a transportation service subject to tax under paragraph ten
  of subdivision (c) of section  eleven  hundred  five  of  this  part  is
  provided  by  vehicle,  and the owner or lessor of the vehicle leases or
  rents the vehicle to an unrelated person who provides the transportation
  service, such as a limousine driver who  drives  a  limousine  owned  by
  another  person,  then  (i) the owner or lessor is deemed to provide the
  transportation service during the day or other period that the unrelated
  person uses the vehicle to provide the service, (ii) the owner or lessor
  is deemed to be the vendor of the  service  provided  by  the  unrelated
  person,  (iii)  the  tax  imposed  by such paragraph ten is deemed to be
  imposed on the unrelated person, (iv) the owner or  lessor,  as  vendor,
  must  collect  the  tax  from  the  unrelated person, based on the local
  jurisdiction where the driver takes delivery of the vehicle and pay over
  such tax required to be collected with its returns required to be  filed
  under  this  article,  and (v) the receipts subject to the tax equal two
  hundred percent of the amount that  the  owner  or  lessor  charges  the
  unrelated  person  for  the  use  of the vehicle during the day or other
  period, including any charge related to insurance, maintenance, repairs,
  fuel, the use, rental or economic  value  of  any  vehicle  or  business
  license,  and  any  other  charge  made  by  the  owner or lessor to the
  unrelated person for the day or other period, regardless of whether  the
  unrelated  person  transported, carried or conveyed any person or earned
  any fares with that vehicle during that day or other period.
    (2) Notwithstanding any law to the contrary:
    (i)  Any  municipality  or  public  corporation  that  establishes  or
  regulates  black  car,  limousine  or  other  vehicle service fares must
  adjust those fares to include therein the tax imposed by  paragraph  ten
  of  subdivision  (c) of section eleven hundred five of this part and the
  taxes imposed by other  sections  of  this  part  and  pursuant  to  the
  authority  of  article twenty-nine of this chapter on the services taxed
  by such paragraph ten and must require that any meters or other  devices
  in  the  vehicles or otherwise that measure fares be adjusted to include
  these taxes, as the same are from time to time imposed and as the  rates
  of those taxes may change.
    (ii)  Any person that sells the services described in paragraph one of
  this subdivision must adjust any meters or other devices in the vehicles
  or otherwise that measure fares so that they timely reflect  any  change
  in  the  rates  of  the  taxes  described  in  subparagraph  (i) of this
  paragraph.  Neither  the  failure  of  a  municipal  or   other   public
  corporation  to adjust fares nor the failure of any person to adjust the
  meters or devices will relieve any person from the obligation to collect
  and pay or pay over such taxes timely, at the correct combined rate.
    (3) For purposes of  this  subdivision,  "unrelated  person"  means  a
  person  other  than  a related person as defined for purposes of section
  fourteen of this chapter.


   (p) Notwithstanding any contrary provision of law: (1) The  sales  tax
  imposed  by  subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred five of this part
  on receipts from the retail sale of a new modular home module  shall  be
  computed  on  the sum of (i) sixty percent of the vendor's receipts from
  the  sale  of  the  module,  excluding  any charges by the vendor to the
  purchaser for shipping or delivery, as described in paragraph  three  of
  subdivision  (b)  of section eleven hundred one of this article and (ii)
  one hundred percent of any charges by the vendor to  the  purchaser  for
  shipping or delivery of the modules as described in such paragraph three
  of subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred one.
    (2)  The compensating use tax imposed by clause (A) of subdivision (a)
  of section eleven hundred ten of this part on the use of a  new  modular
  home  module  by its purchaser shall be computed on the sum of (i) sixty
  percent of the amount described  in  subdivision  (b)  of  such  section
  eleven  hundred  ten,  excluding any charges for shipping or delivery as
  described in paragraph  three  of  subdivision  (b)  of  section  eleven
  hundred one of this article, and (ii) one hundred percent of any charges
  for  shipping  or  delivery  as  described  in  such  paragraph three of
  subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred one.
    (3) The compensating use tax imposed  by  subclause  (i)  or  (ii)  of
  clause (B) of subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred ten of this part
  on the use of modular home modules by their manufacturer to be installed
  at  a  building  site  to  construct  a  modular home that constitutes a
  capital improvement shall be computed on the sum of (i) sixty percent of
  the consideration for which the manufacturer conveys  those  modules  to
  the   modular   home   buyer   on  an  installed  basis,  excluding  any
  consideration for shipping or delivery as described in  paragraph  three
  of  subdivision  (b)  of section eleven hundred one of this article, and
  excluding the consideration for the installation of those modules at the
  building  site  as  a  modular  home  if  such  installation  charge  is
  reasonable  and  stated separately from every other charge, and (ii) one
  hundred percent of any charges for shipping or delivery as described  in
  such paragraph three of subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred one.
    (q)  (1)  The  exclusions  from  the  definition  of  retail  sale  in
  subparagraph (iv) of paragraph four of subdivision (b) of section eleven
  hundred one of this article shall not apply to transfers, distributions,
  or contributions of a vessel, except where, in the case of the exclusion
  in subclause (I) of clause  (A)  of  such  subparagraph  (iv),  the  two
  corporations  to  be  merged  or consolidated are not affiliated persons
  with  respect  to  each  other.  For  purposes  of   this   subdivision,
  corporations are affiliated persons with respect to each other where (i)
  more  than five percent of their combined shares are owned by members of
  the same family, as defined by  paragraph  four  of  subsection  (c)  of
  section two hundred sixty-seven of the internal revenue code of nineteen
  hundred  eighty-six;  (ii)  one  of  the  corporations  has an ownership
  interest of more than five percent, whether direct or indirect,  in  the
  other;  or  (iii)  another  person  or a group of other persons that are
  affiliated persons with respect to each other hold an ownership interest
  of more than five percent, whether direct or indirect, in  each  of  the
  corporations.
    (2)  Notwithstanding any contrary provision of law, in relation to any
  transfer, distribution, or contribution of a vessel that qualifies as  a
  retail  sale as a result of paragraph one of this subdivision, the sales
  tax imposed by subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred  five  of  this
  part  shall be computed based on the price at which the seller purchased
  the tangible personal  property,  provided  that  where  the  seller  or
  purchaser affirmatively shows that the seller owned the property for six
  months  prior  to  making  the  transfer,  distribution  or contribution


 covered by paragraph one of this subdivision, such vessel shall be taxed
  on the basis of the current market value of the vessel at  the  time  of
  that  transfer,  distribution,  or contribution. For the purposes of the
  prior  sentence, "current market value" shall not exceed the cost of the
  vessel. See subdivision (b) of this section for a similar  rule  on  the
  computation of any compensating use tax due under section eleven hundred
  ten of this part on such transfers, distributions, or contributions.
    (3)  A  purchaser  of  a  vessel  covered  by  paragraph  one  of this
  subdivision will be entitled to a refund or credit against the sales  or
  compensating  use  tax  due  as a result of a transfer, distribution, or
  contribution of such vessel in the amount of any sales or use  tax  paid
  to  this state or any other state on the seller's purchase or use of the
  vessel so transferred, distributed or contributed, but not to exceed the
  tax due on the transfer, distribution, or contribution of the vessel  or
  on  the  purchaser's  use  in  the  state  of the vessel so transferred,
  distributed or contributed. An application for a refund or credit  under
  this  subdivision  must  be  filed  and  shall  be  in  such form as the
  commissioner may prescribe. Where an application  for  credit  has  been
  filed,  the  applicant  may  immediately  take such credit on the return
  which is due coincident with or immediately subsequent to the  time  the
  application  for  credit  is filed. However, the taking of the credit on
  the return shall be deemed to be part of  the  application  for  credit.
  Provided  that  the  commissioner  may,  in  his  or  her discretion and
  notwithstanding any other law, waive the application requirement for any
  or all classes of persons where the amount of the credit  or  refund  is
  equal to the amount of the tax due from the purchaser. The provisions of
  subdivisions  (a), (b), and (c) of section eleven hundred thirty-nine of
  this article shall apply to applications for refund or credit under this
  subdivision. No interest shall be allowed or paid on any refund made  or
  credit  allowed  under  this  subdivision.  If  a refund is granted or a
  credit allowed under this paragraph, the seller or purchaser  shall  not
  be  eligible  for  a  refund  or credit pursuant to subdivision seven of
  section eleven hundred eighteen of this article with regard to the  same
  purchase or use.
    (r)  (1)  In  regard  to the collection of sales tax on occupancies by
  room remarketers, when occupancy is provided for a single  consideration
  with  property, services, amusement charges, or any other items, whether
  or  not  such  other  items  are  taxable,  the  rent  portion  of   the
  consideration  for such transaction shall be computed as follows: either
  the total consideration received by the room remarketer multiplied by  a
  fraction,  the numerator of which shall be the consideration payable for
  the occupancy by the room remarketer and the denominator of which  shall
  be  such  consideration payable for the occupancy plus the consideration
  payable by the remarketer for the other items  being  sold,  or  by  any
  other  method  as  may  be  authorized  by the commissioner. If the room
  remarketer fails to separately state the tax on the rent so computed  on
  a sales slip, invoice, receipt, or other statement given to the occupant
  in  the  manner prescribed by paragraph two of this subdivision or fails
  to maintain records of the prices of all  components  of  a  transaction
  covered  by this paragraph, the entire consideration shall be treated as
  rent subject to tax under paragraph one of subdivision  (e)  of  section
  eleven  hundred  five of this part. Nothing herein shall be construed to
  subject to tax or exempt from tax any service or property  or  amusement
  charge  or other items otherwise subject to tax or exempt from tax under
  this article or pursuant to the authority of article twenty-nine of this
  chapter. A room remarketer's records of the  consideration  payable  for
  all  components  of  a transaction covered by this paragraph are records


 required to be maintained for purposes of  subdivision  (a)  of  section
  eleven hundred thirty-five of this article.
    (2)  In  regard  to the collection of sales tax on occupancies by room
  remarketers, including a transaction described in paragraph one of  this
  subdivision, the requirements of the second sentence of paragraph one of
  subdivision  (a)  of  section  eleven hundred thirty-two of this article
  shall be deemed satisfied if the remarketer gives the customer  a  sales
  slip,  invoice,  receipt,  or  other  statement of the price ("invoice")
  prior to the customer's completion of his or her occupancy, on which the
  amount of tax due under this article and pursuant to  the  authority  of
  article  twenty-nine of this chapter is stated. The room remarketer must
  keep either a copy of the invoice as  required  by  subdivision  (a)  of
  section  eleven  hundred  thirty-five  of  this  article,  or electronic
  records that accurately reflect the information that is on  the  invoice
  provided to the customer.
    (3)  In regard to the reporting and the payment to the commissioner by
  room remarketers of sales tax due on  occupancies,  subdivision  (a)  of
  section  eleven  hundred  thirty-seven  of this article shall be read to
  require a room remarketer to report such sales  tax  due,  including  in
  regard  to a transaction described in paragraph one of this subdivision,
  on the return due for the filing period in which the occupancy ends and,
  at the time of filing such return, to pay to the commissioner the  total
  amount described by such subdivision (a).






	   §  1112.  Taxes  imposed  on  qualified Indian reservations. (a) Where
  property or services subject to sales or compensating use tax have  been
  purchased  on  or  from  a  qualified  Indian reservation, as defined in
  section four hundred seventy of this chapter, the purchaser shall not be
  relieved of his or her liability to pay the tax due. Such  tax  due  and
  not collected shall be paid by the purchaser directly to the department.
    (b)  The tax due and not collected pursuant to subdivision (a) of this
  section may be reported and paid by means of such  personal  income  tax
  forms or other tax forms as the commissioner deems appropriate.
    (c)  The  provisions  of  section  two  hundred  eighty-four-e of this
  chapter concerning  sales  of  motor  fuel  and  Diesel  motor  fuel  on
  qualified Indian reservations shall apply to the prepayment of sales tax
  imposed  on  motor fuel and Diesel motor fuel pursuant to section eleven
  hundred two of this article in the same manner and with the  same  force
  and   effect   as   if  the  provisions  of  such  section  two  hundred
  eighty-four-e had been incorporated in full into this article, except to
  the extent that  any  such  provision  is  either  inconsistent  with  a
  provision of such section eleven hundred two or not relevant thereto.
    (d)  The  provisions  of  section  four  hundred seventy-one-e of this
  chapter concerning sales of cigarettes on qualified Indian  reservations
  shall  apply  to  the  prepayment  of  sales  tax  imposed on cigarettes
  pursuant to section eleven hundred three of this  article  in  the  same
  manner  and  with the same force and effect as if the provisions of such
  section four hundred seventy-one-e had been incorporated  in  full  into
  this  article,  except  to  the extent that any such provision is either
  inconsistent with a provision of such section eleven hundred three or is
  not relevant thereto.




   §  1115.  Exemptions  from  sales and use taxes. (a) Receipts from the
  following shall be exempt from the tax on  retail  sales  imposed  under
  subdivision  (a) of section eleven hundred five and the compensating use
  tax imposed under section eleven hundred ten:
    (1) (A) Food, food  products,  beverages,  dietary  foods  and  health
  supplements,  sold for human consumption but not including (i) candy and
  confectionery, (ii) fruit drinks which contain less than seventy percent
  of natural fruit juice, (iii) soft drinks, sodas and beverages  such  as
  are  ordinarily  dispensed  at soda fountains or in connection therewith
  (other than coffee,  tea  and  cocoa)  and  (iv)  beer,  wine  or  other
  alcoholic  beverages,  all of which shall be subject to the retail sales
  and compensating use taxes, whether or not the item is  sold  in  liquid
  form.  Nothing in this subparagraph shall be construed as exempting food
  or drink from the tax imposed under subdivision (d)  of  section  eleven
  hundred five of this article.
    (B)  Until  May  thirty-first,  two thousand twenty-four, the food and
  drink excluded from the exemption provided  by  clauses  (i),  (ii)  and
  (iii) of subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, and bottled water, shall be
  exempt  under  this subparagraph: (i) when sold for one dollar and fifty
  cents or less through any vending machine that accepts coin or  currency
  only;  or  (ii)  when  sold  for two dollars or less through any vending
  machine that accepts any form of payment other than  coin  or  currency,
  whether or not it also accepts coin or currency.
    (2) Water, when delivered to the consumer through mains or pipes.
    (3) Drugs and medicines intended for use, internally or externally, in
  the  cure,  mitigation, treatment or prevention of illnesses or diseases
  in human beings, medical equipment (including component  parts  thereof)
  and  supplies  required for such use or to correct or alleviate physical
  incapacity, and products consumed by  humans  for  the  preservation  of
  health  but  not  including cosmetics or toilet articles notwithstanding
  the presence of  medicinal  ingredients  therein  or  medical  equipment
  (including  component parts thereof) and supplies, other than such drugs
  and medicines, purchased at retail for use  in  performing  medical  and
  similar services for compensation.
    (3-a) Menstrual products, including, but not limited to, pads, tampons
  and panty liners.
    (3-b)  Adult-use  cannabis  products as defined by article twenty-C of
  this chapter.
    (4) Prosthetic aids, hearing aids, eyeglasses and  artificial  devices
  and  component  parts thereof purchased to correct or alleviate physical
  incapacity in human beings.
    (5) Newspapers and periodicals.
    (6) (A) Tangible personal property, whether or not incorporated  in  a
  building  or  structure,  for use or consumption predominantly either in
  the production for sale of tangible personal property by farming or in a
  commercial horse boarding operation, or in both.
    (B) With respect  to  the  exemption  of  motor  vehicles  under  this
  paragraph,  (i) use of a motor vehicle either in the production phase of
  farming or in a commercial horse boarding operation, or in  both,  shall
  be  defined as any use of the motor vehicle on property either farmed or
  used in a commercial horse boarding operation, or  both,  by  the  motor
  vehicle  purchaser  or user or in direct and uninterrupted trips between
  properties farmed or used in such  operation,  or  both,  by  the  motor
  vehicle purchaser or user, and (ii) "predominantly" shall mean that more
  than  fifty  percent  of  the  motor  vehicle's  use  is  either  in the
  production phase of farming or in a commercial horse boarding operation,
  or in  both.  The  percentage  of  such  vehicle's  use  either  in  the
  production phase of farming or in a commercial horse boarding operation,


 or  in  both, may be computed either on the basis of mileage or hours of
  use, at the discretion of the motor vehicle purchaser or user. A  person
  may  purchase  a  motor  vehicle  qualifying  for  exemption  under this
  paragraph  without payment of tax imposed by section eleven hundred five
  or eleven hundred ten  of  this  article  by  furnishing  the  vendor  a
  properly    completed   exemption   certificate   promulgated   by   the
  commissioner; and such purchaser may register such vehicle or apply  for
  a  certificate  of title for such vehicle with the commissioner of motor
  vehicles or a county clerk, without payment of such taxes, by furnishing
  such a properly completed certificate to such commissioner or clerk.
    (7) Tangible personal property sold  by  a  mortician,  undertaker  or
  funeral  director.  However,  all  tangible  personal property sold to a
  mortician, undertaker or funeral director for use in the  conducting  of
  funerals  shall  not  be  deemed a sale for resale within the meaning of
  paragraph (4) of subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred one  of  this
  chapter and shall not be exempt from the retail sales tax.
    (8)  Commercial  vessels  primarily  engaged  in interstate or foreign
  commerce and property used by or purchased for the use of  such  vessels
  for  fuel,  provisions,  supplies,  maintenance  and repairs (other than
  articles purchased for the original equipping of a new ship).
    (9) Fuel sold to an air line for use in its airplanes.
    (10) Tangible personal  property  purchased  for  use  or  consumption
  directly   and   predominantly   in  research  and  development  in  the
  experimental or laboratory sense. Such research  and  development  shall
  not be deemed to include the ordinary testing or inspection of materials
  or products for quality control, efficiency surveys, management studies,
  consumer surveys, advertising, promotions or research in connection with
  literary, historical or similar projects.
    (11)  The  flags  of the United States of America and the state of New
  York.
    (11-a)  Any  military  decorations,  including  but  not  limited  to,
  ribbons,  medals, mini-medals, and lapel pins, when sold to a purchaser:
  (i) who is a veteran of the United States provided  that  the  purchaser
  shall  present  to  the vendor proof in the form of discharge papers, or
  other official documentation, of his or her veteran status; or (ii)  who
  is  an  active  member of the military provided that the purchaser shall
  present to the vendor proof or other official  documentation  of  actual
  military service.
    (11-b)  Military  service  flags,  prisoner of war flags and blue star
  banners.
    (12) Machinery or  equipment  for  use  or  consumption  directly  and
  predominantly  in  the  production  of  tangible personal property, gas,
  electricity,  refrigeration  or  steam  for  sale,   by   manufacturing,
  processing,  generating, assembling, refining, mining or extracting, but
  not including parts with a useful life of one year or less or  tools  or
  supplies  used  in  connection  with  such  machinery or equipment. This
  exemption shall include all pipe, pipeline, drilling rigs, service rigs,
  vehicles and associated equipment used in the drilling,  production  and
  operation  of  oil,  gas, and solution mining activities to the point of
  sale to the first commercial purchaser.
    (12-a) Tangible personal property for use or consumption directly  and
  predominantly  in  the  receiving,  initiating,  amplifying, processing,
  transmitting, retransmitting, switching or monitoring  of  switching  of
  telecommunications  services  for  sale  or internet access services for
  sale or any combination thereof. Such tangible personal property  exempt
  under  this  subdivision  shall include, but not be limited to, tangible
  personal property used or consumed to upgrade systems to allow  for  the
  receiving,    initiating,    amplifying,    processing,    transmitting,


 retransmitting,   switching    or    monitoring    of    switching    of
  telecommunications  services  for  sale  or internet access services for
  sale or any combination thereof. As used in  this  paragraph,  the  term
  "telecommunications  services" shall have the same meaning as defined in
  paragraph (g) of subdivision one of section one hundred eighty-six-e  of
  this chapter.
    * (12-b)  (i)  Machinery,  equipment  or  apparatus  used  or consumed
  directly and predominantly to upgrade cable television systems to  allow
  for  the  receiving,  initiating,  amplifying, processing, transmitting,
  retransmitting, switching or monitoring of switching  of  digital  cable
  television  service  for sale, including parts with a useful life of one
  year or less  and  tools  or  supplies  used  in  connection  with  such
  machinery,  equipment or apparatus; and (ii) to the extent not otherwise
  exempt, equipment or apparatus, sold to an entity principally engaged in
  furnishing cable television service for sale,  for  use  or  consumption
  directly  and  predominantly  in  the receiving, initiating, amplifying,
  processing, transmitting, retransmitting,  switching  or  monitoring  of
  switching  of  internet  access service for sale, including parts with a
  useful life of  one  year  or  less  and  tools  and  supplies  used  in
  connection  with such equipment or apparatus. As used in this paragraph,
  the term "digital cable television service" shall mean cable  television
  service,  as defined in subparagraph two of paragraph (b) of subdivision
  two of section one hundred eighty-six-e of this chapter, transmitted  by
  the  use  of  digital technology; and the term "internet access service"
  shall mean such term as defined in subdivision (v) of this section.
    * NB Expired September 1, 2003
    13. Tangible personal property  sold  through  coin  operated  vending
  machines  at  ten  cents  or  less,  provided  the retailer is primarily
  engaged in making such sales and maintains records satisfactory  to  the
  state tax commission.
    (13-a)  Tangible  personal  property  sold  through coin operated bulk
  vending machines at fifty  cents  or  less,  provided  the  retailer  is
  primarily   engaged   in   making   such  sales  and  maintains  records
  satisfactory to the commissioner.  As  used  in  this  paragraph,  "bulk
  vending   machine"   means   a   vending  machine,  containing  unsorted
  merchandise, which, upon insertion of a  coin,  dispenses  the  same  in
  approximately  equal  portions,  at  random and without selection by the
  customer.
    (13-b) Temporary transportation  devices  sold  through  coin-operated
  equipment,  provided  the  retailer  is primarily engaged in making such
  sales and maintains records satisfactory to the commissioner. As used in
  this paragraph, "temporary transportation device" means an instrument of
  transport used for a limited period of time for the purpose of  carrying
  luggage   or   merchandise   a  short  distance  within  a  facility  of
  embarkation/disembarkation or a  facility  where  such  merchandise  was
  purchased.
    (14)  Motor  vehicles,  as such term is defined in section one hundred
  twenty-five of the vehicle and traffic law, sold by a husband or wife to
  his or her spouse, or by a parent to his or her child, or by a child  to
  his  or her parent. Provided, however, this exemption shall not apply if
  the vendor is a dealer as defined in section four hundred fifteen of the
  vehicle and traffic law.
    (14-a) Motor vehicles, as such term is defined in section one  hundred
  twenty-five  of  the  vehicle and traffic law, upon registration of such
  motor vehicle if such motor vehicle was purchased in another state by  a
  person  while he or she was in the military service of the United States
  upon the return of such person to this state, as long as he or  she  has
  proof  of  payment,  whether made by the seller or purchaser, in another


 state of one or more of the  following  taxes  on  such  motor  vehicle:
  sales,  use,  excise,  usage,  or  a highway use tax necessary to obtain
  title.
    (15) Tangible personal property sold to a contractor, subcontractor or
  repairman  for  use  in  (i)  erecting a structure or building (A) of an
  organization described in subdivision  (a)  of  section  eleven  hundred
  sixteen  or  (B)  used  predominantly  either in the production phase of
  farming or in a commercial horse boarding operation, or in both, or (ii)
  adding to, altering or improving real property, property or land (A)  of
  such  an organization or (B) used predominantly either in the production
  phase of farming or in a commercial  horse  boarding  operation,  or  in
  both,  as  the  terms real property, property or land are defined in the
  real property tax law; provided, however, no exemption shall exist under
  this paragraph unless such tangible personal property is  to  become  an
  integral component part of such structure, building or real property.
    (16) Tangible personal property sold to a contractor, subcontractor or
  repairman  for use in maintaining, servicing or repairing real property,
  property or land (i) of an organization described in subdivision (a)  of
  section  eleven hundred sixteen or (ii) used predominantly either in the
  production phase of farming or in a commercial horse boarding operation,
  or in both, as the terms real property, property or land are defined  in
  the  real  property tax law; provided, however, no exemption shall exist
  under this paragraph unless such tangible personal property is to become
  an integral component part of such structure, building or real property.
    (17) Tangible personal property sold by a contractor, subcontractor or
  repairman  to  a  person  other  than  an  organization   described   in
  subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred sixteen, for whom he is adding
  to,   or  improving  real  property,  property  or  land  by  a  capital
  improvement, or for whom he is about to do any of the foregoing, if such
  tangible personal property is to become an integral  component  part  of
  such  structure,  building  or real property; provided, however, that if
  such sale is made pursuant to a contract irrevocably entered into before
  September first, nineteen hundred sixty-nine, no exemption  shall  exist
  under this paragraph.
    (18)  Tangible  personal  property  sold  by a person at his residence
  provided such person or any member of his household does not  conduct  a
  trade or business in which similar items are sold, and the receipts from
  such  sales can reasonably be expected not to exceed six hundred dollars
  in a calendar year. If such person reasonably expects that his  receipts
  from  such sales will not exceed six hundred dollars in a calendar year,
  but such receipts do exceed such sum, the exemption provided for in this
  paragraph will apply but only  to  the  first  six  hundred  dollars  of
  receipts  in  such  calendar  year.  Provided,  however,  where a person
  sixteen years of age or older has engaged in such sales for  three  days
  in  a  calendar year, the exemption provided for in this paragraph shall
  not apply to subsequent sales  in  that  calendar  year.  The  exemption
  provided  for  in  this paragraph shall also not apply to (A) sales at a
  private residence conducted by an auctioneer,  sheriff  or  other  third
  party,  (B) a sale held to liquidate an estate or (C) the sale of boats,
  snowmobiles or motor vehicles except such sales of motor vehicles within
  the exemptions of paragraph fourteen of subdivision (a) of this section.
    (18-a) Tangible personal property manufactured and sold by a  veteran,
  as  defined in section twenty-two of the veterans' services law, for the
  benefit of a veteran's service organization, provided that  such  person
  or  any  member  of  his  or  her  household does not conduct a trade or
  business in which similar items are sold, the first  two  thousand  five
  hundred dollars of receipts from such sales in a calendar year.


   (19)  Cartons,  containers,  and  wrapping and packaging materials and
  supplies, and components thereof for use and consumption by a vendor  in
  packaging  or  packing tangible personal property for sale, and actually
  transferred by the vendor to the purchaser.
    (19-a)  Milk  crates  purchased  by  a  dairy farmer or New York state
  licensed milk distributor and used  exclusively  and  directly  for  the
  packaging and delivery of milk and milk products to customers.
    (20) Paper, ink and any other tangible personal property purchased for
  use  in  the publication of a shopping paper, as such term is defined in
  and limited by subdivision (i) of this section, which  is  to  become  a
  physical component part of such paper.
    (21)  Commercial  aircraft primarily engaged in intrastate, interstate
  or foreign commerce, machinery or equipment  to  be  installed  on  such
  aircraft  and property used by or purchased for the use of such aircraft
  for  maintenance  and  repairs  and  flight  simulators   purchased   by
  commercial airlines.
    (21-a)  General  aviation  aircraft,  and machinery or equipment to be
  installed on such aircraft. For purposes of this  subdivision,  "general
  aviation  aircraft"  means  an  aircraft that is used in civil aviation,
  that is not a commercial aircraft as defined in paragraph  seventeen  of
  subdivision  (b) of section eleven hundred one of this article, military
  aircraft, unmanned aerial vehicle or drone.
    (22) The rental  or  lease  of  trucks,  tractors  or  tractor-trailer
  combinations to an authorized carrier, pursuant to a written contractual
  agreement,  for  use in the transportation for hire of tangible personal
  property as augmenting equipment by such  authorized  carrier,  provided
  that  under  such rental, lease or license to use, the owner of any such
  vehicle or any  employee  of  such  owner  operates  such  vehicle.  For
  purposes of this paragraph, the term "authorized carrier" shall have the
  same   meaning  given  that  term  in  subpart-A  of  part  ten  hundred
  fifty-seven of title forty-nine of the code of federal  regulations  and
  in  part eight hundred forty-five of title seventeen of the codes, rules
  and regulations of the state of New York, as the case may  be,  and  the
  term  "augmenting equipment" shall have the same meaning given that term
  in such part of such title of the codes, rules and  regulations  of  the
  state of New York.
    (23) Used mobile homes.
    (24) Fishing vessels used directly and predominantly in the harvesting
  of  fish for sale, and property used by or purchased for the use of such
  vessels for fuel, provisions, supplies, maintenance and repairs. For the
  purpose of this paragraph the term fishing vessel shall not include  any
  vessel used predominantly for sport fishing purposes.
    (25)  Natural  gas  used  for personal residence consumption by a land
  owner from, or provided in exchange for gas from,  a  natural  gas  well
  located  on  property owned by such land owner, such gas having been set
  aside for the property owner's use by lease.
    (26) Tractors, trailers or semi-trailers, as such terms are defined in
  article one of the vehicle and traffic law, and  property  installed  on
  such  vehicles for their equipping, maintenance or repair, provided such
  vehicle is used in combination where the gross vehicle  weight  of  such
  combination exceeds twenty-six thousand pounds.
    (27) Precious metal bullion sold for investment, provided that (i) the
  retailer,  if  so  required,  is  registered  pursuant  to section three
  hundred fifty-nine-e of the general business law and (ii) the receipt or
  consideration given or contracted to be given for such  bullion  depends
  only  on the value of the metal content of such bullion. "Precious metal
  bullion"  means  bars,  ingots  or  coins  of  gold,  silver,  platinum,
  palladium,  rhodium,  ruthenium  or iridium, but shall not include bars,


 ingots or coins which  have  been  manufactured,  processed,  assembled,
  fabricated or used for an industrial, professional, esthetic or artistic
  purpose.  Precious  metal  bullion  shall  be  deemed  to  be  sold  for
  investment  when  it  is sold for more than one thousand dollars and the
  purchaser or user or agent of either of them holds it in the  same  form
  as  when it was purchased and does not manufacture, process, assemble or
  fabricate such bullion for its own use. For purposes of this  paragraph,
  the  receipt  or  consideration given or contracted to be given shall be
  deemed to depend only on the value of the metal content if, at the  time
  of  sale  or  purchase at retail, such receipt or consideration does not
  exceed (i) one hundred forty percent, with respect to silver  coins,  or
  (ii)  one  hundred  twenty  percent, with respect to gold coins weighing
  one-quarter of an ounce or less, or (iii) one hundred  fifteen  percent,
  with  respect  to  other  coins, of the greater of (A) the daily closing
  bullion cash price of such metal in the open market or  (B)  the  coins'
  face  value  at  prevailing  rates of exchange, or (iv), with respect to
  bars and ingots, one hundred fifteen percent of such bullion cash  price
  of  such metal. Where there is no such closing price for such metal, the
  average of the bid and asked cash prices shall be substituted  for  such
  closing price.
    (28) Computer software designed and developed by the author or creator
  to  the  specifications  of  a  specific  purchaser which is transferred
  directly or indirectly  to  a  corporation  which  is  a  member  of  an
  affiliated  group of corporations within the meaning of subparagraph six
  of paragraph (b) of subdivision seventeen of section two  hundred  eight
  of  this  chapter except for clauses (ii) and (iii) of such subparagraph
  that includes  such  purchaser,  or  to  a  partnership  in  which  such
  purchaser  and  other  members  of such affiliated group have at least a
  fifty percent capital or profits interest (but only if the  transfer  is
  not in pursuance of a plan having as its principal purpose the avoidance
  or evasion of tax under this article), but in no case including computer
  software   which   is  pre-written,  as  defined  in  paragraph  six  of
  subdivision (b) of section  eleven  hundred  one  of  this  article  and
  available to be sold to customers in the ordinary course of the seller's
  business.
    (29) a horse which is a racehorse registered with the jockey club, the
  United States trotting association or the national steeplechase and hunt
  association  (or such a horse during the first twenty-four months of its
  life if it is eligible to be so registered) which is purchased  or  used
  with  the  intent  that  it  shall  be  entered  in  an  event  on which
  pari-mutuel wagering is authorized by law,  except  that  the  exemption
  provided  for  under  this  paragraph  shall not apply to any such horse
  which is considered to be at least four years old and has never raced in
  an event on which pari-mutuel wagering is authorized by  law.  Provided,
  further,  the  purchaser  of  such a racehorse must give to the seller a
  certification  containing  such  information  as  the  commissioner   of
  taxation  and  finance shall require, which shall include a statement to
  the effect that the purchaser intends to enter such horse in  events  on
  which  pari-mutuel  wagering  is  authorized  by law. Such certification
  shall be retained by such seller, together with documentary proof of the
  age of such horse, for a  three-year  period.  The  provisions  of  this
  paragraph  shall  apply to all sales and uses of racehorses occurring on
  and after June first, nineteen hundred ninety-four.
    (30) Clothing and footwear for  which  the  receipt  or  consideration
  given or contracted to be given is less than one hundred ten dollars per
  article  of clothing, per pair of shoes or other articles of footwear or
  per item used or consumed to make or  repair  such  clothing  and  which
  becomes a physical component part of such clothing.


   (30-a)  Diapers  intended for human use including, but not limited to:
  disposable, reusable, adult, and children's diapers.
    * (31)  Copies  sold  through  coin  operated photocopying machines at
  fifty cents or less. As used in this paragraph,  "photocopying  machine"
  means  a  vending  machine  which,  upon  insertion  of a coin, copies a
  document for a purchaser.
    * NB There are 2 par. (31)'s
    * (31) Enhanced  emissions  inspection  equipment,  certified  by  the
  department   of  environmental  conservation,  pursuant  to  regulations
  promulgated by  such  department,  for  use  in  an  enhanced  emissions
  inspection  and maintenance program as required by the federal clean air
  act of 1990, as amended in nineteen hundred  ninety(42  U.S.C.  7401  et
  seq.) and the New York state clean air compliance act enacted by chapter
  608  of  the laws of 1993, where such equipment is purchased and used by
  an official inspection station licensed by  the  commissioner  of  motor
  vehicles  under  article  five  of  the  vehicle  and  traffic  law  and
  authorized to conduct the enhanced emission inspections required by such
  federal act.
    * NB There are 2 par. (31)'s
    (32) Omnibuses, as such term is defined in article one of the  vehicle
  and  traffic  law,  weighing  at  least  twenty-six  thousand pounds and
  measuring at least  forty  feet  in  length  and  parts,  equipment  and
  lubricants   purchased  and  used  in  their  operation,  provided  such
  omnibuses are used to transport persons for hire by a carrier  operating
  pursuant  to  a  certificate  of  authority issued by the New York state
  commissioner of transportation or by an appropriate agency of the United
  States. Where receipts from  the  sale  of  or  consideration  given  or
  contracted  to be given for the purchase of an omnibus or other property
  has been exempted under this paragraph, such receipts  or  consideration
  shall not also qualify for the refund or credit described in subdivision
  (b) of section eleven hundred nineteen of this article; where any or all
  of  the  tax  on  receipts  from  the  sale of or consideration given or
  contracted to be given for the purchase of an omnibus or other  property
  has  been  refunded  or  credited under such subdivision (b), no part of
  such receipts or consideration shall be  exempt  under  this  paragraph.
  Nothing  in  this  paragraph  shall be construed to affect the refund or
  credit under subdivision (b) of such  section  eleven  hundred  nineteen
  with respect to the purchase or use of motor fuel or diesel motor fuel.
    (33)  Wine  or  wine  product,  beer  or  beer product, cider or cider
  product, liquor or liquor product, mead or mead product, and  the  kegs,
  cans,  bottles,  growlers,  corks, caps, and labels used to package such
  alcoholic product, furnished by the official agent  of  a  farm  winery,
  winery,  brewery, farm brewery, cider producer, farm cidery, distillery,
  farm distillery, mead producer, farm meadery, wholesaler, or importer at
  a tasting held in accordance with the alcoholic beverage control law  to
  a  customer or prospective customer who consumes such wine, beer, cider,
  liquor or mead at such tasting.
    (34) Textbooks purchased by full and part time  college  students  for
  their  courses;  provided,  however,  that  upon purchase such a student
  shall present a valid student identification card, and such  a  textbook
  shall  be  required  for  a  course  being  taken  by such student at an
  institution of higher education. For purposes of  this  subdivision  the
  term:
    (i)  "Textbooks"  includes  only  those  books  specifically  written,
  designed or  produced  for  educational,  instructional  or  pedagogical
  purposes.
    (ii)  "Institution  of higher education" shall mean any institution of
  higher  education,  recognized  and  approved  by  the  regents  of  the


 university  of  the  state  of  New  York  or accredited by a nationally
  recognized accrediting agency or association accepted  as  such  by  the
  regents  of  the  university  of the state of New York, which provides a
  course  of  study  leading  to  the granting of a post-secondary degree,
  certificate or diploma.
    (35)  Computer  system  hardware  used  or   consumed   directly   and
  predominantly  in designing and developing computer software for sale or
  in providing the service, for sale, of designing and developing internet
  websites.
    (36) Parts with a useful life of one year or less, tools and  supplies
  for  use or consumption directly and predominantly in the production for
  sale of gas or oil by manufacturing, processing, generating, assembling,
  refining, mining, or extracting.
    (37) (i) Machinery, equipment and  other  tangible  personal  property
  specified  herein,  sold  to  a person operating an internet data center
  located in this state for use in such a center, where such property: (A)
  will be located or installed in a facility  or  structure  which  is  an
  internet data center and (B) is required for and directly related to the
  provision  of  internet website services for sale by the operator of the
  center. Such property shall include computer system  hardware  including
  servers  and  routers,  computer  software,  storage racks and cages for
  computer equipment, interior fiber optic  and  copper  cables,  property
  required  to maintain the appropriate climate controlled environment for
  the property in the internet data center such as air filtration and  air
  conditioning  equipment  and  vapor  barriers,  property related to fire
  control such as fire suppression equipment and alarms, power generators,
  power conditioners, property related to providing a  secure  environment
  such  as  protective  barriers,  property  which  when installed in such
  facility or structure will constitute raised flooring and other  similar
  property.  For  purposes  of  this paragraph the operator of an internet
  data center is a person (A) operating a facility  which  consists  of  a
  data  center  specifically  designed  and  constructed to provide a high
  security environment for the location of servers and  similar  equipment
  on  which  reside  internet websites; and (B) providing at such facility
  the internet website services of: (I) uninterrupted internet  access  to
  its  customers'  web  pages  in a secure environment and (II) continuous
  internet traffic management for its customers' web pages.
    (ii) For purposes of this paragraph, an operator of an  internet  data
  center,  primarily  engaged  in  the  sale  from such center of internet
  access services exempt from tax under subdivision (v) of  this  section,
  is  not  providing internet website services for sale. Primarily engaged
  shall mean that more than fifty percent of the use of all the machinery,
  equipment and other specified property in any such center,  which  would
  otherwise  be  exempt under this paragraph, is for the rendition of such
  internet access services.
    (iii) Receipts from the retail sale of the tangible personal  property
  exempt pursuant to subparagraph (i) of this paragraph if purchased by an
  operator of an internet data center, shall be exempt when purchased by a
  contractor,  subcontractor  or  repairman  for  use as described in such
  subparagraph (i), where such property is to become a capital improvement
  to real property.
    (iv) In order  to  receive  the  exemption  provided  for  under  this
  paragraph  or  subdivision  (y)  of  this  section,  the operator of the
  internet data center or the contractor, subcontractor or repairman shall
  furnish to the vendor of the exempt property or services  a  certificate
  in such form and containing such information as may be prescribed by the
  commissioner.


   (38)  (A)  Machinery  or equipment or other tangible personal property
  (including parts, tools and  supplies)  for  use  or  consumption  by  a
  broadcaster  directly  and  predominantly  in  the production (including
  post-production) of live or recorded programs which are used or consumed
  by a broadcaster predominantly for the purpose of broadcast over-the-air
  by such broadcaster or transmission through a cable television or direct
  broadcast  satellite  system  by  such  broadcaster.  Tangible  personal
  property, which is described in the preceding  sentence,  and  which  is
  leased  by  a  broadcaster  to  another  person for that person's use or
  consumption directly and  predominantly  in  the  production  (including
  post-production) of such live or recorded programs by such person, shall
  be  deemed to be used or consumed by the lessor for purposes of applying
  the directly and predominantly requirement of this subparagraph.
    (B)  Machinery  or  equipment  or  other  tangible  personal  property
  (including  parts,  tools  and  supplies)  for  use  or consumption by a
  broadcaster directly and predominantly in the transmission  of  live  or
  recorded  programs  over-the-air or through a cable television or direct
  broadcast  satellite  system  by  such  broadcaster.  Tangible  personal
  property,  which  is  described  in the preceding sentence, and which is
  leased by a broadcaster to another  person  for  that  person's  use  or
  consumption  directly and predominantly in the transmission of such live
  or recorded programs by such person, shall  be  deemed  to  be  used  or
  consumed  by  the  lessor  for  purposes  of  applying  the directly and
  predominantly requirement of this subparagraph.
    (C) For purposes of this paragraph: (i) the term "broadcaster" means a
  television or radio  station  licensed  by  the  federal  communications
  commission,   a  television  or  radio  broadcast  network  or  a  cable
  television network. The term "television  or  radio  broadcast  network"
  means  an organization which produces and/or purchases programs intended
  for transmission by affiliated television or radio stations licensed  by
  the   federal  communications  commission  and  which  has  distribution
  facilities or circuits available to such affiliated stations during  all
  or  some  portion  of one or more days during each week. The term "cable
  television  network"  means  an  organization  which   produces   and/or
  purchases  programs intended for transmission either by direct broadcast
  satellite systems or by cable systems  pursuant  to  an  affiliation  or
  similar  agreement  and  which  has  distribution facilities or circuits
  available to such direct  broadcast  satellite  systems  or  such  cable
  systems during all or some portion of one or more days during each week.
  For  the  purpose  of  subparagraph  (B)  of  this  paragraph,  the term
  "broadcaster" shall  not  include  cable  system  operators  and  direct
  broadcast satellite system operators. Provided, however, for the purpose
  of  subparagraph  (A)  of this paragraph, such term shall also include a
  cable system operator or a direct broadcast  satellite  system  operator
  solely with respect to machinery or equipment or other tangible personal
  property (including parts, tools and supplies) for use or consumption by
  it   directly   and   predominantly   in   the   production   (including
  post-production) of live or recorded programs intended for  transmission
  to  its  viewers  over  its  system;  (ii) the term "programs" means any
  performance, event, play, story or literary, musical, artistic or  other
  work  used  for entertainment or educational purposes, including but not
  limited to news, news specials, sporting events, game shows, talk  shows
  and  commercials;  and  (iii)  the  term  "recorded  programs" means any
  program contained on any medium.
    (39) Tangible personal property for use or  consumption  directly  and
  predominantly  in the production, including editing, dubbing and mixing,
  of a film for sale regardless of the medium by means of which  the  film
  is  conveyed  to  a  purchaser. For purposes of this paragraph, the term


 "film" means feature films, documentary films, shorts, television films,
  television commercials and similar productions.
    (40)  Machinery  or  equipment  for  use  or  consumption directly and
  predominantly in the control, prevention, or abatement of  pollution  or
  contaminants  from manufacturing or industrial facilities, to the extent
  such machinery or equipment is  not  otherwise  exempt  under  paragraph
  twelve of this subdivision.
    (41)  machinery  and  equipment  for use directly and predominantly in
  loading, unloading and handling cargo  at  a  marine  terminal  facility
  located  in a city with a population of one million or more which in two
  thousand  three,  handled  more  than  three  hundred   fifty   thousand
  twenty-foot equivalent units (TEUs). For the purpose of this section the
  term  twenty-foot  equivalent unit (TEU) is used to express the relative
  number of containers based on the equivalent  length  of  a  twenty-foot
  container.
    * (42)  E85,  CNG  or  hydrogen,  for  use or consumption directly and
  exclusively in the engine of a motor vehicle and natural  gas  purchased
  and  converted  into  CNG,  for  use  or for sale for use or consumption
  directly and exclusively in the engine of a motor vehicle.
    * NB Repealed September 1, 2026
    (43) Ferry boats used directly  and  predominantly  to  provide  ferry
  service  for  vehicles  and  passengers within a county or counties by a
  ferry company whose rates for that ferry service are  regulated  by  the
  county  or  counties in which that service is provided under section one
  hundred thirty-one-g  of  the  highway  law  and  property  used  by  or
  purchased  for the use of those exempt ferry boats for fuel, provisions,
  supplies, maintenance and repairs.
    (44) monuments as that term is defined in  paragraph  (f)  of  section
  fifteen  hundred two of the not-for-profit corporation law, and tangible
  personal property that will become a physical  component  part  of  such
  monuments.
    (45)  Sales  by  a  brewery  licensed  under  section fifty-one of the
  alcoholic beverage control law, or a farm brewery licensed under section
  fifty-one-a of such law, of no  more  than  four  samples  of  beer  not
  exceeding  four  fluid ounces each, and each sample shall be a different
  beer than the others. Only  a  customer's  first  purchase  during  each
  calendar  day  at  each  licensed  entity  shall  be  exempt  under this
  paragraph.
    (46) Breast pump replacement parts  and  breast  pump  collection  and
  storage  supplies  to an individual purchaser for home use. For purposes
  of this subdivision:
    (A)  "Breast  pump  replacement  parts"  shall  mean  items  used   in
  conjunction  with  a  breast pump to collect milk expressed from a human
  breast and shall include, but not be  limited  to:  breast  shields  and
  breast  shield connectors; breast pump tubes and tubing adapters; breast
  pump valves and membranes; backflow protectors  and  backflow  protector
  adapters;  and  bottles and bottle caps specific to the operation of the
  breast pump.  "Breast pump replacement parts" does not  include  storage
  bags  and infant feeding bottles that are not specifically designed for,
  or a component part of, a breast pump.
    (B) "Breast pump collection and storage supplies"  shall  mean  breast
  milk  storage  bags  used  to collect breast milk and to store collected
  breast milk until it is ready for consumption.
    (b) (i) Telephony and telegraphy and telephone and  telegraph  service
  used  by  newspapers,  electronic  news services, radio broadcasters and
  television broadcasters in the collection or dissemination of news shall
  be exempt from the tax imposed under subdivision (b) of  section  eleven
  hundred  five  of this article if the charge for such services is a toll


 charge or a  charge  for  mileage  services,  including  the  associated
  station terminal equipment.
    (ii)  Gas,  electricity,  refrigeration  and steam, and gas, electric,
  refrigeration  and  steam  service  of  whatever  nature  for   use   or
  consumption  directly and exclusively in research and development in the
  experimental or laboratory sense shall be exempt from  the  tax  imposed
  under   subdivision   (b)   of  section  eleven  hundred  five  and  the
  compensating use tax imposed under section eleven hundred  ten  of  this
  article.  Such  research  and development shall not be deemed to include
  the ordinary testing or inspection of materials or products for  quality
  control,  efficiency  surveys,  management  studies,  consumer  surveys,
  advertising,  promotions  or  research  in  connection  with   literary,
  historical or similar projects.
    (iii)  (A)  Electricity, steam, and refrigeration and electric, steam,
  and refrigeration services that are (1) metered  and  (2)  generated  or
  produced  by  a cogeneration facility owned or operated by a cooperative
  corporation containing at least fifteen hundred apartments,  where  such
  electricity,   steam,   or  refrigeration  and/or  electric,  steam,  or
  refrigeration services are distributed to tenants and/or occupants of  a
  cooperative  corporation,  shall  be exempt from the taxes imposed under
  subdivisions (a)  and  (b)  of  section  eleven  hundred  five  and  the
  compensating  use  tax  imposed under section eleven hundred ten of this
  article.
    (B) For purposes of this paragraph, the term  "cogeneration  facility"
  means  (1)  a  facility that produces electric energy and steam or other
  forms of useful energy (such as heat)  that  are  used  for  industrial,
  commercial,  or  residential  heating  or  cooling  purposes that was in
  operation before January first,  two  thousand  four,  and  is  used  to
  generate  electricity  and/or  thermal  energy produced by such facility
  when such electricity and/or thermal energy is supplied to and  used  by
  tenants  and/or  occupants  of  a  cooperative  corporation;  or  (2)  a
  cogeneration facility, as defined in clause one  of  this  subparagraph,
  that   has  been  replaced  by  any  other  facility  used  to  generate
  electricity and/or thermal energy produced by such  facility  when  such
  electricity  and/or  thermal  energy  is supplied to and used by tenants
  and/or occupants of a cooperative corporation.
    (C) For purposes of this paragraph, the term "cooperative corporation"
  means a corporation organized under the laws of New York, at least  some
  of   the   stockholders   of  which  are  entitled,  by  reason  of  the
  stockholders' ownership interest of stock in the corporation, to  occupy
  for   dwelling  purposes  an  apartment  in  a  building  owned  by  the
  corporation  pursuant  to  a  lease  or  occupancy  agreement  with  the
  corporation.
    (D)   Fuel,  gas,  electricity,  refrigeration  and  steam,  and  gas,
  electric, refrigeration and steam  service,  used  or  consumed  in  the
  production of electricity, steam, and refrigeration and electric, steam,
  and refrigeration services for sale that are exempted under subparagraph
  (A)  of  this paragraph, shall not be entitled to the exemption provided
  by paragraph one of subdivision (c) of this section.
    (c) (1) Fuel, gas, electricity,  refrigeration  and  steam,  and  gas,
  electric,  refrigeration and steam service of whatever nature for use or
  consumption directly and  exclusively  in  the  production  of  tangible
  personal  property,  gas, electricity, refrigeration or steam, for sale,
  by manufacturing, processing, assembling, generating,  refining,  mining
  or  extracting shall be exempt from the taxes imposed under subdivisions
  (a) and (b) of section eleven hundred five and the compensating use  tax
  imposed under section eleven hundred ten of this article.


   (2)   Fuel,  gas,  electricity,  refrigeration  and  steam,  and  gas,
  electric, refrigeration and steam service of whatever nature for use  or
  consumption  either in the production of tangible personal property, for
  sale, by farming or in a commercial  horse  boarding  operation,  or  in
  both,  shall be exempt from the taxes imposed under subdivisions (a) and
  (b) of section eleven hundred five and the compensating use tax  imposed
  under section eleven hundred ten of this article.
    (d)  Services  otherwise taxable under paragraph (1), (2), (3), (7) or
  (8) of subdivision (c) of section eleven hundred five  shall  be  exempt
  from  tax  under  this  article  if the tangible property upon which the
  services were performed is delivered to the purchaser outside this state
  for use outside this state.
    (e) Telephone and telegraph service paid for  by  inserting  coins  in
  coin  operated  telephones where the charge is twenty-five cents or less
  shall be exempt from the tax imposed under subdivision  (b)  of  section
  eleven  hundred five. For the purposes of this subdivision, each payment
  for overtime or additional usage beyond the initial usage  period  shall
  be deemed to be a separate charge.
    (f) (1) Services rendered by a veterinarian licensed and registered as
  required   by  the  education  law  which  constitute  the  practice  of
  veterinary medicine as defined in said  law,  including  hospitalization
  for  which  no separate boarding charge is made, shall not be subject to
  tax under paragraph (3) of subdivision (c)  of  section  eleven  hundred
  five,  but  the exemption allowed by this subdivision shall not apply to
  other services provided by a veterinarian to  pets  and  other  animals,
  including, but not limited to, boarding, grooming and clipping. Articles
  of  tangible  personal property designed for use in some manner relating
  to domestic animals or poultry, when sold by such a veterinarian,  shall
  not  be  subject  to tax under subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred
  five or under section eleven hundred ten. However, the sale of any  such
  articles  of  tangible  personal property to a veterinarian shall not be
  deemed a sale  for  resale  within  the  meaning  of  paragraph  (4)  of
  subdivision  (b)  of  section eleven hundred one and shall not be exempt
  from retail sales tax.
    (2) Drugs or medicine sold to or used by a  veterinarian  for  use  in
  rendering  services  that  are  exempt pursuant to paragraph one of this
  subdivision to livestock or poultry used in the production for  sale  of
  tangible  personal  property  by farming, or sold to a person qualifying
  for the exemption provided for in paragraph six of  subdivision  (a)  of
  this section for use by such person on such livestock or poultry.
    (g)  Services otherwise taxable under paragraph (3) of subdivision (c)
  of section eleven hundred five shall be exempt from tax (1) if performed
  upon prosthetic aids, hearing aids, eyeglasses,  artificial  devices  or
  medical  equipment  when receipts from the retail sale of such items are
  exempt from tax under the provisions of paragraphs  three  and  four  of
  subdivision  (a)  of  this  section  or  (2) if performed upon tractors,
  trailers or semi-trailers or on property installed on such vehicles  for
  their  equipping,  maintenance  or  repair when receipts from the retail
  sale of such items are exempt from tax under the provisions of paragraph
  twenty-six of subdivision (a) of this section.
    (h)  Sales  of  tangible  personal   property   by   a   railroad   in
  reorganization  to  a  profitable railroad, as such terms are defined in
  section one hundred two of  the  rail  reorganization  act  of  nineteen
  hundred   seventy-three,  as  part  of  a  plan  of  reorganization  and
  restructuring under such rail reorganization act, shall be  exempt  from
  the  tax on retail sales imposed under subdivision (a) of section eleven
  hundred five and the compensating use tax imposed under  section  eleven
  hundred ten.


   (i)  (A)  Receipts  from  the  retail  sale of a shopping paper to the
  publisher of such publication shall be exempt from the  tax  imposed  by
  subdivision  (a)  of  section  eleven  hundred  five of this article and
  receipts from the sale of printing services performed in publishing such
  paper  shall  be  exempt  from  the  tax  imposed  by  paragraph  two of
  subdivision (c) of such section.
    (B) For purposes of this subdivision, the term "shopping paper"  shall
  mean  those  community  publications  distributed to the public, without
  consideration, for purposes of advertising and  public  information.  To
  qualify  as  a  shopping  paper  for  purposes  of this subdivision, the
  publication must also:
    (1) be distributed to the public on a community-wide basis,
    (2) be published at stated intervals at least fifty times a year;
    (3) having continuity as to title and general nature of  content  from
  issue to issue,
    (4)  contain  in  each issue news of general or community interest and
  community notices or editorial comment or articles by different authors;
    (5) not constitute a book, either singly or when successive issues are
  put together;
    (6) contain in  each  issue  advertisements  from  numerous  unrelated
  advertisers;
    (7)  be independently owned in that the publication is not owned by or
  under the control of the owners or lessees of a  shopping  center  or  a
  merchants  association  or  similar  entity  or  a  business which sells
  property or services (other than advertising) and the advertisements  in
  such publication are not predominantly for the property or services sold
  by such business; and
    (8)   meet  the  requirement  set  forth  in  paragraph  (C)  of  this
  subdivision.
    (C) The advertisements in such publication  shall  not  exceed  ninety
  percent  of  the  printed  area  of  all issues as averaged on an annual
  basis.
    (D) The term "shopping paper" shall not include mail order  and  other
  catalogs,  advertising  fliers,  travel brochures, house organs, theatre
  programs, telephone directories, shipping and restaurant guides,  racing
  tip  and  form  sheets,  shopping  center advertising sheets and similar
  publications.
    * (j) The exemptions provided in this section shall not apply  to  the
  tax  required to be prepaid pursuant to the provisions of section eleven
  hundred two of this article nor to the taxes imposed by sections  eleven
  hundred  five  and  eleven  hundred  ten of this article with respect to
  receipts from sales and uses of motor fuel or diesel motor fuel,  except
  that  the  exemptions  provided  in  paragraphs  nine  and  forty-two of
  subdivision (a) of this section shall apply to the tax  required  to  be
  prepaid pursuant to the provisions of section eleven hundred two of this
  article  and  to  the  taxes imposed by sections eleven hundred five and
  eleven hundred ten of this article with respect to  sales  and  uses  of
  kero-jet  fuel,  CNG, hydrogen and E85, provided, however, the exemption
  allowed for E85 shall be subject to the additional requirements provided
  in section eleven hundred two of this article with respect to  E85.  The
  exemption  provided  in  subdivision  (c) of this section shall apply to
  sales and uses of non-highway diesel motor fuel but only if all of  such
  fuel  is  consumed  other than on the public highways of this state. The
  exemption provided in subdivision (c) of this  section  shall  apply  to
  sales  and  uses of non-highway diesel motor fuel for use or consumption
  either in the production for  sale  of  tangible  personal  property  by
  farming or in a commercial horse boarding operation, or in both but only
  if  all  of  such  fuel is consumed other than on the public highways of


 this state (except for the use of the public highways to reach  adjacent
  farmlands  or  adjacent  lands  used  in  a  commercial  horse  boarding
  operation, or both).
    * NB Effective until September 1, 2026
    * (j)  The  exemptions provided in this section shall not apply to the
  tax required to be prepaid pursuant to the provisions of section  eleven
  hundred  two of this article nor to the taxes imposed by sections eleven
  hundred five and eleven hundred ten of  this  article  with  respect  to
  receipts  from sales and uses of motor fuel or diesel motor fuel, except
  that the exemption provided in paragraph nine of subdivision (a) of this
  section shall apply to the tax required to be prepaid  pursuant  to  the
  provisions  of  section  eleven  hundred  two of this article and to the
  taxes imposed by sections eleven hundred five and eleven hundred ten  of
  this  article  with  respect  to  sales  and  uses of kero-jet fuel. The
  exemption provided in subdivision (c) of this  section  shall  apply  to
  sales  and uses of non-highway diesel motor fuel but only if all of such
  fuel is consumed other than on the public highways of  this  state.  The
  exemption  provided  in  subdivision  (c) of this section shall apply to
  sales and uses of non-highway diesel motor fuel for use  or  consumption
  either  in  the  production  for  sale  of tangible personal property by
  farming or in a commercial horse boarding operation, or in both but only
  if all of such fuel is consumed other than on  the  public  highways  of
  this  state (except for the use of the public highways to reach adjacent
  farmlands  or  adjacent  lands  used  in  a  commercial  horse  boarding
  operation, or both).
    * NB Effective September 1, 2026
    (k)  Receipts  from  the  sale  of  food eligible to be purchased with
  coupons issued under or pursuant  to  the  federal  food  stamp  act  of
  nineteen  hundred  seventy-seven  (7 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.), as amended,
  from  retail  food  stores  and   other   participants,   approved   for
  participation  under  or  pursuant to such act, shall be exempt from the
  sales and compensating use taxes imposed under this article,  when  such
  food  is  purchased  with  such  coupons,  but  only so long as such act
  conditions state participation in the federal food stamp program on this
  state providing an exemption  from  state  and  local  sales  taxes  for
  purchases of food made with coupons issued under or pursuant to such act
  and this state is participating in such program.
    (l)  Tangible  personal  property manufactured, processed or assembled
  and  donated  by  the  manufacturer,  processor  or  assembler   to   an
  organization  described  in  subdivision  (a)  of section eleven hundred
  sixteen shall be exempt from tax under this article  provided  that  the
  manufacturer,  processor  or  assembler offers the same kind of tangible
  personal property for  sale  in  the  regular  course  of  business  and
  provided  further  that the manufacturer, processor or assembler has not
  made any other use of the tangible personal property which  is  donated.
  Nothing  in  this  subdivision  shall  be construed to allow a refund or
  credit of tax properly paid pursuant to this article.
    (m) (1) The services of training and maintaining a racehorse  to  race
  in  a race or race meeting held, maintained or conducted pursuant to the
  racing, pari-mutuel wagering and  breeding  law  or  a  similar  law  of
  another  state,  when  the  services  are  rendered  to the owner of the
  racehorse by a trainer of the racehorse, shall be exempt from tax  under
  this article;
    (2)  Tangible  personal  property actually transferred by a trainer to
  the owner of the racehorse  in  conjunction  with  the  rendering  of  a
  service  that is exempt under paragraph one of this subdivision shall be
  exempt from tax under this article. However, the sale to  a  trainer  of
  such a racehorse of any such tangible personal property or such services


 taxable  under this article shall not be deemed a sale for resale within
  the meaning of paragraph four  of  subdivision  (b)  of  section  eleven
  hundred  one  and  shall not be exempt from retail sales or compensating
  use tax;
    (3)  For purposes of this subdivision, a trainer means a horse trainer
  licensed under the racing, pari-mutuel wagering and breeding  law  or  a
  similar  law  of another state, and a racehorse means a horse registered
  with the jockey club, the United States trotting  association,  American
  quarterhorse   association   or   the  National  steeplechase  and  hunt
  association or a horse, during the first twenty-four months of its life,
  if it is eligible to be so registered.
    (n) (1) Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision,  promotional
  materials  mailed,  shipped or otherwise distributed from a point within
  the state, by or  on  behalf  of  vendors  or  other  persons  to  their
  customers  or  prospective  customers located outside this state for use
  outside this state shall be exempt from the tax on retail sales  imposed
  under   subdivision   (a)   of  section  eleven  hundred  five  and  the
  compensating use tax imposed under section eleven hundred  ten  of  this
  article.
    (2)   Services  otherwise  taxable  under  paragraph  one  or  two  of
  subdivision (c) of section eleven hundred five of this article  relating
  to  mailing  lists  or  activities  directly in conjunction with mailing
  lists shall be exempt from tax under this article if such  services  are
  performed  on  or  directly  in  conjunction  with promotional materials
  exempt under paragraph one or four of this subdivision.
    (3) Receipts from the retail sale of promotional  materials,  receipts
  from  every  sale, except for resale, of services described in paragraph
  one or two of subdivision (c) of section eleven  hundred  five  to  such
  promotional  materials and consideration given or contracted to be given
  for either such materials or such services to such  materials  shall  be
  exempt  from  tax  under  this  article  to  the  extent of the vendor's
  separately stated charge to the purchaser of such materials or  services
  for  the  vendor's  cost  to  ship  or  deliver  such  materials  to the
  purchaser's customers or prospective customers by means  of  the  United
  States postal service, paid by the vendor to such postal service to ship
  or  deliver  such materials, but only where the vendor separately states
  such charge to ship or deliver (not exceeding the vendor's United States
  postal service costs) in a written contract with the purchaser or  on  a
  written bill rendered to the purchaser.
    (4)  Notwithstanding  any contrary provisions of paragraph one of this
  subdivision, promotional  materials  which  are  printed  materials  and
  promotional  materials upon which services described in paragraph two of
  subdivision (c) of  section  eleven  hundred  five  have  been  directly
  performed  shall  be  exempt  from  tax  under  this  article  where the
  purchaser of such promotional materials mails or ships such  promotional
  materials, or causes such promotional materials to be mailed or shipped,
  to  its  customers  or  prospective  customers,  without  charge to such
  customers or prospective customers, by means of a common carrier, United
  States postal service or like delivery service.
    (5) Services otherwise taxable under paragraph two of subdivision  (c)
  of section eleven hundred five performed on promotional materials exempt
  under  paragraph four of this subdivision shall be exempt from tax under
  this article.
    (6) Storing promotional materials exempt under paragraph four of  this
  subdivision shall be exempt from tax under this article where the vendor
  of  the  storing  service  is  also  either  the  vendor  of such exempt
  promotional materials or the vendor who rendered exempt  services  under
  paragraph two or five, or both, of this subdivision with respect to such


 exempt promotional materials and the purchaser of the storing service is
  the purchaser of such exempt promotional materials.
    (7)  Mechanicals, layouts, artwork, photographs, color separations and
  like property shall be exempt from tax under  this  article  where  such
  property  is purchased, manufactured, processed or assembled by a person
  who furnishes such property to a  printer  and  the  printer  uses  such
  property  directly  and  predominantly  in the production of promotional
  materials exempt  under  paragraph  four  of  this  subdivision,  or  in
  performing services exempt under paragraph five of this subdivision, for
  sale  by  such  printer to the person who furnished such property to the
  printer.
    (8) Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to exempt  tangible
  personal   property  (i)  purchased  by  a  person  (other  than  exempt
  promotional materials described in paragraph four of  this  subdivision)
  or  (ii)  manufactured,  processed  or  assembled  by  the manufacturer,
  processor or assembler, who furnishes such property  to  the  vendor  of
  promotional  materials  exempt  under  paragraph  one  or  four  of this
  subdivision to be included as free gifts with  such  exempt  promotional
  materials   to  be  mailed  or  shipped  to  such  purchaser's  or  such
  manufacturer's, processor's  or  assembler's  customers  or  prospective
  customers  or  who  otherwise  uses  such  property  in  this state, for
  example, by giving or donating the property as  free  gifts  to  another
  person,  unless  such  tangible  personal property is mailed, shipped or
  otherwise distributed from a point within this state to  such  customers
  or prospective customers located outside this state for use outside this
  state.
    (o) Services otherwise taxable under subdivision (c) of section eleven
  hundred  five  or  under section eleven hundred ten shall be exempt from
  tax under this article where  performed  on  computer  software  of  any
  nature;  provided,  however,  that where such services are provided to a
  customer in conjunction with the sale of tangible personal property  any
  charge  for  such  services  shall  be  exempt  only when such charge is
  reasonable and separately stated on an invoice or other statement of the
  price given to the purchaser.
    (q) Services otherwise taxable under paragraph  three  of  subdivision
  (c)  of  section eleven hundred five or under section eleven hundred ten
  of this article, and tangible personal property purchased  and  used  by
  the  person  who  sells such services in performing such services, where
  such property becomes a physical component part  of  the  property  upon
  which  the  services  are performed, shall be exempt from tax under this
  article where such services are performed on a barge which is  not  self
  propelled,  has a cargo capacity of at least one thousand short tons, is
  used exclusively by the owner,  lessee  or  operator  of  the  barge  to
  transport  goods  or  other  property  in  the  conduct of such person's
  business and is primarily engaged in interstate or foreign commerce.
    (r)  Receipts  from  the  sale  of  alarm   call   services   designed
  specifically  to  respond  to  medical  emergencies  and the use of such
  services, otherwise taxable under paragraph eight of subdivision (c)  of
  section  eleven  hundred  five or under clause (C) of subdivision (a) of
  section eleven hundred ten of this article, shall be  exempt  from  such
  taxes.
    * (s)  The  exemptions provided in this section shall not apply to the
  tax required to be prepaid pursuant to the provisions of section  eleven
  hundred three of this article.
    * NB There are 2 sub (s)'s
    * (s)  (1)  The  sale  of  any  good  or  service  necessary  for  the
  acquisition, sustenance or maintenance of a guide dog, a hearing dog  or
  a  service  dog,  as  defined  in  section  one  hundred  eight  of  the


 agriculture and markets law, which is utilized  by  any  person  with  a
  disability, shall be exempt from taxation pursuant to this article.
    (2)  For  the purposes of this subdivision, "person with a disability"
  shall mean any person with a disability  as  that  term  is  defined  in
  subdivision   twenty-one  of  section  two  hundred  ninety-two  of  the
  executive law who uses a guide dog, hearing dog, or service  dog  to  do
  work  or  perform tasks for such person, with respect to such disability
  and for which such dog is trained.
    (3) The commissioner shall create and implement a means of identifying
  persons who make purchases  which  shall  be  exempt  pursuant  to  this
  subdivision.  Such  persons  shall  include persons who have a dependent
  with a disability, and who makes purchases on behalf of such  dependent.
  Only  persons  presenting such means of identification shall receive the
  exemption  granted  pursuant  to  this  subdivision.  Furthermore,   the
  commissioner  shall  promulgate  any  rules and regulations necessary to
  implement the provisions of this subdivision.
    * NB There are 2 sub (s)'s
    (t) (1) Receipts of a car wash facility from every  sale,  except  for
  resale,  of  the service of washing, waxing or vacuuming a motor vehicle
  or  other  tangible  personal  property  and  consideration   given   or
  contracted  to  be  given for such service at such a facility, where (i)
  the motor vehicle or other tangible personal property is  washed,  waxed
  or  vacuumed  at  such  facility  by  means exclusively of coin-operated
  equipment at such facility of the vendor providing the service; and (ii)
  neither the vendor nor any employee of the vendor  assists  in  washing,
  waxing  or  vacuuming  the  motor  vehicle  or  other  tangible personal
  property; and (iii) the purchaser or user of the service  washes,  waxes
  or  vacuums  such  person's  motor  vehicle  or  other tangible personal
  property at such a facility, or (iv) the motor vehicle or other tangible
  personal property is washed, waxed or vacuumed  by  automated  equipment
  without  assistance  by  the  purchaser or user of the service, shall be
  exempt from tax under this article, to the extent of the amount of money
  or value, in money, of tokens deposited in such coin-operated  equipment
  by the purchaser of the service.
    (2)   Except  to  the  extent  exempt  under  paragraph  one  of  this
  subdivision receipts from every sale, except for resale, of the  service
  of  vacuuming  a  motor  vehicle or other tangible personal property and
  consideration given or contracted to be given for  such  service,  where
  the purchaser or user of the service vacuums such person's motor vehicle
  or  other  tangible  personal  property at the facility where the vacuum
  equipment is located, by means exclusively  of  coin-operated  equipment
  and  neither  the  vendor operating the facility nor any employee of the
  vendor assists the purchaser in vacuuming the vehicle or other  tangible
  personal  property,  shall be exempt from tax under this article, to the
  extent of the amount of money or value, in money, of tokens deposited in
  such coin-operated equipment by the purchaser of the service.
    (3)  For  purposes  of  this  subdivision,  the  term  "coin-operated"
  includes coin-operated, currency-operated or token-operated and the term
  "motor vehicle" shall mean a motor vehicle as defined in subdivision (f)
  of section eleven hundred thirty-two of this article.
    (u)  Receipts  from  every sale of the services described in paragraph
  three of subdivision (c) of section eleven hundred five of this  article
  to  omnibuses,  parts,  equipment  and  lubricants exempt from tax under
  paragraph thirty-two of subdivision (a) of this section shall be  exempt
  from  tax  under  this  article.  Where  receipts  from  the  sale of or
  consideration given or contracted to be given  for  the  purchase  of  a
  service  have  been  exempted  under  this subdivision, such receipts or
  consideration shall not also qualify for the refund or credit  described


 in  subdivision  (b) of section eleven hundred nineteen of this article;
  where  any  or  all  of  the  tax  on  receipts  from  the  sale  of  or
  consideration  given  or  contracted  to  be given for the purchase of a
  service  has  been  refunded  or credited under such subdivision (b), no
  part of such receipts  or  consideration  shall  be  exempt  under  this
  subdivision.
    (v)  Receipts  from  the  sale  of  Internet access service, including
  start-up charges, and the use of such service, shall be exempt from  the
  taxes  imposed under this article. For purposes of this subdivision, the
  term "Internet access service"  shall  mean  the  service  of  providing
  connection  to  the  Internet,  but  only where such service entails the
  routing of Internet traffic by means of accepted Internet protocols. The
  provision of communication or navigation software,  an  e-mail  address,
  e-mail  software,  news  headlines,  space  for  a  website  and website
  services, or other such services, in conjunction with the  provision  of
  such  connection  to  the  Internet,  where  such  services  are  merely
  incidental to the provision of such connection, shall be  considered  to
  be part of the provision of Internet access service.
    * (w)  Receipts from the sale of gas or electricity or gas or electric
  service of whatever nature and consideration given or contracted  to  be
  given  for,  or  for  the  use of, gas or electricity or gas or electric
  service of whatever nature purchased for use or consumption directly and
  exclusively to provide  gas  or  electric  service  of  whatever  nature
  consisting  of  operating  a gas pipeline or gas distribution line or an
  electric transmission or distribution line and  ensuring  the  necessary
  working  pressure in an underground gas storage facility shall be exempt
  from sales and compensating use taxes  imposed  by  this  article.  Such
  exempt  gas or electricity or gas or electric service of whatever nature
  shall include, but shall not be limited to, such gas or  electricity  or
  gas or electric service of whatever nature used or consumed directly and
  exclusively  to  (1) ensure necessary working pressure in a gas pipeline
  used to transport, transmit or distribute gas, (2)  operate  compressors
  used  to  transport,  transmit  or  distribute  gas  through  such a gas
  pipeline or distribution  line  or  used  to  ensure  necessary  working
  pressure  in such a storage facility, (3) operate heaters to prevent gas
  in such a pipeline or  distribution  line  from  freezing,  (4)  operate
  equipment  which  removes  impurities  and  moisture  from gas in such a
  pipeline or distribution line, (5)  operate  substations  and  equipment
  related   to  electric  transmission  and  distribution  lines  such  as
  transformers, capacitors, meters, switches,  communication  devices  and
  heating  and  cooling  equipment,  and  (6)  ensure  the  reliability of
  electricity or electric service transmitted or distributed through  such
  lines,   for  example,  by  operating  reserve  capacity  machinery  and
  equipment.
    * NB There are 2 sub. (w)'s
    * (w) Receipts from sales by  a  senior  citizen  independent  housing
  community  of  food  or  drink (other than beer, wine or other alcoholic
  beverages) for consumption on the premises of such community (1) to  its
  residents  and (2) to guests of such residents, provided that the dining
  facility where food and drink is served  to  such  residents  and  their
  guests  is  not open to the public, shall be exempt from the tax imposed
  by subdivision (d) of section  eleven  hundred  five  of  this  article,
  provided  that  any  such food or drink shall be exempt only where it is
  served at the dining  facility  at  such  community  or  served  to  the
  residents  or  the  residents'  guests  in the residents' rooms. For the
  purposes of this subdivision, the term "senior citizen" means  a  person
  at   least  fifty-five  years  of  age  and  the  term  "senior  citizen
  independent housing community" means a  residential  facility,  with  or


 without  additional facilities such as recreational facilities, which is
  designed  for  senior  citizens,  the  residents  of  which  are  senior
  citizens,  spouses  of  such  senior  citizens  or any other person, not
  necessarily  related, who has resided with a senior citizen for at least
  six months and persons hired to provide live-in, long  term  care  to  a
  resident and who are actually providing such care to such a resident for
  compensation. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to apply to
  food  or  drink sold or served at a hotel, motel, rooming house or other
  similar establishment or  at  a  restaurant,  tavern  or  other  similar
  establishment.  The  exemption provided by this subdivision shall not be
  construed to apply to food or drink sold through vending machines.
    * NB There are 2 sub. (w)'s
    (x) Receipts from every sale of, and consideration given or contracted
  to be given for, or for the use  of,  the  following  tangible  personal
  property  and  services  shall  be exempt from the taxes imposed by this
  article:
    (1) Tangible personal property for use  or  consumption  directly  and
  predominantly   in   production   of   live  dramatic  or  musical  arts
  performances in a theater or other similar place of  assembly  (but  not
  including a roof garden, cabaret or other similar place), with a seating
  capacity  of one hundred or more chairs that are rigidly anchored to the
  construction or fixed  in  place  so  as  to  prevent  movement  in  any
  direction,  but  only  where  it  can be shown at the time such tangible
  personal  property  is  purchased  that  such  performances  are  to  be
  presented  to  the  public  in  such theater or other similar place on a
  regular basis of at least five performances per week for a period of  at
  least  two consecutive weeks, the content of each such performance shall
  be the same and a charge is or is to be made for admission to the  place
  where  such  performances  occur.  For purposes of this subdivision, the
  term "place of assembly" shall mean a place of assembly with a stage  in
  which  scenery  and  scenic  elements  are used, as described in section
  27-232 and subdivision (a) of section 27-255 of the administrative  code
  of  the  city  of  New  York  (as  such section and subdivision exist on
  January first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight), and for which an approved
  seating plan is required to be kept, as described in section  27-528  of
  the  administrative code of the city of New York (as such section exists
  on January first, nineteen hundred ninety-eight), whether  or  not  such
  theater  or other similar place is located in such city. Nothing in this
  paragraph shall be construed to exempt tangible personal property  which
  is  permanently  affixed to, or becomes an integral component part of, a
  structure, building, or real property.
    (2) Services described in paragraph two or three of subdivision (c) of
  section eleven hundred five of this article when rendered  with  respect
  to property exempt under paragraph one of this subdivision.
    (y) Services otherwise taxable under paragraph three, five or eight of
  subdivision  (c)  of section eleven hundred five or under section eleven
  hundred ten of this  article  shall  be  exempt  from  any  tax  imposed
  pursuant to such provisions where such services are rendered directly to
  or  in  relation  to  the property exempt from tax pursuant to paragraph
  thirty-seven of subdivision (a) of this section, provided however  where
  any  such  services  are rendered to property or in relation to property
  which was in part not exempt  under  such  paragraph  thirty-seven,  the
  commissioner  shall  provide  for  a  method  of  allocation to exempt a
  portion of such services.
    (aa)(1) The following services shall be  exempt  when  rendered  to  a
  broadcaster in connection with its broadcasting business:
    (i)  The  services  described  in  paragraph two of subdivision (c) of
  section eleven hundred five of this article and the services of editing,


 dubbing, and mixing when performed in connection  with  the  production,
  post-production  or  transmission of live or recorded programs described
  in subparagraph (A) of paragraph thirty-eight of subdivision (a) of this
  section.
    (ii)  The  services described in paragraph three of subdivision (c) of
  section eleven hundred five  of  this  article  when  performed  on  the
  tangible  personal  property  described  in  paragraph  thirty-eight  of
  subdivision (a) of this section.
    (iii) The services described in paragraph five of subdivision  (c)  of
  section  eleven  hundred five of this article when performed on property
  described in paragraph thirty-eight of subdivision (a) of  this  section
  which  subsequent  to its installation has become an addition or capital
  improvement to real property,  property  or  land,  as  such  terms  are
  defined in the real property tax law.
    (2)  For  purposes  of  this  subdivision:  the  terms  "broadcaster",
  "programs", and "recorded programs" shall have the same meaning as  that
  ascribed to those terms in subparagraph (C) of paragraph thirty-eight of
  subdivision (a) of this section.
    (bb)  1. Receipts from the sale of services described in paragraph two
  or three of subdivision (c) of  section  eleven  hundred  five  of  this
  article,  and  consideration given or contracted to be given for, or for
  the use of, such services, shall be exempt from tax under  this  article
  when   rendered   with   respect  to  property  exempt  under  paragraph
  thirty-nine of subdivision (a) of this section.
    2. Fuel, gas, electricity, refrigeration and steam, and gas, electric,
  refrigeration  and  steam  service  of  whatever  nature  for   use   or
  consumption  directly  and  exclusively  in the production of a film for
  sale, as described in paragraph thirty-nine of subdivision (a)  of  this
  section,  shall  be exempt from the taxes imposed under subdivisions (a)
  and (b) of section eleven hundred five  and  the  compensating  use  tax
  imposed under section eleven hundred ten of this article.
    (cc)  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  law to the contrary,
  receipts from the sale of mobile telecommunications service  by  a  home
  service  provider shall be exempt from the taxes imposed by subparagraph
  (B) of paragraph one and paragraph two of  subdivision  (b)  of  section
  eleven  hundred  five  of  this article if the mobile telecommunications
  customer's place of primary use is within a taxing jurisdiction  outside
  this state.
    (dd)   (1)   Services  otherwise  taxable  under  paragraph  three  of
  subdivision (c) of section eleven hundred five or under  section  eleven
  hundred  ten  of  this article, and tangible personal property purchased
  and used by the person  who  sells  such  services  in  performing  such
  services,  where  such property becomes a physical component part of the
  property upon which the services are performed or where such property is
  a lubricant applied to aircraft, shall be exempt  from  tax  under  this
  article where such services are performed on aircraft.
    (2)  The service of storing an aircraft provided by a person who sells
  a service exempt under paragraph one  of  this  subdivision,  when  such
  storing  is  rendered  in conjunction with, and during the rendering of,
  such service to such aircraft, shall be  exempt  from  the  tax  imposed
  under  paragraph  four of subdivision (c) of section eleven hundred five
  of this article.
    * (ee) The following shall be exempt from tax under this article:  (1)
  Receipts  from the retail sale of, and consideration given or contracted
  to be given for, or for the use of,  residential  solar  energy  systems
  equipment  and  the service of installing such systems. For the purposes
  of this subdivision, "residential solar energy systems equipment"  shall
  mean  an  arrangement  or  combination  of  components  installed  in  a


 residence that utilizes solar radiation to produce  energy  designed  to
  provide heating, cooling, hot water and/or electricity. Such arrangement
  or  components  shall  not include equipment that is part of a non-solar
  energy  system  or  which  uses  any  sort  of  recreational facility or
  equipment as a storage medium.
    (2) Receipts from the  sale  of  electricity  by  a  person  primarily
  engaged  in the sale of solar energy system equipment and/or electricity
  generated by such equipment pursuant to a written agreement under  which
  such  electricity  is  generated  by  residential  solar  energy  system
  equipment that is: (A) owned by a person other  than  the  purchaser  of
  such electricity; (B) installed on residential property of the purchaser
  of such electricity; and (C) used to provide heating, cooling, hot water
  or electricity to such property.
    * NB There are 2 sb (ee)'s
    * (ee)  (1)  Tangible  personal property purchased by a tenant for use
  directly and exclusively  to  furnish  and  equip  the  tenant's  leased
  premises  for  use  as  commercial office space shall be exempt from the
  taxes imposed by sections eleven hundred five and eleven hundred ten  of
  this  article.  Provided,  however,  no exemption shall exist under this
  paragraph unless  such  tangible  personal  property  is  to  become  an
  integral  component  part  of the building in which such leased premises
  are located.
    (2) Tangible personal property purchased by a tenant or  landlord  for
  use  directly  and  exclusively  in adding to, altering or improving the
  tenant's leased premises for use as commercial  office  space  shall  be
  exempt from the taxes imposed by sections eleven hundred five and eleven
  hundred ten of this article. Provided, however, no exemption shall exist
  under this paragraph unless such tangible personal property is to become
  an integral component part of the building in which such leased premises
  are located.
    (3)  Tangible personal property sold to a contractor, subcontractor or
  repairperson for use directly and exclusively in adding to, altering  or
  improving  a tenant's leased premises for use as commercial office space
  shall be exempt from the taxes imposed by sections eleven  hundred  five
  and  eleven hundred ten of this article. Provided, however, no exemption
  shall exist under this paragraph unless such tangible personal  property
  is  to  become  an integral component part of the building in which such
  leased premises are located.
    (4) The service of installing property exempt under paragraph  one  or
  two  of  this  subdivision  shall  be  exempt  from  the  tax imposed by
  paragraph three of subdivision (c) of section  eleven  hundred  five  of
  this article.
    (5)  The  exemptions in this subdivision shall apply only to purchases
  or sales made, uses occurring and services rendered  during  the  period
  commencing  on  the  first day of the tenant's lease term and ending one
  year later, provided that any such property must  be  delivered  to  the
  tenant's  leased  premises  for  use  at  or  in such premises, and such
  services must be rendered there in full, no later than ninety days after
  the end of such year; and  provided,  further,  that,  with  respect  to
  leased or rented tangible personal property, such exemptions shall apply
  only  to  lease or rental payments required to be paid during such year.
  Nothing in this  subdivision  shall  be  construed  to  exempt  tangible
  personal  property  for  use  in  erecting  or  adding to a structure or
  building of a landlord.
    (6) When applying the exemptions in paragraphs one  and  two  of  this
  subdivision  with  respect to leased premises located in the World Trade
  Center site, the world financial center and the Battery Park city  area,
  such  paragraphs  shall  be  read  without regard to the requirement set


 forth in the last sentence of each such paragraph that tangible personal
  property is to become an integral component  part  of  the  building  in
  which such leased premises are located.
    (7) For purposes of this subdivision:
    (A)  "Tenant" means a person who, as lessee, enters into a space lease
  with a landlord for a term of ten years or more commencing on  or  after
  September first, two thousand five, but not later than, in the case of a
  space lease with respect to leased premises located in eligible areas as
  defined  in  clause (i) of subparagraph (D) of this paragraph, September
  first, two thousand twenty-seven and, in the case of a space lease  with
  respect  to  leased  premises  located  in  eligible areas as defined in
  clause (ii) of  subparagraph  (D)  of  this  paragraph  not  later  than
  September  first,  two  thousand  twenty-nine,  of  premises  for use as
  commercial office space in buildings located or to  be  located  in  the
  eligible  areas.  A  person  who  currently occupies premises for use as
  commercial office space under an existing lease in  a  building  in  the
  eligible   areas   shall  not  be  eligible  for  exemption  under  this
  subdivision unless such existing lease, in the case  of  a  space  lease
  with  respect to leased premises located in eligible areas as defined in
  clause (i) of subparagraph (D) of this paragraph  expires  according  to
  its  terms  before  September  first,  two thousand twenty-seven or such
  existing lease, in the case of a space  lease  with  respect  to  leased
  premises  located  in  eligible  areas  as  defined  in  clause  (ii) of
  subparagraph (D) of this paragraph and such person enters into  a  space
  lease,  for a term of ten years or more commencing on or after September
  first, two thousand five, of premises for use as commercial office space
  in a building located or to be located in the eligible  areas,  provided
  that  such  space  lease  with  respect  to  leased  premises located in
  eligible areas as defined in clause (i)  of  subparagraph  (D)  of  this
  paragraph   commences  no  later  than  September  first,  two  thousand
  twenty-seven, and provided that such space lease with respect to  leased
  premises  located  in  eligible  areas  as  defined  in  clause  (ii) of
  subparagraph (D) of this paragraph commences  no  later  than  September
  first,  two  thousand twenty-nine and provided, further, that such space
  lease shall expire no earlier than ten years after the expiration of the
  original lease.
    (B) "Leased premises" means the premises within a building to be  used
  as  commercial  office space under a lease described in subparagraph (A)
  of this paragraph, excluding any common areas and any other area outside
  such office space.
    (C) "Landlord" means the person, unrelated by ownership to  a  tenant,
  who leases leased premises to that tenant.
    (D)  "Eligible areas" mean: **(i) the area in the borough of Manhattan
  bounded by Murray street on the north starting at  the  intersection  of
  West street and Murray street; running easterly along the center line of
  Murray street, connecting through City Hall Park with the center line of
  Frankfort  street  and  running  easterly  along  the  center  lines  of
  Frankfort and Dover streets to the  intersection  of  Dover  street  and
  South street; running southerly along the center line of South street to
  Peter  Minuit Plaza; connecting through Peter Minuit Plaza to the center
  line of State street and running northwesterly along the center line  of
  State  street  to  the  intersection  of State street and Battery Place;
  running  westerly  along  the  center  line  of  Battery  Place  to  the
  intersection  of  Battery  Place  and West street; and running northerly
  along the center line of West street to the intersection of West  street
  and  Murray  street.  In  addition,  "eligible  area"  shall include the
  "Battery Park project area"  as  defined  in  section  nineteen  hundred
  seventy-two of the public authorities law, including the world financial


 center.  Any  tax  lot  that  is partly located inside the eligible area
  shall be deemed to be entirely located inside such area, and
    ** NB Repealed December 1, 2028
    (ii)  the  World Trade Center site, the World financial center and the
  Battery Park city area as defined as follows:
    (a) "World Trade Center site" means the area of the former complex  of
  seven  buildings (known as numbers one through seven world trade center)
  around a central plaza, near the south end of the county of New York  in
  the  downtown financial district, which were destroyed or damaged beyond
  repair in the attacks of September eleventh, two thousand one.
    (b) "World financial center" means the complex of buildings  known  as
  numbers  one  through  four  world  financial  center, in an area in the
  county of New York bordered by West street, the Hudson River, and  Vesey
  and Liberty streets.
    (c)  "Battery Park city area" means the "Battery Park project area" as
  defined  in  section  nineteen  hundred  seventy-two   of   the   public
  authorities law, including the world financial center.
    (8)  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  law  to  the  contrary, this
  subdivision shall also apply to the  taxes  imposed  by  section  eleven
  hundred  seven  and  the taxes imposed by section eleven hundred nine of
  this article, but shall not apply to the taxes imposed by section eleven
  hundred eight of this article or pursuant to the  authority  of  article
  twenty-nine  of  this  chapter  other  than taxes imposed by a city of a
  million or more pursuant to the authority of subdivision (a) of  section
  twelve hundred ten of such article twenty-nine.
    * NB Repealed December 1, 2030
    * NB There are 2 sb (ee)'s
    (ff)  Receipts  from retail sales of tangible personal property by any
  gift shop located in a veteran's home described in title thirty-eight of
  the United States Code shall be exempt from the taxes  imposed  by  this
  article.
    (gg)  (1)  Receipts  from  the  sale of an electronic news service and
  consideration given or contracted to be given for, or for the use of, an
  electronic news service shall  be  exempt  from  the  taxes  imposed  by
  paragraph  one or nine of subdivision (c) of section eleven hundred five
  of this article and clause (C) of  subdivision  (a)  of  section  eleven
  hundred  ten  of  this  article if the receipts from the sale of, or the
  consideration given for, or for the use of, the electronic news  service
  does  not  exceed  the  cap  amount  as  defined in subparagraph (ii) of
  paragraph thirty-seven of subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred  one
  of  this  article.  If  the  subscription  period of the electronic news
  service is  other  than  a  year,  the  cap  amount  shall  be  adjusted
  proportionately  in  determining  whether the subscription price exceeds
  the cap amount. If the contract for the  sale  of  the  electronic  news
  service  grants  more  than  one person the right to view the electronic
  news service, the receipts from the sale of, or the consideration  given
  for, or for the use of, the service will be deemed not to exceed the cap
  amount  only  if the listed selling price for an individual subscription
  on the day the contract commences does not exceed the cap amount.
    (2)  Receipts  from  the  sale  of  an   electronic   periodical   and
  consideration  given,  or contracted to be given for, or for the use of,
  an electronic periodical shall be  exempt  from  the  taxes  imposed  by
  paragraph  one or nine of subdivision (c) of section eleven hundred five
  and clause (C) of subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred ten of  this
  article.
    (3)  If  an  electronic  periodical  is  sold  together with any other
  components that are taxable under this article (other than an electronic
  news service) for a single price, the exemption in paragraph two of this


 subdivision shall not apply  to  the  receipts  from  the  sale  of,  or
  consideration  given,  or  contracted to be give for, or for the use of,
  the electronic periodical and such other components  unless  the  vendor
  sells such electronic periodical and such other components separately in
  the  regular  course  of  business.  If the requirement in the preceding
  sentence is satisfied, then the exemption will apply to an amount  equal
  to the bundled price multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is
  the  price  of  the  electronic  periodical when sold separately and the
  denominator of  which  is  the  sum  of  the  price  of  the  electronic
  periodical when sold separately and the price of the other components of
  the transaction when sold separately.
    (4)  If  an  electronic  news  service  is  sold  together  with other
  components for a single price, the exemption in paragraph  one  of  this
  subdivision  shall  not  apply  to  the  receipts  from  the sale of, or
  consideration given, or contracted to be given, for, or for the use  of,
  the  electronic news service and the other components in the transaction
  unless one of the following exceptions applies and only  to  the  extent
  indicated:
    (i)  The  provider  of the electronic news service does not separately
  sell the electronic news service in the regular course of business,  the
  other  components  are  not  taxable under this article, and the bundled
  price is less than the cap amount, in which case the  exemption  applies
  to the full bundled price; or
    (ii)  The provider of the electronic news service sells the electronic
  news service and  each  of  the  other  components  of  the  transaction
  separately  in  the  regular  course  of  business,  whether  or not the
  components are taxable under this article, and the separate price of the
  electronic  news  service  does  not  exceed  the  cap  amount.  If  the
  conditions  in  this  subparagraph  are  met,  the exemption provided by
  paragraph one of this subdivision will apply only to an amount equal  to
  the  bundled  price  multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is
  the price of the electronic news service when  sold  separately  in  the
  regular  course  of business, and the denominator of which is the sum of
  the price of the electronic news service when  sold  separately  in  the
  regular  course  of business and the prices of the other components when
  sold separately in the regular course of  business;  provided,  however,
  that  in  no  case shall the exempt amount be greater than the amount of
  the charge for the electronic news service when sold separately  in  the
  regular course of business.
    (5)  For  the  purposes  of this subdivision "bundled price" means the
  price at which an electronic news service or an electronic periodical is
  sold together with any other components for one price;  and  "component"
  means  any  property,  service, or other item of whatever nature that is
  sold together with an electronic news service or  electronic  periodical
  for one price.
    (6)  Nothing  in  this  subdivision  shall  exempt, or be construed to
  exempt, any separate charge by the vendor of an electronic news  service
  or  electronic  periodical  for other information services, or any other
  property or service subject to tax under this  article,  that  does  not
  constitute an electronic news service or electronic periodical.
    (hh)  Receipts from the sale of transportation service consisting of a
  HAIL vehicle trip, as the term "HAIL vehicle trip" is defined in article
  twenty-nine-A of this chapter, shall be exempt from the tax  imposed  by
  paragraph  ten of subdivision (c) of section eleven hundred five of this
  article, if such trip originates in a city of  a  million  or  more  and
  terminates   anywhere   within   the   territorial   boundaries  of  the
  metropolitan commuter transportation district and is subject to the  tax
  on HAIL vehicle trips imposed by such article twenty-nine-A.


   * (ii)  The following shall be exempt from tax under this article: (1)
  Receipts from the retail sale of, and consideration given or  contracted
  to  be  given  for,  or  for the use of, commercial solar energy systems
  equipment and the service of installing such systems. For  the  purposes
  of  this  subdivision, "commercial solar energy systems equipment" shall
  mean  an  arrangement  or  combination  of  components  installed   upon
  non-residential  premises that utilize solar radiation to produce energy
  designed to provide heating, cooling, hot water and/or electricity. Such
  arrangement or components shall not include equipment that is part of  a
  non-solar energy system.
    (2)  Receipts  from  the  sale  of  electricity  by a person primarily
  engaged in the sale of solar energy system equipment and/or  electricity
  generated  by such equipment pursuant to a written agreement under which
  the electricity is generated by commercial solar energy system equipment
  that is: (A) owned  by  a  person  other  than  the  purchaser  of  such
  electricity;  (B)  installed  on  the  non-residential  premises  of the
  purchaser of such electricity; and (C) used to provide heating, cooling,
  hot water or electricity to such premises.
    * NB There are 2 sb (ii)'s
    * (ii) Receipts from sales of and fees associated with water and sewer
  service line protection programs sold to owners of residential  property
  shall be exempt from the taxes imposed by this article.
    * NB There are 2 sb (ii)'s
    * (jj)  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  this  article: (1)
  Receipts in excess of two hundred thirty  thousand  dollars  from  every
  sale  of,  and consideration given or contracted to be given for, or for
  the use of, a vessel shall be exempt from  the  taxes  imposed  by  this
  article.  For purposes of this subdivision, "vessel" shall have the same
  meaning as such term is defined in section twenty-two hundred  fifty  of
  the  vehicle  and  traffic  law  and  any  outboard motor or trailer, as
  defined in section one hundred fifty-six  of  such  law,  when  sold  in
  conjunction with such vessel.
    (2)  For  purposes of subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred eleven
  of this article, the purchase  price,  current  market  value,  or  fair
  rental value, as the case may be, of a vessel purchased by a resident of
  New  York state outside of this state for use outside of this state that
  subsequently becomes subject to the compensating use tax  imposed  under
  this  article  shall be deemed not to exceed two hundred thirty thousand
  dollars.
    (3) For purposes of subdivision (i) of section eleven  hundred  eleven
  of  this article, receipts from, or consideration given or contracted to
  be given for, the lease of a vessel that is subject to such  subdivision
  (i)  in  excess  of  two hundred thirty thousand dollars shall be exempt
  from the calculation of tax due under such subdivision (i).
    (4) For purposes of paragraph one of subdivision (q) of section eleven
  hundred eleven of this article, the limitations on exclusions  from  the
  definition  of  retail  sale  in paragraph one of such subdivision shall
  apply only to the first two hundred thirty thousand dollars of  receipts
  from  every  sale  of,  or consideration given or contracted to be given
  for, or for the use of, a vessel.
    (5) For purposes of paragraph two of subdivision (q) of section eleven
  hundred eleven of this article, the purchase price or market  value,  as
  the  case may be, of a vessel subject to tax under paragraph two of such
  subdivision (q) shall  be  deemed  not  to  exceed  two  hundred  thirty
  thousand dollars.
    (6) For purposes of subdivision two of section eleven hundred eighteen
  of  this  article, the limitation on the exclusion from compensating use
  tax in such subdivision two  with  respect  to  qualified  property,  as


 defined  in  such subdivision, shall apply only to the first two hundred
  thirty thousand dollars of consideration given or contracted to be given
  for, or for the use of, a vessel.
    (7)  For  purposes  of  paragraph  (a) of subdivision seven of section
  eleven hundred eighteen of this article, the refund or credit  allowable
  under  paragraph  (a)  of  such subdivision seven shall be computed only
  with regard to tax legally due and paid to another state  on  the  first
  two hundred thirty thousand dollars of the purchase price.
    (8) Except as otherwise provided herein, this subdivision shall not be
  deemed to limit any other exemption, exclusion or credit in this article
  relating to a vessel.
    * NB There are 2 sb (jj)'s
    * (jj)  Tangible personal property or services otherwise taxable under
  this article sold to a related person shall not be subject to the  taxes
  imposed   by  section  eleven  hundred  five  of  this  article  or  the
  compensating use tax imposed under section eleven hundred  ten  of  this
  article  where the purchaser can show that the following conditions have
  been met to the extent they are applicable: (1)(i) the  vendor  and  the
  purchaser  are  referenced as either a "covered company" as described in
  section 243.2(f) or a "material entity" as described in section 243.2(l)
  of the Code of Federal Regulations in a resolution plan  that  has  been
  submitted  to  an  agency  of  the  United  States  for  the  purpose of
  satisfying subparagraph 1  of  paragraph  (d)  of  section  one  hundred
  sixty-five  of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection
  Act (the "Act") or any  successor  law,  or  (ii)  the  vendor  and  the
  purchaser are separate legal entities pursuant to a divestiture directed
  pursuant  to  subparagraph  5  of  paragraph  (d) of section one hundred
  sixty-five of such act or any successor law; (2) the sale would not have
  occurred between such related entities were it not for  such  resolution
  plan or divestiture; and (3) in acquiring such property or services, the
  vendor  did not claim an exemption from the tax imposed by this state or
  another state based on the vendor's intent to resell  such  services  or
  property.  A  person  is  related to another person for purposes of this
  subdivision if the person bears a relationship to such person  described
  in  section  two  hundred  sixty-seven of the internal revenue code. The
  exemption provided by this subdivision shall not apply  to  sales  made,
  services  rendered, or uses occurring after June thirtieth, two thousand
  twenty-four, except with respect to sales made,  services  rendered,  or
  uses  occurring  pursuant to binding contracts entered into on or before
  such date; but  in  no  case  shall  such  exemption  apply  after  June
  thirtieth, two thousand twenty-seven.
    * NB There are 2 sb (jj)'s
    * (kk)  Rent  paid  by  a room remarketer to an operator that is not a
  room remarketer for an occupancy that the  room  remarketer  intends  to
  provide  to an occupant for rent shall be exempt from the hotel unit fee
  imposed by section eleven hundred four  of  this  article  and  the  tax
  imposed  by  subdivision  (e)  of  section  eleven  hundred five of this
  article, provided that such room remarketer furnishes  such  operator  a
  certificate  in  such  form  and  containing  such information as may be
  prescribed by the commissioner. The exemption certificate  provided  for
  by  this  subdivision  shall  be  administered  by  the  commissioner in
  conformity with the  rules  for  exemption  or  resale  certificates  in
  subparagraph  (i)  of paragraph one of subdivision (c) of section eleven
  hundred thirty-two of this article.
    * NB There are 2 sb (kk)'s
    * (kk) The following shall be exempt from tax under this article:  (1)
  Receipts  from the retail sale of, and consideration given or contracted
  to be given for, or for the use of,  commercial  fuel  cell  electricity


 generating   systems   equipment  and  the  service  of  installing  and
  maintaining such systems. For the purposes of  this  subdivision,  "fuel
  cell  electricity  generating  systems equipment" shall mean an electric
  generating  arrangement  or  combination  of  components  installed upon
  non-residential premises that utilize  solid  oxide,  molten  carbonate,
  proton  exchange  membrane  or  phosphoric  acid  fuel  cell, or for the
  purposes of this section only, linear generator.
    (2) Receipts from the sale of hydrogen gas or electricity by a  person
  primarily engaged in the sale of fuel cell electricity generating system
  equipment  and/or  electricity generated by such equipment pursuant to a
  written agreement under which the electricity is generated by commercial
  fuel cell electricity generating system equipment that is: (A) owned  by
  a  person other than the purchaser of such electricity; (B) installed on
  the non-residential premises of the purchaser of such  electricity;  (C)
  placed  in  service; and (D) used to provide heating, cooling, hot water
  or electricity to such premises.
    * NB There are 2 sb (kk)'s




   § 1116. Exempt organizations. (a) Except as otherwise provided in this
  section,  any  sale or amusement charge by or to any of the following or
  any use or occupancy by any of the following shall not be subject to the
  sales and compensating use taxes imposed under this article:
    (1) The state of New York, or any of its agencies,  instrumentalities,
  public  corporations (including a public corporation created pursuant to
  agreement  or  compact  with  another  state  or  Canada)  or  political
  subdivisions where it is the purchaser, user or consumer, or where it is
  a  vendor  of  services  or  property  of  a kind not ordinarily sold by
  private persons;
    (2) The United  States  of  America,  and  any  of  its  agencies  and
  instrumentalities, insofar as it is immune from taxation where it is the
  purchaser, user or consumer, or where it sells services or property of a
  kind not ordinarily sold by private persons;
    (3)  The United Nations or any international organization of which the
  United States of America is a member where it is the purchaser, user  or
  consumer,  or  where  it  sells  services  or  property  of  a  kind not
  ordinarily sold by private persons;
    (4) Any corporation, association, trust,  or  community  chest,  fund,
  foundation,   or  limited  liability  company,  organized  and  operated
  exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific,  testing  for  public
  safety,  literary  or  educational  purposes,  or  to foster national or
  international amateur sports competition (but only if  no  part  of  its
  activities  involve  the provision of athletic facilities or equipment),
  or for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, no part of  the
  net  earnings  of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder
  or individual, no  substantial  part  of  the  activities  of  which  is
  carrying   on   propaganda,   or   otherwise   attempting  to  influence
  legislation, (except as otherwise provided in subsection (h) of  section
  five  hundred one of the United States internal revenue code of nineteen
  hundred fifty-four, as amended), and which does not participate  in,  or
  intervene  in  (including the publishing or distributing of statements),
  any political campaign on behalf of or in opposition  to  any  candidate
  for  public office. The provisions of this paragraph regarding political
  campaign activity shall be interpreted in the  same  manner  as  section
  501(c)(3)   of   the  United  States  internal  revenue  code  has  been
  interpreted as of the effective date of the chapter of the laws  of  two
  thousand nineteen that amended this paragraph;
    (5)  A  post  or  organization of past or present members of the armed
  forces of the United States, or an auxiliary unit or society  of,  or  a
  trust or foundation for, any such post or organization:
    (A) organized in this state,
    (B)  at least seventy-five percent of the members of which are past or
  present members of the armed forces of the United States as  defined  in
  section thirteen-a of the general construction law and substantially all
  of  the  other  members  of  which are individuals who are cadets or are
  spouses, widows, widowers, ancestors, or lineal descendants of  past  or
  present  members  of the armed forces of the United States or of cadets,
  and
    (C) no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of  any
  private shareholder or individual.
    (6) The following Indian nations or tribes residing in New York state:
  Cayuga,  Oneida,  Onondaga,  Poospatuck,  Saint  Regis  Mohawk,  Seneca,
  Shinnecock, Tonawanda and Tuscarora, where it is the purchaser, user  or
  consumer.
    (7)  A  not-for-profit  corporation  operating as a health maintenance
  organization subject to the provisions  of  article  forty-four  of  the
  public health law.


   (8)  Cooperative and foreign corporations doing business in this state
  pursuant to the rural electric cooperative law.
    (9)  A  credit union, as defined in subdivision nine of section two of
  the banking law, where it is the purchaser, user, or consumer, or  where
  it  is a vendor of services or property of a kind not ordinarily sold by
  private persons.
    (b) Nothing in this section shall exempt:
    (1) (i) retail sales of tangible personal  property  by  any  shop  or
  store operated by an organization described in paragraph (4), (5) or (6)
  of  subdivision  (a) of this section; (ii) sales, other than for resale,
  of  services  described  in  subdivision  (b)  or  paragraph   five   of
  subdivision  (c)  of section eleven hundred five of this article by that
  organization, whether or not at a shop or store; (iii) retail  sales  of
  tangible  personal  property  and sales, other than for resale, of those
  services by  that  organization,  made  with  a  degree  of  regularity,
  frequency,  and  continuity  by  remote means, such as by telephone, the
  internet, mail order or otherwise; or  (iv)  retail  sales  of  tangible
  personal  property  by  lease  or rental by that organization as lessor,
  whether or not at a shop or store;
    (2) sales of food or drink in or by  a  restaurant,  tavern  or  other
  establishment  operated  by  an organization described in paragraph (1),
  paragraph (4), paragraph (5) or paragraph (6) of subdivision (a) of this
  section, other than sales exempt under paragraph (ii) of subdivision (d)
  of section eleven hundred five, from the taxes imposed hereunder, unless
  the purchaser is an organization exempt under this section;
    (3) sales of the service of providing parking, garaging or storing for
  motor  vehicles  by  an  organization  described  in  paragraph  (4)  or
  paragraph  (5)  of  subdivision  (a)  of this section operating a garage
  (other than a garage which is part of  premises  occupied  solely  as  a
  private  one  or  two  family  dwelling),  parking lot or other place of
  business engaged in providing parking, garaging  or  storing  for  motor
  vehicles; or
    (4) sales of tangible personal property or services by cooperative and
  foreign  corporations doing business in this state pursuant to the rural
  electric cooperative law, unless the purchaser is an organization exempt
  under this section.
    (5) purchases of motor fuel or diesel motor fuel from the tax required
  to be prepaid pursuant to section eleven hundred two of this article and
  retail sales of motor fuel or diesel  motor  fuel  subject  to  the  tax
  imposed  by  sections eleven hundred five and eleven hundred ten of this
  article, except that purchases of such fuel by an organization described
  in paragraph one or two of subdivision (a) of this section for  its  own
  use  or  consumption,  purchases of motor fuel by a hospital included in
  the organizations described in paragraph four of  such  subdivision  for
  its  own  use  and consumption, purchases of motor fuel and diesel motor
  fuel by a fire company or fire department, as defined in  section  three
  of  the  volunteer  firefighters'  benefit  law or a voluntary ambulance
  service, as defined in section three thousand one of the  public  health
  law,  for  such department, company or service's own use and consumption
  for use in firefighting vehicles, apparatus or equipment,  or  emergency
  rescue or first aid response vehicles, apparatus or equipment, owned and
  operated  by  such  department,  company  or  service  if  such company,
  department or service qualifies as an exempt  organization  pursuant  to
  the  provisions of paragraph four of subdivision (a) of this section and
  purchases of diesel motor fuel by an organization described in paragraph
  four of such subdivision for its own heating use and  consumption  shall
  be exempt from such tax required to be prepaid and from retail sales and
  use taxes on such fuel.


   (6)  purchases  of  cigarettes  from  the  tax  required to be prepaid
  pursuant to section eleven hundred three of this article, except that no
  prepayment of tax shall be required on sales of  cigarettes  sold  under
  such  circumstances  that this state is without power to impose such tax
  or sold to the United States or sold to or by a voluntary unincorporated
  organization  of the armed forces of the United States operating a place
  for sale of goods pursuant to regulations promulgated by the appropriate
  executive agency of the United States, to the extent  provided  in  such
  regulations  and  written policy statements of such agency applicable to
  such sales.
    (7) rent received by a hotel operated  by  a  college  or  university,
  where  such  hotel  offers  one hundred or more rooms for occupancy, and
  where the individual paying said rent is not doing business on behalf of
  any organization exempted pursuant to subdivision (a) of this section.
    (c)  (1)  Where  any  organization  described  in  paragraph  four  of
  subdivision (a) of this section carries on its activities in furtherance
  of  the  purposes  for  which it was organized, in premises in which, as
  part of said activities, it operates a hotel, occupancy of rooms in  the
  premises and rents therefrom received by such corporation or association
  shall not be subject to tax hereunder.
    (2)  Nothing  in this subdivision shall exempt any hotel operated by a
  college or university and which offers one hundred  or  more  rooms  for
  occupancy  from  collecting  taxes  imposed  pursuant  to section eleven
  hundred five of this article from individuals who are not doing business
  on behalf of an organization exempted pursuant  to  subdivision  (a)  of
  this section.
    (d)  (1)  Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subdivision, any
  admissions all of the proceeds of which inure exclusively to the benefit
  of the following organizations shall not be subject to any of the  taxes
  imposed under subdivision (f) of section eleven hundred five:
    (A)  an  organization  described  in  paragraph  (4),  (5)  or  (6) of
  subdivision (a) of this section;
    (B) a society or  organization  conducted  for  the  sole  purpose  of
  maintaining  symphony  orchestras  or  operas  and receiving substantial
  support from voluntary contributions; or
    (C) national guard organizations; or
    (D) a police or fire department of  a  political  subdivision  of  the
  state,  or  a  voluntary  fire or ambulance company, or exclusively to a
  retirement, pension or disability fund for the sole benefit  of  members
  of  a  police  or  fire  department  or  to a fund for the heirs of such
  members.
    (2) The exemption provided under paragraph  (1)  of  this  subdivision
  shall not apply in the case of admissions to:
    (A)  Any  athletic  game or exhibition unless the proceeds shall inure
  exclusively to the benefit of elementary or secondary schools or  unless
  in  the  case  of  an  athletic game between two elementary or secondary
  schools, the entire gross proceeds from such game  shall  inure  to  the
  benefit  of  one  or  more  organizations  described in paragraph (4) of
  subdivision (a) of this section;
    (B) Carnivals  or  rodeos  in  which  any  professional  performer  or
  operator  participates  for  compensation,  unless the entire net profit
  from such carnival or rodeo shall inure exclusively to the benefit of an
  organization described in paragraph four  of  subdivision  (a)  of  this
  section,   and  such  organization  shall  have  as  its  charitable  or
  educational purpose the operation of a school and of such a carnival  or
  rodeo; or


   (3)  Admission charges for admission to the following places or events
  shall not be subject to any of the taxes imposed under  subdivision  (f)
  of section eleven hundred five:
    (A) Any admission to agricultural fairs if no part of the net earnings
  thereof  inures  to  the  benefit  of any stockholders or members of the
  association conducting the same; provided  the  proceeds  therefrom  are
  used  exclusively for the improvement, maintenance and operation of such
  agricultural fairs.
    (B) Any admission to a home or garden which is temporarily open to the
  general public as a  part  of  a  program  conducted  by  a  society  or
  organization  to  permit the inspection of historical homes and gardens;
  provided no part of the net earnings thereof inures to  the  benefit  of
  any private stockholder or individual.
    (C)  Any admissions to historic sites, houses and shrines, and museums
  conducted in connection therewith, maintained and operated by a  society
  or  organization  devoted  to  the  preservation and maintenance of such
  historic sites, houses, shrines and museums; provided no part of the net
  earnings thereof inures to the benefit of  any  private  stockholder  or
  individual.
    (e)  Receipts  from  the service of trash removal shall be exempt from
  the tax on such service imposed by this article, where such  service  is
  rendered  by  a municipal corporation of the state, other than a city of
  one million or more, including such  service  rendered  on  its  behalf,
  under an agreement with such corporation.
    (f)(1)  For  purposes  of  paragraph  four  of subdivision (a) of this
  section, in the case of a qualified amateur sports organization (A)  the
  requirement of such paragraph that no part of its activities involve the
  provision  of  athletic facilities or equipment shall not apply, and (B)
  such organization shall  not  fail  to  meet  the  requirement  of  such
  paragraph merely because its membership is local or regional in nature.
    (2)  For  purposes  of  this  subdivision, the term "qualified amateur
  sports organization"  means  any  organization  organized  and  operated
  exclusively   to   foster   national  or  international  amateur  sports
  competition  if  such  organization  is  also  organized  and   operated
  primarily  to conduct national or international competition in sports or
  to support and develop amateur athletes for  national  or  international
  competition in sports.
    (g) For purposes of paragraph five of subdivision (a) of this section,
  duly  authorized representatives of any such post or organization, while
  acting on behalf of such post or organization, shall not be  subject  to
  the  tax imposed under subdivision (e) of section eleven hundred five or
  the unit fee imposed by section eleven hundred  four  of  this  article,
  provided  that  such  representatives  provide  an  exempt  organization
  certificate  from  such  post  or  organization  certifying  that   such
  representative is acting on its behalf.






	

   § 1117. Certain sales of motor vehicles and vessels. (a) Receipts from
  any sale of a motor vehicle or vessel shall not be subject to the retail
  sales  tax  imposed under subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred five
  of this article, despite  the  taking  of  physical  possession  by  the
  purchaser within this state, provided that:
    (1) the purchaser, at the time of taking delivery
    (i) is a nonresident of this state,
    (ii) has no permanent place of abode in this state, and
    (iii)  is  not  engaged  in  carrying on in this state any employment,
  trade, business or profession in which the motor vehicle or vessel  will
  be used in this state;
    (2)  (i)  the  vendor  of  such  motor  vehicle does not issue to such
  purchaser  with  respect  to  such  motor  vehicle  either  a  temporary
  certificate  of  registration  pursuant  to subdivision seven of section
  four hundred twenty of the  vehicle  and  traffic  law  or  a  temporary
  registration  pursuant  to  section four hundred twenty-a of the vehicle
  and traffic law, or other like certificate or registration; or
    (ii) the vendor of such vessel does not assign to such  vessel  a  New
  York registration number or issue to such purchaser with respect to such
  vessel  a  temporary registration pursuant to section twenty-two hundred
  fifty-five of the vehicle and traffic law, or other like registration or
  temporary certificate of registration;
    (3) the purchaser does not register such motor vehicle or  vessel,  as
  the  case  may be, in this state prior to registering such motor vehicle
  or vessel in another state or jurisdiction; and
    (4) prior to taking delivery such purchaser furnishes to  such  vendor
  any   affidavit,   statement  or  additional  evidence,  documentary  or
  otherwise,  which  the  commissioner  may  require  to   ensure   proper
  administration  of  the  tax  imposed  under  subdivision (a) of section
  eleven hundred five of this article.
    (b) A vendor shall not  be  liable  for  failure  to  collect  tax  on
  receipts  from  any  sale of a motor vehicle or vessel provided that the
  vendor  prior  to  making  delivery  obtains  and  keeps  available  for
  inspection  by  the  commissioner any affidavit, statement or additional
  evidence, documentary or otherwise, as may be required to  be  furnished
  under  subdivision  (a)  of  this section; provided that such affidavit,
  statement or additional evidence is not known by the  vendor,  prior  to
  making physical delivery of the motor vehicle or vessel, to be false.
    (c) For purposes of this section, the term:
    (1)  "Motor  vehicle"  shall  include  a  motor  vehicle as defined in
  section one hundred twenty-five of the vehicle and  traffic  law  and  a
  trailer  as  defined in section one hundred fifty-six of the vehicle and
  traffic law.
    (2) "Vessel"  shall  (i)  include  a  vessel  as  defined  in  section
  twenty-two  hundred  fifty of the vehicle and traffic law, including any
  inboard or outboard motor and any trailer, as  defined  in  section  one
  hundred  fifty-six  of the vehicle and traffic law, sold with the vessel
  for use with such vessel; (ii) but not include  a  vessel  weighing  two
  hundred pounds or less, inclusive of any mast and sail or other rigging,
  which is not equipped with a motor and which is exempt from registration
  under  paragraph  (g)  of  subdivision one of section twenty-two hundred
  fifty-two of the vehicle and traffic law.
    (d) Nothing in this section or section twelve hundred fourteen of this
  chapter shall be construed as meaning that the provisions of subdivision
  (i) of section eleven hundred eleven of this article  do  not  apply  to
  leases  of motor vehicles, vessels and trailers described in subdivision
  (i) of section eleven hundred eleven of this article.




   §  1118.  Exemptions  from use tax. The following uses of property and
  services shall not be subject to the compensating use tax imposed  under
  this article:
    (1)  In  respect  to the use of property used by the purchaser in this
  state prior to August first, nineteen hundred sixty-five.
    (2)(a) In respect to the use of property or services purchased by  the
  user  while  a nonresident of this state, except in the case of tangible
  personal property or services which the user, in the  performance  of  a
  contract, incorporates into real property located in the state. A person
  while engaged in any manner in carrying on in this state any employment,
  trade,  business  or  profession, shall not be deemed a nonresident with
  respect to the use in  this  state  of  property  or  services  in  such
  employment, trade, business or profession. This exemption does not apply
  to  the  use  of  qualified  property  where  the  qualified property is
  purchased primarily to carry individuals, whether or not for  hire,  who
  are   agents,  employees,  officers,  shareholders,  members,  managers,
  partners, or  directors  of  (A)  the  purchaser,  where  any  of  those
  individuals was a resident of this state when the qualified property was
  purchased  or  (B)  any  affiliated  person that was a resident when the
  qualified property was purchased. For purposes of this subdivision:  (i)
  persons  are  affiliated persons with respect to each other where one of
  the persons has an ownership interest of more than five percent, whether
  direct or indirect, in the other, or where an ownership interest of more
  than five percent, whether direct or indirect, is held in  each  of  the
  persons  by  another  person  or  by  a  group of other persons that are
  affiliated persons with respect to each other; (ii) "qualified property"
  means vessels and motor vehicles; and (iii) "carry" means  to  take  any
  person  from  one point to another, whether for the business purposes or
  pleasure of that person. For an exception to  the  exclusions  from  the
  definition  of  "retail sale" applicable to vessels, see subdivision (q)
  of section eleven hundred eleven of this article.
    (b) Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the
  exclusion in paragraph (a) of this subdivision shall not  apply  to  the
  use  within  the  state  of property or a service purchased outside this
  state  by  a  nonresident  that  is  not  an  individual,  unless   such
  nonresident  has  been doing business outside the state for at least six
  months prior to the date  such  nonresident  brought  such  property  or
  service into this state.
    (3)  In  respect  to  the use of property or services upon the sale of
  which the purchaser would be expressly exempt  from  the  taxes  imposed
  under  subdivision  (a),  (b)  or (c) of section eleven hundred five. In
  respect to the use of property to the extent that it is exempt from  the
  sales tax under subdivision (g) of section eleven hundred eleven of this
  article.
    (4)  In  respect  to  the  use  of property which is converted into or
  becomes a  component  part  of  a  product  produced  for  sale  by  the
  purchaser.
    (5)  In  respect  to the use of paper in the publication of newspapers
  and periodicals.
    (6) In respect to  the  use  of  property  used  exclusively  for  the
  temporary   construction,  improvement,  alteration  or  repair  of  any
  building, structure or exhibit, located entirely on land owned by a city
  having a population of one million  or  more  and  leased  by  it  to  a
  corporation organized for the sole purpose of holding a world's fair and
  confining  its  operations  solely  to preparing for and conducting such
  fair.
    (7) (a) In respect to the use of property or services  to  the  extent
  that a retail sales or use tax was legally due and paid thereon, without


 any  right  to  a  refund  or  credit  thereof,  to  any  other state or
  jurisdiction within any other state but only when it is shown that  such
  other  state  or  jurisdiction  allows  a  corresponding  exemption with
  respect  to  the  sale  or use of tangible personal property or services
  upon which such a sales tax or compensating use tax  was  paid  to  this
  state. To the extent that the tax imposed by this article is at a higher
  rate  than  the  rate  of  tax  in  the  first taxing jurisdiction, this
  exemption shall be inapplicable and the tax imposed  by  section  eleven
  hundred  ten of this chapter shall apply to the extent of the difference
  in such rates, except as provided in paragraph (b) of this subdivision.
    (b) To the extent that  the  compensating  use  tax  imposed  by  this
  article   and  a  compensating  use  tax  imposed  pursuant  to  article
  twenty-nine are at a higher aggregate rate than the rate of tax  imposed
  in  the  first  taxing jurisdiction, the exemption provided in paragraph
  (a) of this subdivision shall be inapplicable and the taxes  imposed  by
  this  article  and  pursuant  to  article twenty-nine shall apply to the
  extent of the difference between such aggregate rate and the  rate  paid
  in  the  first  taxing  jurisdiction.  In such event, the amount payable
  shall be allocated between the tax imposed by this article and  the  tax
  imposed  pursuant to article twenty-nine in proportion to the respective
  rates of such taxes.
    (8) In  respect  to  the  use  of  spare  parts  (including  engines),
  consumable  technical  supplies,  maintenance  and ground equipment used
  exclusively in the operation or handling or maintenance of aircraft, and
  aircraft stores, brought into this state from a  foreign  country  by  a
  foreign  airline which holds a foreign air carrier permit, issued by the
  Civil Aeronautics Board pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal  Aviation
  Act  of  1958,  as  amended,  to  engage  in foreign air transportation,
  provided that:
    (i) such property is to be  used  on  aircraft  (or  directly  in  the
  operation, handling or maintenance of aircraft) of the airline providing
  foreign air transportation services (or such aircraft of another foreign
  airline eligible under this subdivision); and
    (ii)  such  property  would  not  be  subject  to taxes imposed in the
  foreign country in which the particular  foreign  airline  is  based  if
  brought  into  such country by a United States airline operating in that
  country.
    (9) In respect to the use of a thoroughbred, standardbred  or  quarter
  horse  purchased  outside  the  state and brought into the state for the
  purpose of entering a  racing  event  or  events  on  which  pari-mutuel
  wagering  is  authorized  by  law,  and  to  prepare therefor. Provided,
  however, that the exemption contained  in  this  subdivision  shall  not
  apply to any such horse which enters racing events in this state on more
  than  five days in any one calendar year. Nothing contained herein shall
  alter  the  exemption  provided  to  nonresidents,   as   specified   in
  subdivision two of this section.
    (10)  In  respect to the use of horses purchased outside the state and
  brought into the state for racing to the extent that the  value  of  the
  horse  exceeds  one  hundred  thousand  dollars.  On  or before December
  fifteenth,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-five,  and   December   fifteenth,
  nineteen  hundred  eighty-six, the board shall report to the director of
  the budget, the  chairman  of  the  senate  finance  committee  and  the
  chairman  of  the  assembly  ways  and  means  committee  concerning the
  benefits or costs associated with the provisions of this subdivision, an
  assessment of any economic impact and appropriate  recommendations.  The
  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance shall provide to the board such
  reports as are necessary to effect the board's mandate.


   (11) In  respect  to  the  use  of  computer  software  that  did  not
  constitute tangible personal property prior to September first, nineteen
  hundred  ninety-one,  used by the purchaser, author or other creator, or
  copyright owner in this state prior to such date.
    (12)  In respect to the use of prepaid telephone calling service prior
  to the effective date of a chapter  of  the  laws  of  nineteen  hundred
  ninety-nine which added this subdivision.
    * (13)  In respect to the use of the following items at a tasting held
  by a licensed producer of alcoholic beverages  in  accordance  with  the
  alcoholic  beverage control law: (i) the alcoholic beverage or beverages
  authorized by the alcoholic beverage control law to be furnished  at  no
  charge  to  a  customer  or  prospective  customer  at  such tasting for
  consumption at such tasting; and (ii) bottles, corks,  caps  and  labels
  used to package such alcoholic beverages.
    * NB There are 2 sb (13)'s
    * (13)  In respect to the use within the state of a vessel, as defined
  in section twenty-two hundred fifty of  the  vehicle  and  traffic  law,
  until the first of the following events occur:
    (a)  the use of such vessel within this state by the purchaser thereof
  for a period in excess of ninety consecutive days;
    (b) the date upon which such vessel is first required to be registered
  pursuant to section twenty-two hundred  fifty-one  of  the  vehicle  and
  traffic law; or
    (c) the date upon which such vessel is so registered.
    * NB There are 2 sb (13)'s




   §  1119.  (a)  Subject  to the conditions and limitations provided for
  herein, a refund or credit shall be allowed for a tax paid  pursuant  to
  subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred five or section eleven hundred
  ten  (1)  on  the  sale  or  use  of  tangible  personal property if the
  purchaser or user, in the performance of a contract, later  incorporates
  that  tangible personal property into real property located outside this
  state, (2) on the sale or use of tangible personal property purchased in
  bulk, or any portion thereof, which  is  stored  and  not  used  by  the
  purchaser  or  user  within  this state if that property is subsequently
  reshipped by such purchaser or user to a point outside  this  state  for
  use  outside  this  state,  (3) on the sale to or use by a contractor or
  subcontractor of tangible personal property if that property is used  by
  him  solely  in the performance of a pre-existing lump sum or unit price
  construction contract, (4) on the sale  or  use  within  this  state  of
  tangible personal property, not purchased for resale, if the use of such
  property  in  this  state  is  restricted  to  fabricating such property
  (including incorporating it into or assembling it  with  other  tangible
  personal property), processing, printing or imprinting such property and
  such  property  is  then  shipped  to a point outside this state for use
  outside this state, or (6) on the sale  of  tangible  personal  property
  purchased   for   use   in  constructing,  expanding  or  rehabilitating
  industrial or commercial real property (other than property used  or  to
  be  used exclusively by one or more registered vendors primarily engaged
  in the retail sale of tangible personal property)  located  in  an  area
  designated  as  an  empire  zone  pursuant  to article eighteen-B of the
  general municipal law, but only to the extent that such property becomes
  an integral component part of the real property.  (For  the  purpose  of
  clause (3) of the preceding sentence, the term "pre-existing lump sum or
  unit  price  construction  contract"  shall  mean  a  contract  for  the
  construction of improvements to real property  under  which  the  amount
  payable  to  the  contractor or subcontractor is fixed without regard to
  the costs incurred by him in the performance thereof, and which (i)  was
  irrevocably  entered  into  prior  to  the date of the enactment of this
  article or the enactment of a law increasing the  rate  of  tax  imposed
  under   this  article,  or  (ii)  resulted  from  the  acceptance  by  a
  governmental agency of a bid accompanied by a bond or other  performance
  guaranty  which was irrevocably submitted prior to such date.) Where the
  tax on the sale or use of such tangible personal property has been  paid
  to  the  vendor,  to  qualify  for  such refund or credit, such tangible
  personal property must be incorporated into real property as required in
  clause (1) above, reshipped as required in clause (2) above, used in the
  manner described in clauses (3), (4) and (6) above  within  three  years
  after  the date such tax was payable to the tax commission by the vendor
  pursuant to section eleven hundred thirty-seven. Where the  tax  on  the
  sale or use of such tangible personal property was paid by the applicant
  for  the credit or refund directly to the tax commission, to qualify for
  such  refund  or  credit,  such  tangible  personal  property  must   be
  incorporated  into  real  property  as  required  in  clause  (1) above,
  reshipped as required in clause (2) above, used in the manner  described
  in clauses (3), (4) and (6) above within three years after the date such
  tax was payable to the tax commission by such applicant pursuant to this
  article.  An application for a refund or credit pursuant to this section
  must  be  filed  with  such  commission  within  the  time  provided  by
  subdivision  (a) of section eleven hundred thirty-nine. Such application
  shall be in such form as the tax  commission  may  prescribe.  Where  an
  application  for  credit  has  been filed, the applicant may immediately
  take such  credit  on  the  return  which  is  due  coincident  with  or
  immediately  subsequent  to  the  time that he files his application for


 credit. However, the taking of the credit on the return shall be  deemed
  to  be  part  of  the application for credit and shall be subject to the
  provisions in respect to  applications  for  credit  in  section  eleven
  hundred thirty-nine as provided in subdivision (e) of such section. With
  respect  to  a  sale  or  use  described  in  clause  (3)  above where a
  pre-existing  lump  sum  or  unit  price   construction   contract   was
  irrevocably  entered  into  prior  to  the date of the enactment of this
  article  or  the  bid  accompanied  by  the  performance  guaranty   was
  irrevocably submitted to the governmental agency prior to such date, the
  purchaser  or  user  shall be entitled to a refund or credit only of the
  amount by which the tax on such sale or use imposed under  this  article
  plus  any tax imposed under the authority of article twenty-nine exceeds
  the amount computed by applying against such sale or use the local  rate
  of  tax, if any, in effect at the time such contract was entered into or
  such bid was submitted.
    In the case of the enactment of a  law  increasing  the  rate  of  tax
  imposed by this article, the purchaser or user shall be entitled only to
  a refund or credit of the amount by which the increased tax on such sale
  or  use  imposed  under  this  article  plus  any  tax imposed under the
  authority of article twenty-nine exceeds the amount computed by applying
  against such sale or use the state and local rates of tax in  effect  at
  the time such contract was entered into or such bid was submitted.
    (b)  Subject  to  the  conditions and limitations provided for in this
  subdivision, a refund or credit shall be allowed for a tax paid pursuant
  to subdivision (a) and paragraph three of  subdivision  (c)  of  section
  eleven  hundred  five, or section eleven hundred ten of this article and
  any tax imposed pursuant to the authority of article twenty-nine of this
  chapter on the sale to or use by an omnibus carrier  described  in  this
  subdivision  of  any omnibus, and of parts, equipment, lubricants, motor
  fuel, diesel motor fuel, maintenance, servicing or repair purchased  and
  used in the operation of any such omnibus by such carrier or on the sale
  to or use by a vessel operator described in this subdivision of a vessel
  with  a  seating  capacity  of  more than twenty passengers used for the
  transportation on water of passengers for hire, and of parts, equipment,
  lubricants,  diesel  motor  fuel,  maintenance,  servicing   or   repair
  purchased and used in the operation of any such vessel by such operator.
  Any  such  omnibus carrier or vessel operator must provide local transit
  service in this state and operate pursuant to a  certificate  of  public
  convenience  and  necessity issued by the commissioner of transportation
  of this state or by a like officer or agency of  the  United  States  or
  pursuant  to  the contract, franchise or consent between such carrier or
  operator and a city  having  a  population  of  more  than  one  million
  inhabitants,  or  any  agency of such city. The amount of such refund or
  credit shall be determined by first computing the local transit  service
  percentage  which  shall  be  the proportion that, in the case of such a
  carrier, such carrier's vehicle mileage or,  in  the  case  of  such  an
  operator,  such operator's vessel hours in local transit service in this
  state in  the  calendar  year  immediately  preceding  the  end  of  the
  quarterly return period, prescribed by section eleven hundred thirty-six
  of  this  article,  to which such refund or credit relates bears to such
  carrier's total mileage operated in this state  in  such  year  or  such
  operator's  total hours operated in this state in such year, as the case
  may be. An omnibus carrier or vessel operator which was not  engaged  in
  local  transit  service  in  the preceding calendar year shall determine
  such percentage with respect to its first four quarterly  returns  filed
  pursuant  to section eleven hundred thirty-six of this article, by using
  the proportion that such carrier's vehicle mileage  or  such  operator's
  vessel  hours  in local transit service in this state in the first three


 months of such operation bears to such carrier's total mileage  or  such
  operator's total hours operated in this state in such period. The amount
  of  the  refund  or credit allowable on the combined state and local tax
  paid  on  such  purchases or uses then shall be determined in accordance
  with the following table:
 
  If the local transit service          The refund or credit is:
    percentage is:
  Less than 10 percent                  None
  10 percent                            10 percent of such combined tax
  Greater than 10 percent but less      10 percent plus (the product of
    than 70 percent                       1.5 times each whole percent
                                          in excess of 10 percent) of
                                          such combined tax
  70 percent or more                    100 percent of such combined tax
 
  For  purposes  of  this  subdivision,  local  transit  service,  vehicle
  mileage,  vessel  hours, total mileage operated and total hours operated
  shall be defined by rule or regulation of the commissioner  and  records
  satisfactory  to  the commissioner shall be maintained by the carrier or
  operator. An application  for  a  refund  or  credit  pursuant  to  this
  subdivision must be filed with the commissioner within the time provided
  by  subdivision  (a)  of  section  eleven  hundred  thirty-nine  of this
  article. Such application shall be in such form as the commissioner  may
  prescribe. Where an application for credit has been filed, the applicant
  may  immediately  take such credit on the return which is due coincident
  with or immediately subsequent to the time that the applicant files  the
  application  for credit. However, the taking of the credit on the return
  shall be deemed to be part of the application for credit  and  shall  be
  subject  to  the  provisions  in  respect  to applications for credit in
  section eleven hundred  thirty-nine  of  this  article  as  provided  in
  subdivision (e) of such section.
    (c)  A  refund  or credit equal to the amount of sales or compensating
  use tax imposed by this article and pursuant to the authority of article
  twenty-nine, and paid on the sale or use of tangible personal  property,
  shall  be allowed the purchaser where such property is later used by the
  purchaser in performing a service subject to tax  under  paragraph  (1),
  (2),  (3),  (5), (7) or (8) of subdivision (c) of section eleven hundred
  five or under section eleven hundred ten and such property has become  a
  physical  component  part  of  the  property  upon  which the service is
  performed or has been transferred to the purchaser  of  the  service  in
  conjunction  with  the performance of the service subject to tax or if a
  contractor,  subcontractor  or  repairman  purchases  tangible  personal
  property  and  later  makes  a  retail  sale  of  such tangible personal
  property, the acquisition of which would not have been a sale at  retail
  to  him  but  for  the  second  to  last sentence of subparagraph (i) of
  paragraph (4) of subdivision (b)  of  section  eleven  hundred  one.  An
  application  for  the refund or credit provided for herein must be filed
  with the commissioner of taxation and finance within the  time  provided
  by   subdivision   (a)  of  section  eleven  hundred  thirty-nine.  Such
  application shall be in such form as  the  commissioner  may  prescribe.
  Where  an  application  for  credit  has  been  filed, the applicant may
  immediately take such credit on the return which is due coincident  with
  or  immediately subsequent to the time that he files his application for
  credit. However, the taking of the credit on the return shall be  deemed
  to  be part of the application for credit. The procedure for granting or
  denying such applications for  refund  or  credit  and  review  of  such


 determinations shall be as provided in subdivision (e) of section eleven
  hundred thirty-nine.
    (d) (1) Subject to the conditions and limitations provided for in this
  section,  a  refund  or  credit will be allowed for taxes imposed on the
  retail sale of tangible personal property described in  subdivision  (a)
  of  section  eleven  hundred  five of this article, and on every sale of
  services described in subdivisions (b) and  (c)  of  such  section,  and
  consideration  given  or  contracted to be given for, or for the use of,
  such  tangible  personal  property  or  services,  where  such  tangible
  personal  property  or  services  are  sold  to  a qualified empire zone
  enterprise or to a qualified entity that is also a tenant in or part  of
  a New York state innovation hot spot as provided in section thirty-eight
  of  this chapter or to a business located in a tax-free NY area approved
  pursuant to article twenty-one of the economic development law, provided
  that (A) such tangible personal property or tangible  personal  property
  upon which such a service has been performed or such service (other than
  a service described in subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred five of
  this article) is directly and predominantly, or such a service described
  in clause (A) or (D) of paragraph one of such subdivision (b) of section
  eleven hundred five of this article is directly and exclusively, used or
  consumed  by  (i)  such  qualified  empire  zone  enterprise  in an area
  designated as an empire zone  pursuant  to  article  eighteen-B  of  the
  general municipal law with respect to which such enterprise is certified
  pursuant  to  such  article eighteen-B, or (ii) such qualified entity at
  its location in or as part of a New York state innovation hot  spot,  or
  (iii)  such  business  at  its location in such tax-free NY area, or (B)
  such a service described in clause  (B)  or  (C)  of  paragraph  one  of
  subdivision  (b)  of  section  eleven  hundred  five  of this article is
  delivered and billed to (i) such enterprise at an address in such empire
  zone or (ii) such qualified entity at its location in or as part of  the
  New  York  state  innovation  hot  spot,  or  (iii) such business at its
  location in such tax-free NY area, or  (C)  the  enterprise's  place  of
  primary   use  of  the  service  described  in  paragraph  two  of  such
  subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred five is at an address in  such
  empire  zone  or  at  its  location  in  or  as part of a New York state
  innovation hot spot, or at  its  location  in  such  tax-free  NY  area;
  provided,  further,  that,  in  order for a motor vehicle, as defined in
  subdivision (c) of section eleven hundred seventeen of this article,  or
  tangible  personal  property related to such a motor vehicle to be found
  to be used predominantly in such a zone, at least fifty percent of  such
  motor  vehicle's  use  shall be exclusively within such zone or at least
  fifty percent of  such  motor  vehicle's  use  shall  be  in  activities
  originating  or  terminating  in  such zone, or both; and either or both
  such usages shall be computed either on the basis of mileage or hours of
  use, at  the  discretion  of  such  enterprise.  For  purposes  of  this
  subdivision,  tangible personal property related to such a motor vehicle
  shall  include  a  battery,  diesel  motor  fuel,  an   engine,   engine
  components,  motor  fuel, a muffler, tires and similar tangible personal
  property used in or on such a motor vehicle.
    (2) Subject to the conditions and limitations  provided  for  in  this
  section,  a  refund  or  credit will be allowed for taxes imposed on the
  retail sale of, and consideration given or contracted to be  given  for,
  or  for  the  use  of,  tangible personal property sold to a contractor,
  subcontractor or repairman for  use  in  (A)  erecting  a  structure  or
  building  of a qualified empire zone enterprise or a business located in
  a tax-free NY area  approved  pursuant  to  article  twenty-one  of  the
  economic  development  law,  (B)  adding  to, altering or improving real
  property, property or land of such an enterprise or  such  business,  or


 (C)  maintaining, servicing or repairing real property, property or land
  of such an enterprise or of such business, as the terms  real  property,
  property  or  land  are  defined in the real property tax law; provided,
  however, no credit or refund will be allowed under this paragraph unless
  such  tangible personal property is to become an integral component part
  of such structure, building, real property, property or land located  in
  an  area  designated as an empire zone pursuant to article eighteen-B of
  the general municipal law in, and with respect to which such  enterprise
  is certified pursuant to such article eighteen-B, or in an area approved
  as  a  tax-free  NY  area pursuant to article twenty-one of the economic
  development law where such business is located.
    (3) Except as otherwise provided by law, the refund or credit provided
  for in this subdivision will not apply to taxes imposed by paragraph ten
  of subdivision (c) of section eleven hundred  five  and  eleven  hundred
  seven  of  this article or to taxes imposed pursuant to the authority of
  article twenty-nine of this chapter.
    (4) In those instances when  the  provisions  of  subdivision  (w)  of
  section  nine  hundred  fifty-nine  of  the  general  municipal  law are
  applicable, no refund or credit will be allowed under  this  subdivision
  unless  the  qualified  empire zone enterprise has been issued an empire
  zone retention certificate.
    (5) A taxpayer may not  apply  for  a  credit  or  refund  under  this
  subdivision  more  frequently than once a sales tax quarter, pursuant to
  subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred thirty-six of this article.
    (6) Any reference in this chapter or in any local  law,  ordinance  or
  resolution  enacted  pursuant to the authority of article twenty-nine of
  this chapter to former subdivision (z) of section eleven hundred fifteen
  of this article will be deemed to be a reference  to  this  subdivision,
  and  any  such  local  law,  ordinance  or resolution which provides the
  exemptions described in former subdivision (z) of  such  section  eleven
  hundred  fifteen  shall  be  deemed  instead  to provide the refunds and
  credits described in this subdivision.
    (7) Notwithstanding any  other  provision  in  this  article,  article
  twenty-nine  of this chapter, or any other law to the contrary, a credit
  or refund for any sale or use under this section shall not be allowed to
  a person that is first certified under article eighteen-B of the general
  municipal law on or after April first, two thousand  nine,  unless  that
  sale  or  use  is  eligible for a credit or refund of the county or city
  sales and compensating use taxes imposed pursuant to  the  authority  of
  subpart b of part I of article twenty-nine of this chapter.
    (e)   Subject   to   conditions   and  limitations  provided  in  this
  subdivision, a room remarketer shall  be  allowed  a  refund  or  credit
  against  the  amount  of tax collected and required to be remitted under
  section eleven hundred thirty-seven of this article in the amount of the
  tax it paid to an operator of a hotel under section eleven hundred  four
  of this article, where applicable, and subdivision (e) of section eleven
  hundred  five  of  this  article.  Provided,  however, that, in order to
  qualify for a refund or credit under this subdivision for any sales  tax
  quarterly  period,  the  room  remarketer must, for that quarter, (1) be
  registered  for  sales  tax  purposes  under  section   eleven   hundred
  thirty-four  of  this  article; (2) collect the taxes imposed by section
  eleven hundred four of this article, where applicable,  and  subdivision
  (e)  of section eleven hundred five of this article; and (3) furnish the
  certificate of authority number of the operator to  whom  the  applicant
  paid the tax in its application for refund or credit if required on that
  form  or upon request. Provided that if the room remarketer requests the
  operator's certificate of authority number and is not provided with that
  number, the room remarketer may satisfy this  requirement  by  providing


 the operator's name, business address, telephone number, and the address
  of  the  hotel where the occupancy took place. An application for refund
  or credit under this subdivision must be  filed  with  the  commissioner
  within  the  time  provided by subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred
  thirty-nine of this  article.  The  application  must  be  in  the  form
  prescribed by the commissioner. Where an application for credit has been
  filed,  the applicant may immediately take the credit on the return that
  is due coincident with or immediately subsequent to the  time  that  the
  applicant  files  the application for credit. However, the taking of the
  credit on the return is deemed to be part of the application for credit.
  The procedure for granting or denying the  applications  for  refund  or
  credit  and  review  of  those  determinations  shall  be as provided in
  subdivision (e) of section eleven hundred thirty-nine of  this  article.
  An  operator,  including  a  room  remarketer, who is paid tax by a room
  remarketer must upon request provide the remarketer with its certificate
  of authority number, provided that the operator's failure to do so  does
  not  change  the  requirement  set  forth  in  paragraph  three  of this
  subdivision.
    * (f)(1) Subject to the conditions and  limitations  provided  for  in
  this  section,  a  refund  will  be  allowed  for  tax  paid pursuant to
  subdivision (a) of  section  eleven  hundred  five,  or  section  eleven
  hundred ten of this article, on the purchase or use of tangible personal
  property  sold  to  a  participant  who  has  received  a certificate of
  eligibility in the economic transformation  and  facility  redevelopment
  program;  provided that such tangible personal property has been used in
  constructing, expanding or rehabilitating industrial or commercial  real
  property  located  in  an  area designated as an economic transformation
  area pursuant to article eighteen of the economic development  law,  but
  only  to  the  extent  that  such  tangible personal property becomes an
  integral component part of such real property.  Such  tangible  personal
  property  must  be  purchased,  or contracted to be purchased, after the
  participant receives its  certificate  of  eligibility  and  before  the
  issuance  of  a certificate of occupancy and it must be used in a manner
  consistent with the  participant's  application  for  such  constructed,
  expanded, or rehabilitated real property.
    (2)  Subject  to  the  conditions and limitations provided for in this
  section, a refund will be allowed for taxes imposed on receipts from the
  retail sale of, and consideration given or contracted to be  given  for,
  or  for  the  use  of,  tangible personal property sold to a contractor,
  subcontractor or repairman for  use  in  (A)  erecting  a  structure  or
  building of a participant who has received a certificate of eligibility,
  or  (B) adding to, altering or improving real property, property or land
  of such a participant, as the terms real property, property or land  are
  defined  in the real property tax law; provided, however, no refund will
  be allowed under this paragraph unless such tangible  personal  property
  has  become an integral component part of such structure, building, real
  property, property or land located  within  an  economic  transformation
  area  as defined by article eighteen of the economic development law in,
  and with respect to which such participant has been issued a certificate
  of eligibility pursuant to such article eighteen and only to the  extent
  that such property is used in a manner consistent with the participant's
  application. Such tangible personal property must be in the contractor's
  inventory  on  or after the day the participant receives its certificate
  of eligibility, or be purchased or contracted to be purchased after  the
  participant  receives  its certificate of eligibility, but such property
  must meet the conditions of the preceding sentence and  be  used  before
  the  issuance  of  a  certificate  of  occupancy  for  such constructed,
  expanded, or rehabilitated real property.


   (3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law,  the  refund  provided
  for  in this subdivision shall not apply to the taxes imposed by section
  eleven hundred seven or eleven hundred nine of this article  or  to  any
  tax  imposed  pursuant  to  the authority of article twenty-nine of this
  chapter.
    (4)  Notwithstanding  any other provision of law, where the tax on the
  sale or use of such tangible personal property  has  been  paid  to  the
  vendor, to qualify for such refund, such tangible personal property must
  be  incorporated  into  real property and used as required in paragraphs
  one and two of this subdivision within three years after the  date  such
  tax  was  payable  to the commissioner by the vendor pursuant to section
  eleven hundred thirty-seven of this article. Where the tax on  the  sale
  or  use of such tangible personal property was paid by the applicant for
  the refund directly to the commissioner, to  qualify  for  such  refund,
  such  tangible personal property must be incorporated into real property
  and used in the manner described in  paragraphs  one  and  two  of  this
  subdivision  within  three  years after the date such tax was payable to
  the  commissioner  by  such  applicant  pursuant  to  this  article.  An
  application for a refund pursuant to this section must be filed with the
  commissioner  within  the  time  provided  by subdivision (a) of section
  eleven hundred thirty-nine of this article. Such application shall be in
  such form as the commissioner may prescribe. This  application  will  be
  the  only  means of applying for the refund allowed by this section; the
  applicant may not take this refund in any other  manner,  including  the
  taking  of a credit on any return due pursuant to section eleven hundred
  thirty-six of this article. A taxpayer may not apply for a refund  under
  this  subdivision more frequently than once a sales tax quarterly period
  as described in subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred thirty-six  of
  this article.
    (5)  The  terms  "participant",  "economic  transformation  area", and
  "certificate of eligibility" shall have the same meaning as those  terms
  have in section four hundred of the economic development law.
    * NB Repealed December 31, 2026




   §  1120.  Refunds  and  credits  with respect to motor fuel and diesel
  motor fuel. (a) Retail vendor. (1) A vendor  of  motor  fuel  or  diesel
  motor  fuel  who  or  which  is required to collect the taxes imposed by
  subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred five of this article  and  any
  like  tax  imposed  pursuant  to the authority of article twenty-nine of
  this chapter shall be allowed a refund or credit against the  amount  of
  tax  collected  and required to be remitted to the commissioner pursuant
  to the provisions of section eleven hundred thirty-seven of this article
  upon the retail sale of motor fuel or diesel motor fuel in the amount of
  the tax on such fuel prepaid by or passed through to and included in the
  price paid by such vendor pursuant to the provisions of  section  eleven
  hundred two of this article.
    (2)  A  refund or credit shall also be allowed such vendor for the tax
  prepaid by or passed through to and included in the price paid  by  such
  vendor  upon  any  motor  fuel  or  diesel  motor  fuel  pursuant to the
  provisions of section eleven hundred two of this article if such fuel is
  sold at retail by  such  vendor  under  circumstances  where  the  taxes
  imposed  by  section eleven hundred five of this article and pursuant to
  the authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter are not required by
  the provisions of  this  article  to  be  collected  and  remitted  upon
  receipts from a retail sale thereof.
    (b) Retail user. A purchaser, user or consumer of motor fuel or diesel
  motor  fuel at retail who or which is required to pay the tax imposed by
  section eleven hundred ten of this article  and  any  like  tax  imposed
  pursuant  to  the  authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter with
  respect to the purchase of or the use or consumption of such fuel  shall
  be  allowed  a  credit  against  such  tax  required  to  be paid to the
  commissioner pursuant to such section and article in the amount  of  the
  tax  prepaid  by  or passed through to and included in the price paid by
  such purchaser, user or consumer pursuant to the provisions  of  section
  eleven hundred two of this article.
    (c)  Self-use  of  motor  fuel  or  diesel  motor  fuel  purchased  at
  wholesale.  A refund or credit equal to the amount of tax prepaid by  or
  passed through to and included in the price paid by a purchaser, user or
  consumer  pursuant  to  the  provisions of section eleven hundred two of
  this article with respect to a purchase of motor fuel  or  diesel  motor
  fuel  other  than  at  retail  shall  be allowed such purchaser, user or
  consumer upon the use or consumption of  such  fuel  at  retail  if  the
  acquisition  of  such fuel by the purchaser, user or consumer would have
  otherwise been exempt pursuant to section eleven hundred five-A,  eleven
  hundred  fifteen  or  eleven hundred sixteen of this article but for the
  provisions of the last sentence of subdivision  (c)  of  section  eleven
  hundred  two and subdivision (j) of section eleven hundred fifteen or of
  such last sentence and paragraph five  of  subdivision  (b)  of  section
  eleven  hundred  sixteen of this article. Also, a refund or credit shall
  be allowed equal to the difference between the amount of tax prepaid  by
  or passed through to and included in the price paid by a purchaser, user
  or  consumer pursuant to the provisions of section eleven hundred two of
  this article with respect to a purchase of diesel motor fuel other  than
  at  retail  and  the aggregate of the amount of tax that would have been
  imposed if measured by the applicable rate specified in  section  eleven
  hundred  five-A  of  this  article and the amount of tax that would have
  been imposed if measured by the applicable  rate  specified  in  section
  twelve  hundred  ten of article twenty-nine upon diesel motor fuel which
  is used for  residential  heating  purposes  if  the  purchase,  use  or
  consumption  would have otherwise been subject to such lower rate of tax
  pursuant to such section eleven hundred five-A but for the last sentence
  of subdivision (a) of such section eleven hundred five-A or pursuant  to


 section twelve hundred ten but for the last sentence of subparagraph (i)
  of  paragraph  three  of  subdivision (a) of such section twelve hundred
  ten.
    (d) Purchase of motor fuel or diesel motor fuel at retail by an exempt
  organization.  A  refund  or  credit  equal to the amount of tax imposed
  pursuant to section eleven hundred five of this article and any like tax
  imposed pursuant to the authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter
  upon the sale of motor fuel or diesel motor fuel and paid by a purchaser
  shall be allowed such purchaser if the purchase, use or  consumption  of
  such  fuel  would  have otherwise been exempt pursuant to section eleven
  hundred fifteen or eleven hundred sixteen of this article  but  for  the
  provisions  of  subdivision  (j)  of  section  eleven hundred fifteen or
  paragraph five of subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred  sixteen  of
  this  article.  Also, there shall be allowed a refund or credit equal to
  the difference between the amount of tax actually  imposed  pursuant  to
  section  eleven  hundred five of this article and the amount of tax that
  would have been imposed as measured by the applicable rate specified  in
  section  eleven  hundred  five-A  of this article and a refund or credit
  equal to the difference between the tax actually imposed pursuant to the
  authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter and the amount  of  tax
  that  would  have  been  imposed  if  measured  by  the  applicable rate
  specified in section twelve hundred  ten  of  article  twenty-nine  upon
  diesel  motor fuel which is used for residential heating purposes if the
  purchase, use or consumption would have otherwise been subject  to  such
  lower rate of tax pursuant to such section eleven hundred five-A but for
  the  last  sentence  of  subdivision  (a) of such section eleven hundred
  five-A or pursuant to section  twelve  hundred  ten  but  for  the  last
  sentence  of  subparagraph  (i) of paragraph three of subdivision (a) of
  such section twelve hundred ten.
    (e) Immediate  export.  With  respect  to  (i)  motor  fuel  imported,
  manufactured or sold or purchased in this state, and (ii) highway diesel
  motor fuel, a refund or credit shall be allowed a registered distributor
  of  this state or a purchaser of the tax required to be prepaid pursuant
  to section eleven hundred two of this article in the amount of such  tax
  paid by or included in the price paid by a distributor or such purchaser
  if  such  fuel was exported from this state for sale outside this state,
  such distributor or such purchaser, as the case may be,  exporting  such
  fuel  is  duly  registered with or licensed by the taxing authorities of
  the state to which such fuel is exported as a distributor or a dealer in
  the fuel being so exported, and in connection with such exportation such
  fuel was immediately shipped to an identified facility in the  state  to
  which  such  fuel  is exported, and provided the applicant complies with
  all  requirements  and  rules  and  regulations  of  the   commissioner,
  including evidentiary requirements, relating thereto.
    (f)  Refunds  of  the  tax  required  to  be  prepaid  pursuant to the
  provisions of section eleven  hundred  two  of  this  article  shall  be
  allowed  only  to  the  extent such tax paid by or passed through to the
  retail vendor, or the purchaser, consumer or user exceeds the amount  of
  tax required to be collected from such person or required to be remitted
  by  the  provisions  of  this  article  and pursuant to the authority of
  article twenty-nine of this chapter.
    (g) Such credit shall be allowed only  to  the  extent  that  the  tax
  required  to  be  prepaid pursuant to section eleven hundred two of this
  article is prepaid by such vendor, purchaser, user or consumer (i)  upon
  importation, manufacture, sale or use, as the case may be, and (ii) with
  respect to the identified motor fuel or diesel motor fuel for which such
  credit  is  claimed upon the use or consumption thereof, but only to the
  extent that the tax imposed by  section  eleven  hundred  five  of  this


 article  and  any  like tax imposed pursuant to the authority of article
  twenty-nine of this chapter together with the  tax  imposed  by  section
  eleven  hundred ten of this article and any like tax imposed pursuant to
  the  authority  of  article  twenty-nine  of this chapter required to be
  paid, collected and remitted has been paid, collected and remitted.
    (h) Such refunds and credits shall be subject  to  the  provisions  of
  sections  eleven hundred nineteen and eleven hundred thirty-nine of this
  article as if such sections were incorporated in full into this  section
  and had expressly referred to the refunds and credits authorized by this
  section   including   the   periods   of  limitations  on  payments  and
  applications to the commissioner; provided, however, that as provided in
  subdivision (e) of section eleven hundred thirty-nine of this article no
  interest shall be allowed or paid upon any refund made or credit allowed
  pursuant to subdivisions (a) and (b)  of  this  section;  and  provided,
  further,   that,   with  respect  to  refunds  or  credits  pursuant  to
  subdivision (d) of this section with respect to organizations  described
  in  paragraph  four of subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred sixteen
  of this chapter and subdivision (e) of this section, upon receipt  of  a
  claim  for refund in processible form, interest shall be allowed or paid
  at the overpayment rate set by  the  commissioner  pursuant  to  section
  eleven  hundred  forty-two of this article, or if no rate is set, at the
  rate of six percent per annum, from the due date of the  return  or  the
  actual  filing  date  of  the  return,  whichever  is later, to the date
  immediately preceding the date of the refund check  except  no  interest
  shall  be  allowed  or  paid if the refund check is mailed within thirty
  days of such receipt (except  in  case  of  organizations  described  in
  paragraph  four  of subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred sixteen of
  this chapter, the relevant period of time shall be forty-five days  from
  the  date the application for refund is received in processible form and
  interest, if allowable, shall apply from the date  such  application  is
  received  in  processible form) and no interest shall be allowed or paid
  upon a credit pursuant to such subdivision and except no interest  shall
  be  allowed or paid if the amount thereof would be less than one dollar.
  Provided, however, the department shall process applications for  refund
  as expeditiously as possible.




   §  1121.  Refunds  and  credits with respect to cigarettes. (a) Retail
  vendor. (1) A vendor of cigarettes who or which is required  to  collect
  the  taxes  imposed by subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred five of
  this article and any like tax  imposed  pursuant  to  the  authority  of
  article  twenty-nine of this chapter shall be allowed a refund or credit
  against the amount of tax collected and required to be remitted  to  the
  commissioner  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  section  eleven hundred
  thirty-seven of this article upon the retail sale of cigarettes  in  the
  amount of the tax on such cigarettes prepaid by or passed through to and
  included  in the price paid by such vendor pursuant to the provisions of
  section eleven hundred three of this article.
    (2) A refund or credit shall also be allowed such vendor for  the  tax
  prepaid  by  or passed through to and included in the price paid by such
  vendor upon any cigarettes pursuant to the provisions of section  eleven
  hundred  three  of this article if such cigarettes are sold at retail by
  such vendor under circumstances  where  the  taxes  imposed  by  section
  eleven  hundred  five  of  this article and pursuant to the authority of
  article twenty-nine of this chapter are not required by  the  provisions
  of this article to be collected and remitted upon receipts from a retail
  sale thereof.
    (b)  Retail  user.  A  person  who or which is required to pay the tax
  imposed by section eleven hundred ten of this article and any  like  tax
  imposed pursuant to the authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter
  with  respect to the purchase or use of such cigarettes shall be allowed
  a credit against such tax  required  to  be  paid  to  the  commissioner
  pursuant to such section and article in the amount of the tax prepaid by
  or passed through to and included in the price paid by such purchaser or
  user  pursuant to the provisions of section eleven hundred three of this
  article.
    (c) Self-use of cigarettes purchased at wholesale. A refund or  credit
  equal  to the amount of tax prepaid by or passed through to and included
  in the price paid by a purchaser or user pursuant to the  provisions  of
  section  eleven hundred three of this article with respect to a purchase
  of cigarettes other than at retail shall be allowed  such  purchaser  or
  user upon the use of such cigarettes at retail if the purchase or use of
  such  cigarettes  by the purchaser or user is exempt pursuant to section
  eleven hundred  fifteen  or  section  eleven  hundred  sixteen  of  this
  article.
    (d)  Export,  destruction,  tax paid in error. Whenever any cigarettes
  upon which the prepaid tax imposed by section eleven  hundred  three  of
  this  article  has been paid have been sold and shipped to another state
  for sale or use there or have become unfit for use or unsalable, or have
  been destroyed, or whenever the commissioner shall have determined  that
  any  tax  required  to  be  prepaid by such section eleven hundred three
  shall have been paid in error, the agent or dealer, as the case may  be,
  shall  be entitled to a refund or credit of the actual amount of prepaid
  tax so paid with respect to cigarettes which will not be  possessed  for
  sale or use in this state.
    (e)  Refunds  of  the  tax  required  to  be  prepaid  pursuant to the
  provisions of section eleven hundred three  of  this  article  shall  be
  allowed  only  to  the  extent such tax paid by or passed through to the
  retail vendor, or the purchaser or  user,  exceeds  the  amount  of  tax
  required  to be collected from such person or required to be remitted by
  the provisions of this article and pursuant to the authority of  article
  twenty-nine of this chapter.
    (f) A refund or credit shall be allowed under this section only to the
  extent  that  the  tax required to be prepaid pursuant to section eleven
  hundred three of this article has been prepaid by or passed  through  to


 such  vendor,  purchaser  or  user,  but only to the extent that the tax
  imposed by section eleven hundred five of this article and any like  tax
  imposed pursuant to the authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter
  together  with  the  tax  imposed  by section eleven hundred ten of this
  article and any like tax imposed pursuant to the  authority  of  article
  twenty-nine  of this chapter required to be paid, collected and remitted
  has been paid, collected and remitted.
    (g) Such refunds and credits shall be subject  to  the  provisions  of
  sections  eleven hundred nineteen and eleven hundred thirty-nine of this
  article as if such sections were incorporated in full into this  section
  and had expressly referred to the refunds and credits authorized by this
  section   including   the   periods   of  limitations  on  payments  and
  applications to the commissioner; provided, however, that,  as  provided
  in  subdivision  (e)  of  section  eleven  hundred  thirty-nine  of this
  article, no interest shall be allowed or paid upon any  refund  made  or
  credit  allowed  pursuant  to  subdivisions  (a),  (b)  and  (d) of this
  section.   The commissioner shall process  applications  for  refund  as
  expeditiously as possible.




   §  1122.  Exemption  from  tax  on amusement charges. (a) Seventy-five
  percent of the amount of the admission charge to a qualifying  place  of
  amusement  shall  be  exempt  from  the  tax imposed by paragraph one of
  subdivision (f) of section eleven hundred five of this article. A  place
  of amusement shall be a qualifying place of amusement if:
    (1)  it  exists  on a year-round basis (whether or not it is open year
  round) at a fixed location in the state;
    (2) the admission charge  to  such  place  entitles  patrons,  without
  additional  charge,  to  ride  at  least  seventy-five  percent  of  the
  amusement rides located at such place;
    (3) the combined geographic area of the  amusement  rides  located  at
  such  place,  including  all fenced-in ride areas, walkways to and among
  the rides, areas where patrons wait  in  line  for  the  rides  and  all
  buildings,  structures,  machinery,  equipment  and ancillary facilities
  associated with the rides equals at least fifty percent  of  the  entire
  geographic area of such place; and
    (4)  it  provides  to  each  person  to  whom  it delivers tickets for
  admission to such place a ticket or paper receipt stating the amount  of
  the admission charges paid by such person and the tax due thereon.
    The  "entire  geographic  area of such place" shall include only areas
  within  the  perimeter  fencing  of  such  place  which  are   generally
  accessible  to  the  public  and which are accessible only by paying the
  charge for admission to such  place  and  shall  exclude  administrative
  areas,  parking  lots,  hotels,  campgrounds  and  picnic  areas, lakes,
  woodlands and other  undeveloped  areas  and  areas  devoted  to  retail
  activities,  such  as  games,  arcades  and food, beverage, souvenir and
  merchandise sales. "Amusement  rides"  shall  include  roller  coasters,
  ferris wheels, carousels, water slides and all other amusement rides and
  water   rides.   If   a   qualifying  place  of  amusement  also  offers
  "admission-only" tickets entitling patrons to be admitted to such place,
  but not to use the amusement rides at such place, this subdivision  will
  not apply to the admission charges for such "admission-only" tickets.
    (b)  (1)  A place of amusement which begins admitting patrons during a
  year shall not, in  its  first  year  of  operation,  be  excluded  from
  classification  as  a  qualifying  place  of  amusement, as described in
  subdivision (a) of this section, because it has not existed  on  a  year
  round  basis,  so long as it admits patrons for the balance of that year
  (or the remainder of the applicable season in that  year  if  the  place
  closes  seasonally,  such  as during winter months) and years thereafter
  and the other conditions in such subdivision (a) are met.
    (2) A place of amusement shall not, in its final year of operation, be
  excluded from classification as a  qualifying  place  of  amusement,  as
  described  in subdivision (a) of this section, because it does not exist
  on a year round basis in that year so long as it admits patrons for  the
  portion  of  the  final year that it is open and the other conditions in
  such subdivision (a) are met.
    (c) Nothing in this section shall be construed as imposing tax  on  an
  admission  charge to a patron for admission to or use of, facilities for
  sporting activities in which such patron is to be a participant.




   §  1123. Exemption from tax on the charge of a roof garden, cabaret or
  other similar place. The portion of the amount paid as the charge  of  a
  roof  garden,  cabaret or other similar place in the state for admission
  to attend a dramatic or musical arts performance at the place  shall  be
  exempt  from  the  tax  imposed by paragraph three of subdivision (f) of
  section eleven hundred five of this article but only if:
    (a) the recipient states the charge for such admission separately from
  all other portions of such amount;
    (b) either (i) the separately stated charges for food, drink,  service
  and  merchandise  are  not  less  on a day when such place offers such a
  performance as on a day when such place does not offer such  performance
  or  (ii)  if  such place is open for business only when it offers such a
  performance, it separately states its charges for food,  drink,  service
  and  merchandise  and  such  separately stated charges are comparable to
  charges for comparable food, drink, service  and  merchandise  at  other
  such  places  and  restaurants  and  taverns in the United States census
  bureau metropolitan statistical area in which such place is  located  or
  in  an  immediately  adjacent  metropolitan  statistical  area  or  in a
  comparable  area  if  such  place  is  not  located  in  a  metropolitan
  statistical area; and
    (c)  such  place retains and makes available to the commissioner menus
  and any other statements of its charges, showing all of its charges  for
  food,  drink, service, merchandise and admission, as part of the records
  required to be kept under section eleven  hundred  thirty-five  of  this
  article.




   § 1131. Definitions. When used in this part IV,
    (1)  "Persons  required to collect tax" or "person required to collect
  any tax imposed by this article" shall include: every vendor of tangible
  personal property or services; every  recipient  of  amusement  charges;
  every  operator  of a hotel; and every marketplace provider with respect
  to sales of tangible personal property it facilitates  as  described  in
  paragraph  one  of subdivision (e) of section eleven hundred one of this
  article. Said terms shall also include any officer, director or employee
  of a corporation or of  a  dissolved  corporation,  any  employee  of  a
  partnership,  any employee or manager of a limited liability company, or
  any employee of  an  individual  proprietorship  who  as  such  officer,
  director,  employee  or  manager  is  under  a  duty  to  act  for  such
  corporation,  partnership,  limited  liability  company  or   individual
  proprietorship in complying with any requirement of this article, or has
  so  acted; and any member of a partnership or limited liability company.
  Provided, however, that any person who is a vendor solely by  reason  of
  clause  (D)  or  (E) of subparagraph (i) of paragraph (8) of subdivision
  (b) of section eleven hundred one of this article shall not be a "person
  required to collect any tax imposed by this article" until  twenty  days
  after the date by which such person is required to file a certificate of
  registration  pursuant  to  section  eleven  hundred thirty-four of this
  part.
    (2) "Customer" shall include: every  purchaser  of  tangible  personal
  property  or  services; every patron paying or liable for the payment of
  any amusement charge; and every occupant of a room or rooms in a hotel.
    (3) "Tax" shall include any tax imposed  by  sections  eleven  hundred
  five,  or  eleven  hundred  ten,  and  any  amount  payable  to  the tax
  commission by a person required to file a return, as provided in section
  eleven hundred thirty-seven.
    (4) "Property and services the use of which is subject to  tax"  shall
  include:  (a) all property sold to a person within the state, whether or
  not the sale is made within the state, the  use  of  which  property  is
  subject  to tax under section eleven hundred ten of this article or will
  become subject to tax when such property is received by  or  comes  into
  the  possession  or  control  of  such  person within the state; (b) all
  information services, protective and  detective  services  and  interior
  decorating  and  design  services  as  such  services  are  described in
  subdivision (c) of section eleven hundred five of this article, rendered
  to a person within the state, whether or not such services are  rendered
  from  or  at a location within the state; (c) all services rendered to a
  person within the state, whether or  not  such  services  are  performed
  within  the  state,  upon tangible personal property the use of which is
  subject to tax under section eleven hundred ten of this article or  will
  become  subject  to  tax when such property is received by or comes into
  possession or control of such person within the state; (d) all  property
  sold  by  a  person making sales described in clause (F) of subparagraph
  (i) of paragraph eight of subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred  one
  of  this  article to a person described in such clause (F) who purchases
  such property at retail, whether or not the  sale  is  made  within  the
  state;  (e)  all telephone answering service rendered to a person within
  the state, whether or not such services are performed within the  state,
  the  use  of which is subject to tax under section eleven hundred ten of
  this article or will become subject to tax when such service is received
  by or comes into possession or control of such person within the  state;
  (f)  all  prepaid telephone calling services sold to a person within the
  state, whether or not the sale is made within  the  state,  the  use  of
  which  services  are  subject to tax under section eleven hundred ten of
  this article or will become  subject  to  tax  when  such  services  are


 received by or come into the possession or control of such person within
  the  state,  and  whether or not such services are rendered from or at a
  location within the state; and (g) all gas  or  electricity  sold  to  a
  person  within  the  state,  whether  or not the sale is made within the
  state, the use of which is subject to tax under section  eleven  hundred
  ten of this article or will become subject to tax when it is received by
  or comes into the possession or control of such person within the state,
  and  whether  or  not  it  is  rendered from or at a location within the
  state.
    (5) "Show promoter" shall include any person who, either  directly  or
  indirectly, rents, leases or grants a license to use space to any person
  for  the  display for sale or for the sale of tangible personal property
  or services subject to tax, at more than three shows during the calendar
  year, or who operates more than three shows during  the  calendar  year.
  For  purposes  of  determining  whether  three shows have been held, the
  conduct of an activity described in subdivision six on one day alone  or
  on  a  series  of  up  to  seven  consecutive  days  shall  be deemed to
  constitute a single show.
    (6) "Show" shall include a flea market, craft show, antique show, coin
  show, stamp show, comic book show, fair and any  similar  show,  whether
  held  regularly  or of a temporary nature, at which more than one vendor
  displays for sale  or  sells  tangible  personal  property  or  services
  subject to tax.
    (7)  "Show  vendor"  shall include any person who displays for sale or
  sells, at a show, tangible personal property or services subject to tax.
    (8) "Entertainment promoter"  shall  include  any  person  who  either
  directly or indirectly rents, leases or grants a license to use space to
  an  entertainment  vendor  at  the  facility or site of an entertainment
  event, or who under any other arrangement authorizes such  a  vendor  to
  sell tangible personal property at such facility or site, and any person
  who  has  any  management  responsibility  with respect to such a vendor
  making such sales at  such  an  event.  "Entertainment  promoter"  shall
  include  the  owner  or  operator  of  any  facility  or  site  where an
  entertainment event is held and where sales are made by an entertainment
  vendor. Where two or  more  persons  are  entertainment  promoters  with
  respect  to  the same entertainment event, any requirement imposed on an
  entertainment promoter under this article  which  is  an  obligation  or
  responsibility imposed solely on entertainment promoters shall be deemed
  to  be  satisfied with respect to such entertainment event, when any one
  such promoter complies with any such requirement.
    (9) "Entertainment event" shall include concerts, athletic contests or
  exhibitions, other than amateur sports competition,  and  other  similar
  forms  of  entertainment,  irrespective  of both the kind of facility or
  site where such event is held and whether such event  has  an  admission
  charge  subject  to  tax, where the person or persons performing at such
  event do not perform on a regular, systematic or recurring basis at  the
  same  location. For purposes of this subdivision an event does not occur
  on a regular, systematic or recurring basis when such event consists  of
  less  than  four  performances  in a weekly period by the same person or
  persons at the same facility  or  site,  or  with  respect  to  athletic
  contests  or  exhibitions  which involve competition between teams, when
  such competition consists of less than five contests in a yearly  period
  by at least one team at the same facility or site. In order for an event
  to  be  an entertainment event, the facility or site where such an event
  is held must have an attendance capacity of greater  than  one  thousand
  persons,  except that the commissioner may prescribe by regulation for a
  minimum attendance capacity of greater than one thousand persons.


   (10) "Entertainment vendor" shall include any person who  makes  sales
  of  tangible personal property subject to tax at an entertainment event.
  Such tangible personal property shall include  but  is  not  limited  to
  wearing  apparel,  recordings,  programs,  posters,  buttons  and  other
  paraphernalia or souvenirs sold by such persons.
    (11)  "Temporary  vendor"  shall include any person who makes sales of
  tangible personal property or services subject to tax (other than  at  a
  show  or entertainment event) in not more than two consecutive quarterly
  periods in any twelve  month  period,  as  such  quarterly  periods  are
  described  in  subdivision  (b)  of section eleven hundred thirty-six of
  this article.




   §   1132.   Collection  of  tax  from  customer;  proof  required  for
  registration of motor vehicles. (a) (1) Except as otherwise permitted in
  subdivision (d) of section eleven hundred  thirty-three  of  this  part,
  every  person required to collect the tax shall collect the tax from the
  customer when collecting the price, amusement charge or rent to which it
  applies. If the customer is given any sales slip,  invoice,  receipt  or
  other  statement  or  memorandum  of the price, amusement charge or rent
  paid or payable, the tax shall be stated, charged and  shown  separately
  on  the  first  of such documents given to him. The tax shall be paid to
  the person required to collect it as trustee for and on account  of  the
  state.
    (2) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary: (i)
  If  a person required to collect tax demonstrates to the satisfaction of
  the commissioner by June first, of any year that, in any  two  quarterly
  periods,  as  described  in  subdivision  (b)  of section eleven hundred
  thirty-six of  this  part,  within  the  most  recent  four  consecutive
  quarterly  periods,  such person was a materialman within the meaning of
  section two of the lien  law,  primarily  engaged  in  selling  building
  materials   to   contractors,   subcontractors   or  repairmen  for  the
  improvement of real property, and authorized  by  such  law  to  file  a
  mechanics lien upon such real property and improvement, then such person
  shall,  with  respect  to  such  sales made through the quarterly period
  ending the succeeding May thirty-first, collect tax due on  such  sales,
  and  on  sales  to  such  contractors,  subcontractors  or  repairmen of
  services described in paragraph two  or  three  of  subdivision  (c)  of
  section  eleven hundred five of this article to such building materials,
  for  such  purpose  and  made  during  such  June  first   through   May
  thirty-first  period,  at  the  time  and to the extent that such person
  receives the receipts from, or consideration for, such sales  from  such
  contractors,  subcontractors  or  repairmen;  provided, however, that if
  such person receives a portion of such receipts or  consideration,  such
  person  shall  collect  the  tax  due  on  such portion at the time such
  portion is received. The taxes imposed by this article on such  receipts
  and consideration shall be deemed not to be imposed, solely for purposes
  of determining when such person is required to collect and pay over such
  taxes  to  the commissioner under section eleven hundred thirty-seven of
  this part, until such person has received payment of  such  receipts  or
  consideration   in  money  (or  money's  worth)  from  such  contractor,
  subcontractor or repairman. A contractor, subcontractor or repairman who
  purchases building materials or services from such  person  pursuant  to
  this  subparagraph  shall, at the time such contractor, subcontractor or
  repairman pays any portion of the purchase price, pay to such person the
  tax due on the portion of the purchase price so paid.
    (ii) In the event that a materialman described in subparagraph (i)  of
  this  paragraph  finances  any  portion of the receipts or consideration
  from a sale described in such subparagraph (i), including  any  tax  due
  thereon,  directly  or  indirectly,  with any other person (other than a
  contractor, subcontractor or repairman described  in  such  subparagraph
  (i)),  whether  by  assignment of the receivable or debt due, factoring,
  direct loan or any other means, then such materialman shall be deemed to
  have received payment of such receipts or  consideration  in  money  (or
  money's  worth)  from  such  contractor,  subcontractor or repairman and
  shall be required to pay over tax on such sale with the next return due,
  with a credit against such tax  for  any  tax  already  paid  over  with
  respect  to  such  sale.  Any such amount of tax paid over in accordance
  with the prior sentence shall be on account of the tax  required  to  be
  collected  on the sale to which it relates and such materialman may take
  a credit against any tax  paid  by  such  contractor,  subcontractor  or


 repairman  in the future on such sale, to ensure that tax paid over with
  respect to such sale does not exceed the amount of tax imposed  on  such
  sale as if the entire purchase price had been paid at the time of sale.
    (iii)  A  materialman described in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph,
  who has not collected the tax due on the full purchase price for a  sale
  described  in  such subparagraph (i) from a contractor, subcontractor or
  repairman within one year of the date of such sale, shall be required to
  pay over to the commissioner the tax due on any  balance  of  such  full
  purchase  price  with  such  materialman's  return  for the period which
  includes the date which is one year after the date of such sale.
    (iv) The commissioner may assess additional tax due with respect to  a
  sale  described in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph within three years
  from the date the tax is required to be paid over  to  the  commissioner
  pursuant  to  this  paragraph;  provided, however, that in the case of a
  willfully false or fraudulent return with intent to evade  the  tax,  or
  where  no  return  has  been  filed as prescribed by law, the tax may be
  assessed at any time.
    (v) The other provisions of this article  and  any  provision  of  law
  applicable  to  the  taxes  imposed  by  this article shall apply to the
  materialmen,  contractors,  subcontractors,  repairmen,   receipts   and
  consideration described in this paragraph, except to the extent that any
  such provision is inconsistent with this paragraph.
    (b) The commissioner shall by regulation prescribe a method or methods
  or a schedule or schedules of the amounts to be collected from customers
  in  respect  to  any receipt, gallon of motor fuel or diesel motor fuel,
  amusement charge or rent upon which a tax is imposed by this article  so
  as  to  eliminate  fractions  of  one  cent  and  so  that the aggregate
  collections of taxes by a person required to collect tax shall,  as  far
  as  practicable,  equal  four  percent  of the total receipts, amusement
  charges or rents of such person, or equal the correct rate per gallon of
  motor fuel or diesel motor fuel sold by such person, upon whom a tax  is
  imposed  by  this  article  or, where a similar tax is imposed under the
  authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter, equal four percent, or
  such rate per gallon, plus the rate of tax imposed under  the  authority
  of article twenty-nine of the total receipts, amusement charges or rents
  of,  or  gallons of motor fuel or diesel motor fuel sold by, such person
  upon whom a tax is imposed by this article and under  the  authority  of
  article twenty-nine, so that the tax rate to be applied shall be the sum
  of the state and local tax rates. Such schedule or schedules may provide
  that no tax need be collected from the customer upon receipts, amusement
  charges  or  rents  below  a stated sum, and may be amended from time to
  time so as to accomplish the purposes herein set forth. Such schedule or
  schedules shall provide that no tax shall be collected from the customer
  upon receipts from retail sales of  tangible  personal  property  which,
  under  the rate imposed by article twenty-eight, together with the rates
  imposed under the authority of article twenty-nine,  produce  a  tax  of
  five mills or less.
    (c)  (1)  For the purpose of the proper administration of this article
  and to prevent evasion of the tax hereby imposed, it shall  be  presumed
  that  all  receipts  for  property  or services of any type mentioned in
  subdivisions (a), (b), (c) and (d) of section eleven hundred  five,  all
  rents  for  occupancy  of  the type mentioned in subdivision (e) of said
  section, and all amusement charges of any type mentioned in  subdivision
  (f)  of  said  section,  are  subject  to  tax  until  the  contrary  is
  established, and the burden  of  proving  that  any  receipt,  amusement
  charge  or  rent  is  not  taxable  hereunder  shall  be upon the person
  required  to  collect  tax  or  the  customer.  Except  as  provided  in
  subdivision  (h)  or (k) of this section, unless (i) a vendor, not later


 than ninety days after delivery of the property or the rendition of  the
  service,  shall  have  taken  from  the  purchaser a resale or exemption
  certificate in such form as the commissioner may  prescribe,  signed  by
  the  purchaser  and  setting forth the purchaser's name and address and,
  except as otherwise provided by  regulation  of  the  commissioner,  the
  number  of  the purchaser's certificate of authority, together with such
  other information as the commissioner may require, to  the  effect  that
  the  property  or  service  was  purchased for resale or for some use by
  reason of which the sale is exempt from  tax  under  the  provisions  of
  section  eleven  hundred  fifteen,  and,  where such resale or exemption
  certificate requires the inclusion of  the  purchaser's  certificate  of
  authority  number or other identification number required by regulations
  of the commissioner, that the purchaser's certificate of  authority  has
  not been suspended or revoked and has not expired as provided in section
  eleven hundred thirty-four, or (ii) the purchaser, not later than ninety
  days  after  delivery  of  the property or the rendition of the service,
  furnishes  to  the  vendor:  any  affidavit,  statement  or   additional
  evidence,  documentary  or otherwise, which the commissioner may require
  demonstrating that the purchaser is an exempt organization described  in
  section  eleven hundred sixteen, the sale shall be deemed a taxable sale
  at retail. Where a resale or  exemption  certificate  or  an  affidavit,
  statement or additional evidence referred to in the previous sentence is
  received  within  the  time limit set forth therein, but is deficient in
  some material manner, and where such deficiency is  thereafter  removed,
  the  receipt  of such resale or exemption certificate or such affidavit,
  statement or additional evidence shall be deemed to have  satisfied  all
  of  the  requirements  of the preceding sentence. Where such a resale or
  exemption certificate or such  an  affidavit,  statement  or  additional
  evidence  has  been  furnished to the vendor, the burden of proving that
  the receipt, amusement charge or rent is not taxable hereunder shall  be
  solely  upon  the  customer. The vendor shall not be required to collect
  tax from purchasers who furnish a resale or  exemption  certificate,  or
  such  an  affidavit,  statement  or  additional evidence in proper form,
  unless, in the case of a resale or exemption  certificate  described  in
  clause  (i)  of  the  second  sentence  of  this  paragraph  whereon the
  purchaser's certificate of authority  number,  or  other  identification
  number  required  by  regulation  of the commissioner, is required to be
  included, such purchaser's certificate of authority is  invalid  because
  it  has  been suspended or revoked as provided in section eleven hundred
  thirty-four, and the commissioner has furnished registered vendors  with
  information  identifying  those  persons whose certificates of authority
  have been suspended or revoked, or unless such  purchaser's  certificate
  of authority is invalid because it has expired, and the commissioner has
  provided  registered  vendors  with  a means of determining whether such
  expiration has occurred. Where the  vendor  accepts  such  a  resale  or
  exemption  certificate  from  a person identified by the commissioner as
  one whose certificate of authority has been suspended or revoked or from
  a person whose certificate of authority has been  identified  as  having
  expired,  the  receipt,  amusement  charge or rent from such transaction
  shall be deemed to be a taxable sale at retail.
    (2) Notwithstanding paragraph one of this subdivision or any other law
  to the  contrary,  the  commissioner  may  authorize  a  purchaser,  who
  acquires  tangible  personal  property  or  services under circumstances
  which make it impossible at the time of  acquisition  to  determine  the
  manner in which the tangible personal property or services will be used,
  to  pay the tax directly to the commissioner and waive the collection of
  the tax by the vendor. Subject to  such  reasonable  conditions  as  the
  commissioner  may  require,  the commissioner shall authorize an omnibus


 carrier described in subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred  nineteen
  to  pay  the  tax  on  the purchase or use of an omnibus directly to the
  commissioner and waive the collection of the tax by the vendor. No  such
  authority  shall  be granted or exercised except upon application to the
  commissioner,  and  the   issuance   by   the   commissioner,   in   the
  commissioner's  discretion,  of  a  direct  payment  permit. If a direct
  payment permit is granted,  its  use  shall  be  subject  to  conditions
  specified   by   the  commissioner,  and  the  payment  of  tax  on  all
  acquisitions pursuant to the  permit  shall  be  made  directly  to  the
  commissioner  by  the  permit  holder.  The  commissioner may suspend or
  revoke a direct payment permit where the permit holder fails  to  comply
  with  any  of  the provisions of this article or any rule promulgated by
  the commissioner with respect to this article. The  notice  and  hearing
  provisions  applicable  to the revocation and suspension of certificates
  of authority under section eleven hundred thirty-four shall apply to the
  suspension and revocation of direct payment permits. A vendor shall  not
  be  required  to  collect  tax  from  a purchaser who furnishes a direct
  payment permit in proper form, unless such  purchaser's  direct  payment
  permit  has  been  suspended  or  revoked  by  the  commissioner and the
  commissioner  has   provided   registered   vendors   with   information
  identifying  those  persons  whose  direct  payment  permits  have  been
  suspended or revoked. Where a vendor accepts  a  direct  payment  permit
  from a person whose direct payment permit has been suspended or revoked,
  and  the  commissioner  has provided registered vendors with information
  identifying  those  persons  whose  direct  payment  permits  have  been
  suspended  or  revoked,  the receipt, amusement charge or rent from such
  transaction shall be deemed to be subject to tax.
    (d) The tax commission may provide by regulation  that  the  tax  upon
  receipts from sales on the installment plan may be paid on the amount of
  each installment and upon the date when such installment is due.
    (e)  The  commissioner  may  provide, by regulation, for the exclusion
  from taxable receipts, gallons of motor fuel or diesel motor fuel  sold,
  amusement  charges  or  rents  of  amounts  representing sales where the
  contract of sale has  been  cancelled,  the  property  returned  or  the
  receipt,  charge or rent has been ascertained to be uncollectible or, in
  case the tax has been paid upon such receipt, gallons, charge  or  rent,
  for  refund  of  or  credit  for the tax so paid. Where the commissioner
  provides for a credit for the tax so paid, he or she  shall  require  an
  application  for  credit  to  be filed, but he or she may also allow the
  applicant to immediately take the credit on  the  return  which  is  due
  coincident  with  or  immediately  subsequent  to the time the applicant
  files his or her application for credit.  However,  the  taking  of  the
  credit  on  the return shall be deemed to be part of the application for
  credit and shall be subject to the provisions in respect to applications
  for credit in  section  eleven  hundred  thirty-nine  of  this  part  as
  provided in subdivision (e) of such section.
    (f)  The commissioner of motor vehicles shall not issue a registration
  certificate for any motor vehicle, snowmobile,  vessel  or  all  terrain
  vehicle,  except  in  the  case of a renewal of registration by the same
  owner, except upon proof, in a form approved by the tax  commission  and
  the  commissioner  of  motor  vehicles,  that any tax imposed by section
  eleven hundred five or eleven hundred ten of this article  with  respect
  to  the  sale  of  the  motor vehicle, snowmobile, vessel or all terrain
  vehicle to the registrant or his use thereof has been paid, or  that  no
  such  tax  is  due.  For  purposes  of  this subdivision, the term motor
  vehicle shall include a motor vehicle as defined in section one  hundred
  twenty-five  of  the  vehicle  and  traffic law; a trailer as defined in
  section one hundred fifty-six of such law; a snowmobile  as  defined  in


 section  twenty-two  hundred twenty-one of such law; a vessel as defined
  in section twenty-two hundred fifty of such  law;  and  an  all  terrain
  vehicle as defined in section twenty-two hundred eighty-one of such law.
    (g)  (1)  The  clerk  of  each  county when performing the function of
  registration of a motor  vehicle,  snowmobile,  vessel  or  all  terrain
  vehicle  or  accepting  an  application  for a certificate of title of a
  motor vehicle or vessel, pursuant to the authority of  the  vehicle  and
  traffic   law,   or  the  commissioner  of  motor  vehicles,  when  such
  commissioner  performs  such  functions,  prior   to   performing   such
  functions, shall act as the agent of the state tax commission to collect
  any  retail  sales  tax  due  under  this  article and under a sales tax
  imposed pursuant to section twelve hundred ten or twelve hundred  eleven
  upon  sales  of such motor vehicles, snowmobiles, vessels or all terrain
  vehicles by persons other than dealers registered  under  sections  four
  hundred  fifteen,  twenty-two  hundred  twenty-two,  twenty-two  hundred
  fifty-seven and twenty-two hundred eighty-two of the vehicle and traffic
  law. Such county clerks and such commissioner shall  also  act  as  such
  agents  to  collect  any  compensating  use tax due under section eleven
  hundred ten and under a compensating use tax imposed pursuant to section
  twelve hundred ten or twelve hundred eleven  for  the  use  of  a  motor
  vehicle,  snowmobile,  vessel  or all terrain vehicle within this state.
  The commissioner of motor vehicles shall act as such agent without  fee.
  Each  such  county  clerk  shall, after deducting his fee as provided in
  paragraph two of this subdivision, and such commissioner shall remit  to
  the  tax commission all funds collected pursuant to this subdivision and
  shall  follow  such  procedures  and  keep  such  records  as  shall  be
  prescribed by the tax commission.
    (2)  Each  such  county  clerk  shall retain, from the state and local
  sales and compensating use taxes which  he  collects,  the  sum  of  one
  dollar for each of the first five thousand motor vehicles or all terrain
  vehicles  in  respect to which he has issued a certificate setting forth
  the proof required by subdivision (f) of this  section  and  subdivision
  (d)  of  section  twelve  hundred  fourteen  of this chapter during each
  annual period commencing on the first day of September and ending on the
  next succeeding thirty-first day of August and the sum  of  seventy-five
  cents  for  each  motor vehicle or all terrain vehicle in excess of five
  thousand for which he has issued such a certificate during  such  annual
  period.    Each  such county clerk shall also retain, from the state and
  local sales and compensating use taxes he collects,  the  sum  of  fifty
  cents for each snowmobile and vessel in respect to which he has issued a
  certificate  setting forth the proof required by subdivision (f) of this
  section and subdivision (d) of section twelve hundred fourteen  of  this
  chapter.  Such  fees shall be payable even though the certificate issued
  shows that no tax is due. Such fees shall belong to the  county  and  be
  paid  into the county treasury monthly on or before the tenth day of the
  month pursuant to section two hundred one of the county law. The  county
  shall  pay  all  expenses  occasioned  by the duties of the county clerk
  under this subdivision, including any expenses for hire of extra clerks.
    (h) (1) (i) No  person  shall  purchase  motor  fuel  in  this  state,
  excluding a purchase at retail, unless the tax required to be prepaid by
  subdivision  (a)  of section eleven hundred two of this article has been
  assumed by a distributor  registered  under  article  twelve-A  of  this
  chapter  in accordance with a certification under this paragraph or paid
  by such distributor, and, in each of such instances, is  passed  through
  to such purchaser. In addition to any other civil and criminal penalties
  which  may  apply,  any  person who purchases motor fuel in violation of
  this subparagraph shall be jointly and severally liable to pay  the  tax


 required  to  be  prepaid  by section eleven hundred two of this article
  with respect to such motor fuel.
    (ii)  For the purpose of the proper administration of this article and
  to prevent evasion of the tax on motor fuel imposed by and  pursuant  to
  this  article,  it  shall  be  presumed  that  all  motor fuel imported,
  manufactured or sold, received or possessed in the state is intended for
  use, distribution, storage or sale in the state and subject to  the  tax
  required  to  be  prepaid  by section eleven hundred two of this article
  until the contrary is established. It shall be further presumed that all
  motor fuel so imported, manufactured, sold, received or possessed in the
  state by any person, other than motor fuel delivered into  the  ordinary
  fuel tank connected with the engine of a means of conveyance in order to
  propel  it,  or  in small drums or similar containers, which such person
  cannot otherwise account for, is subject  to  the  tax  required  to  be
  prepaid under section eleven hundred two of this article and such person
  is  responsible for such prepayment. Provided, however, a distributor of
  motor fuel who imports, manufactures or sells and stores in the state or
  who purchases and stores motor fuel in the state on which he has prepaid
  the tax required to be prepaid pursuant to section eleven hundred two of
  this article shall be allowed an adjustment in arriving at  the  gallons
  subject  to  the taxes imposed by such section on account of the gallons
  the distributor establishes were lost due to shrinkage, evaporation  and
  handling; provided, however, such allowance shall not exceed two percent
  of  the  fuel stored. Provided, further, that in arriving at the gallons
  of motor fuel subject to the tax required  to  be  prepaid  pursuant  to
  section  eleven  hundred  two of this article, there shall be allowed an
  adjustment on account of gallons lost or destroyed due to  an  accident,
  such  as  fire,  and  at the time of such loss or destruction were being
  held or transported for sale other than at retail. The burden of proving
  that any motor fuel is not so  subject  shall  be  upon  the  person  so
  responsible for such prepayment with respect to such fuel.
    (iii)  Upon  each sale of motor fuel, other than a sale at retail, the
  seller must give to the purchaser and the purchaser  shall  receive,  at
  the time of delivery of such motor fuel, a certification containing such
  information  as  the  tax commission shall require which shall include a
  statement to the effect (A) if such seller is a  distributor  registered
  under  article twelve-A of this chapter, that he has assumed the payment
  of or paid the tax required to be prepaid by section eleven hundred  two
  of  this  article  and, in each case, is passing through such tax or (B)
  that such seller is passing through such tax  which  was  so  previously
  assumed  or  paid  by an identified distributor registered under article
  twelve-A of this chapter, and passed through to him.
    (iv)  If  the  certification  required  by  this  paragraph  has  been
  furnished  to  the  purchaser  by the seller at delivery and accepted in
  good faith, the burden of proving that the tax required to  be  paid  by
  section  eleven  hundred  two  of  this article was assumed or paid by a
  distributor registered as such under article twelve-A  of  this  chapter
  and passed through shall be solely on the seller.
    (v)  Where  the  certification  required  under  this paragraph is not
  furnished by the seller at delivery of motor fuel, it shall be  presumed
  that  the  tax  required  to be prepaid by section eleven hundred two of
  this article has not been assumed or paid by a distributor registered as
  such under article twelve-A of this chapter and that  the  purchaser  in
  such case is jointly and severally liable for the tax.
    (vi)  If,  due to the circumstances of delivery, it is not possible to
  issue a certification required under  this  paragraph  at  the  time  of
  delivery of motor fuel, the tax commission may authorize the delivery of
  the  certification  required  under  this  paragraph at a time after the


 delivery of the motor fuel which is the subject of the  sale  under  the
  limited  circumstances  it  shall  prescribe  and  upon  such  terms and
  conditions it shall deem necessary  to  ensure  collection  of  the  tax
  imposed by section eleven hundred two of this article and the motor fuel
  taxes imposed by article twelve-A of this chapter.
    (2)  (i) Except with respect to the exemptions from the prepaid tax on
  Diesel motor fuel set forth in  paragraph  two  of  subdivision  (a)  of
  section  eleven  hundred  two  of this article, no person shall purchase
  Diesel motor fuel in this state unless the prepaid tax has been  assumed
  by  a  registered  distributor of Diesel motor fuel in accordance with a
  certification under this paragraph or paid by such distributor  and,  in
  each  of such instances, except in the case of a purchase at retail, are
  passed through to such purchaser. In addition to  any  other  civil  and
  criminal  penalties  which  may  apply,  any person who purchases Diesel
  motor fuel without having received a certification from  the  seller  in
  accordance  with this paragraph shall be jointly and severally liable to
  pay the tax required to be prepaid by section eleven hundred two of this
  article with respect to such Diesel motor fuel.
    (ii) For purposes of the proper administration of this article and  to
  prevent  evasion  of  the  taxes  imposed  on  Diesel motor fuel by this
  article, it shall be presumed that all Diesel motor fuel sold,  received
  or  possessed  in  the  state  is  subject  to the taxes imposed by this
  article until the contrary is established. It shall be further  presumed
  that  any  person  so selling, receiving or possessing such Diesel motor
  fuel is responsible for payment of the excise taxes on such fuel.
    (iii) The exemption from the tax required to  be  prepaid  by  section
  eleven  hundred  two  of  this  article provided for in paragraph two of
  subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred two of this article  shall  be
  established  by  means  of an interdistributor sale certificate. If such
  exemption is applicable, such  certificate  shall  be  provided  by  the
  purchaser  to  the  seller  at  the  time of or prior to delivery of the
  Diesel motor fuel. Such certificate shall set forth the name and address
  of the purchaser, the purchaser's registration number, an affirmation by
  such purchaser that the purchaser is  registered  as  a  distributor  of
  Diesel  motor  fuel and that such registration has not been suspended or
  cancelled and shall be signed by such purchaser and by the seller.  Such
  certificate  shall be in such form and contain such other information as
  the commissioner of taxation and finance shall require. Where  a  proper
  and  complete  interdistributor  sale certificate has been furnished and
  accepted by the seller  in  good  faith,  such  certificate  under  such
  circumstance  shall relieve the seller of the burden of proving that the
  Diesel motor fuel covered by such certificate is  exempt  from  the  tax
  required  to be prepaid by section eleven hundred two of this article by
  reason of paragraph two of subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred two
  of this article. For purposes of this subparagraph, a seller  shall  not
  have  accepted  such  certificate  in  good  faith  if  the  purchaser's
  registration is invalid because it has been suspended or  cancelled,  or
  if the purchaser is not registered, and the commissioner of taxation and
  finance   has   furnished   registered   distributors  with  information
  identifying all those persons then validly registered as distributors of
  Diesel motor fuel  and  those  persons  whose  registrations  have  been
  suspended  or  cancelled.  Any  purchaser  who furnishes to his seller a
  false or fraudulent interdistributor sale certificate for the purpose of
  establishing an exemption from the tax required to be prepaid by section
  eleven hundred two of this article shall be jointly and severally liable
  for the tax imposed by such section.
    (iv) (A) Upon each sale,  other  than  a  retail  sale  at  a  filling
  station,  the  seller must give to the purchaser and the purchaser shall


 receive  at  the  time  of  delivery  of  such  Diesel  motor  fuel,   a
  certification   containing  such  information  as  the  commissioner  of
  taxation and finance shall require which, unless otherwise  provided  in
  this  paragraph,  shall  include  a statement to the effect: (i) if such
  seller is a  distributor  registered  under  article  twelve-A  of  this
  chapter, that he has assumed the payment of or paid the taxes imposed by
  this article and, in each case, is passing through such taxes; (ii) that
  such  seller  is  passing  through  such  taxes which were so previously
  assumed or paid by an identified distributor  registered  under  article
  twelve-A  of  this  chapter, and passed through to him; or (iii) if such
  seller is making a retail sale to a purchaser, that such taxes  are  not
  being  passed  through  on  the  retail  sale  of  Diesel motor fuel, in
  accordance with subparagraph (i) of this paragraph. In  the  case  of  a
  sale  of Diesel motor fuel described in paragraph two of subdivision (a)
  of section eleven hundred two of this article which is exempt  from  the
  tax   required  to  be  prepaid  by  section  eleven  hundred  two,  the
  certificate, in lieu of the  foregoing  statements,  shall  state  that,
  based   upon   good   faith   reliance  on  the  interdistributor  sales
  certificate,  such  Diesel  motor  fuel  is   being   sold   under   the
  circumstances  described  in  such  paragraph  two of subdivision (a) of
  section eleven hundred two and that the tax imposed  by  section  eleven
  hundred two of this article is not applicable.
    (B)  In  the  case  of  a sale of Diesel motor fuel subject to the tax
  required to be prepaid by section eleven hundred two of this article and
  in all cases where such tax is required to be  passed  through,  if  the
  certification  required  by  this subparagraph has been furnished to the
  purchaser at the time of delivery of such  fuel  and  accepted  in  good
  faith,  the  burden  of  proving  that the tax required to be prepaid by
  section eleven hundred two of this article was  assumed  or  paid  by  a
  distributor  registered  as  such under article twelve-A of this chapter
  and passed through shall be solely on the seller.
    (C) Where the certification required under  this  subdivision  is  not
  furnished  by  the  seller  at  the time of delivery of the Diesel motor
  fuel, it shall be presumed that  the  tax  required  to  be  prepaid  by
  section  eleven hundred two of this article is due and owing and has not
  been assumed or paid by a distributor registered as such  under  article
  twelve-A  of this chapter and that the purchaser in such case is jointly
  and severally liable for the tax.
    (D) If, due to the circumstances of delivery, it is  not  possible  to
  issue  a  certification  required  under this subdivision at the time of
  delivery of Diesel motor fuel, the commissioner of taxation and  finance
  may  authorize  the  delivery  of  the certification required under this
  subdivision at a time after the delivery of the Diesel motor fuel  which
  is  the  subject  of  the  sale under the limited circumstances he shall
  prescribe and upon such terms and conditions he shall deem necessary  to
  ensure  collection  of  the tax imposed by section eleven hundred two of
  this article and the Diesel motor fuel taxes imposed by article twelve-A
  of this chapter.
    (3) (i) For the purpose of the proper administration of  this  article
  and  to  prevent evasion of the tax hereby imposed, it shall be presumed
  that all retail sales of motor fuel or diesel motor fuel are subject  to
  the  tax  required  to be collected by subdivision (a) of section eleven
  hundred five of this article or paid by the provisions of section eleven
  hundred ten of this article until the contrary is  established,  and  it
  shall  be  presumed  that  all motor fuel or diesel motor fuel imported,
  manufactured, sold, received or possessed by any person in  this  state,
  which  such  person  cannot  otherwise  account  for as having been sold
  subject to the tax required  to  be  collected  by  subdivision  (a)  of


 section  eleven hundred five or paid by the provisions of section eleven
  hundred ten of this article, has been sold subject to the  tax  required
  to  be  collected  by  subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred five or
  paid by the provisions of section eleven hundred ten except that no such
  presumption  shall apply with respect to motor fuel or diesel motor fuel
  in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle used to propel such  vehicle  or  to
  motor  fuel  in small drums or similar containers. The burden of proving
  that any sale is not so subject shall be upon  the  person  required  to
  collect such tax and the purchaser of such fuel.
    (ii)  Unless the vendor has received from the purchaser a statement or
  certificate in such form as  the  commissioner  may  require,  that  the
  purchaser  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  subdivision (a) of section
  eleven hundred five-A, subdivision (j) of section eleven hundred fifteen
  or subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred sixteen of this article  is
  not  subject  to  the  provisions  of this paragraph, such sale shall be
  deemed a sale subject to the provisions of sections eleven hundred  five
  and  eleven hundred ten of this article notwithstanding any provision of
  subdivision (c) of this section.
    (iii) Where any certificate or statement required under this paragraph
  has been furnished to the vendor and accepted in good faith, the  burden
  of  proving  that  the  receipt is not taxable hereunder shall be solely
  upon the purchaser. The vendor shall not be  required  to  collect  such
  taxes  from  purchasers  who  furnish such certificates or statements in
  proper form.
    (i) The commissioner shall, by regulation, provide for  a  certificate
  which  must  be furnished by a purchaser of a large volume of motor fuel
  or diesel motor  fuel  who  or  which  is  commonly  referred  to  as  a
  commercial  account  where  such  purchase  is  for  consumption by such
  purchaser and is not resold in order for the sales tax on such  sale  to
  be based on the actual receipts therefor.
    (k)  (1)  (i) No person shall purchase cigarettes in this state, other
  than in a purchase at retail, unless the tax required to be  prepaid  by
  subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred three of this article has been
  paid  by  an  agent  and passed through by such agent and by a wholesale
  dealer or  retail  dealer,  authorized,  licensed  or  registered  under
  article twenty of this chapter, in accordance with a certification under
  this paragraph or paid by such agent, wholesale dealer or retail dealer,
  and,  in each of such instances, is passed through to such purchaser. In
  addition to any other civil and criminal penalties which may apply,  any
  person  who purchases cigarettes in violation of this subparagraph shall
  be jointly and severally liable to pay the tax required to be prepaid by
  section eleven hundred three  of  this  article  with  respect  to  such
  cigarettes.
    (ii)  For the purpose of the proper administration of this article and
  to prevent evasion of the tax on sales and uses of cigarettes imposed by
  this article and pursuant to the authority  of  article  twenty-nine  of
  this chapter, it shall be presumed that all cigarettes possessed in this
  state,  other  than  four  hundred  or fewer cigarettes brought into the
  state by, or in the possession of, any person, are intended for sale  or
  use  in  the  state  and  subject  to  the tax required to be prepaid by
  section eleven hundred three of  this  article  until  the  contrary  is
  established and that such person is responsible for such prepayment.
    (iii)  Upon  each sale of cigarettes, other than a sale at retail, the
  seller must give to the purchaser and the purchaser  shall  receive,  at
  the time of delivery of such cigarettes, a certification containing such
  information  as  the  commissioner  shall  require which shall include a
  statement to the effect (A) if such seller is  an  agent  under  article
  twenty  of  this  chapter,  that  such  agent has paid the amount of tax


 required to be prepaid by section eleven hundred three of  this  article
  and  is  passing  through such amount of tax, or (B) that such seller is
  passing through such amount of tax which was so  previously  assumed  or
  paid by an agent under article twenty of this chapter identified on such
  certification, and passed through to such seller.
    (iv)  If  the  certification  required  by  this  paragraph  has  been
  furnished to the purchaser by the seller at  delivery  and  accepted  in
  good  faith  on  cigarettes  bearing a cigarette tax stamp under article
  twenty of this chapter and this article of an issue currently in effect,
  the burden of proving that the tax required to be paid by section eleven
  hundred three of this article was assumed or paid by an  agent  licensed
  as such under article twenty of this chapter and passed through shall be
  solely on the seller.
    (v)  Where  the  certification  required  under  this paragraph is not
  furnished by the seller to the purchaser at delivery of  cigarettes,  it
  shall  be  presumed  that  no  amount  of  tax required to be prepaid by
  section eleven hundred three of this article has been paid by  an  agent
  authorized  as  such  under  article twenty of this chapter and that the
  purchaser in such case is jointly  and  severally  liable  for  the  tax
  imposed by such section eleven hundred three.
    (2)  (i)  For the purpose of the proper administration of this article
  and to prevent evasion of the tax imposed under this article,  it  shall
  be  presumed  that all retail sales of cigarettes are subject to the tax
  imposed by subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred five  and  required
  to  be collected by section eleven hundred thirty-two of this article or
  required to be paid by the provisions of section eleven hundred  ten  of
  this article until the contrary is established; and it shall be presumed
  that  all  cigarettes  possessed in this state, which such person cannot
  otherwise account for as having been sold subject to the tax imposed  by
  subdivision  (a)  of  section  eleven  hundred  five  and required to be
  collected by section eleven hundred thirty-two or required to be paid by
  the provisions of section eleven hundred ten of this article, have  been
  sold  subject  to  the  tax imposed by subdivision (a) of section eleven
  hundred five and required to be  collected  by  section  eleven  hundred
  thirty-two  or  required  to be paid by the provisions of section eleven
  hundred ten, except that no such presumption shall apply with respect to
  four hundred or fewer cigarettes brought into the state by,  or  in  the
  possession of, any person. The burden of proving that any sale is not so
  subject to tax shall be upon the person required to collect such tax and
  the purchaser or user of such cigarettes.
    (ii)  Unless the vendor has received from the purchaser a statement or
  certificate, in such form as the  commissioner  may  require,  that  the
  purchaser pursuant to the provisions of paragraph six of subdivision (b)
  of  section eleven hundred sixteen of this article is not subject to the
  provisions of this paragraph, such sale shall be deemed a  sale  subject
  to the provisions of sections eleven hundred five and eleven hundred ten
  of this article notwithstanding any provision of subdivision (c) of this
  section.
    (iii) Where any certificate or statement required under this paragraph
  has  been furnished to the vendor and accepted in good faith, the burden
  of proving that the receipt is not taxable  hereunder  shall  be  solely
  upon  the  purchaser.  The  vendor shall not be required to collect such
  taxes from purchasers who furnish such  certificates  or  statements  in
  proper form.
    (l)(1)  A  marketplace  provider  with  respect  to a sale of tangible
  personal property it facilitates: (A) shall have all the obligations and
  rights of a vendor under this article and article  twenty-nine  of  this
  chapter  and  under any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, including,


 but not limited to, the duty to obtain a certificate  of  authority,  to
  collect  tax,  file  returns,  remit  tax,  and  the  right  to accept a
  certificate or other documentation from  a  customer  substantiating  an
  exemption  or  exclusion  from  tax,  the  right  to  receive the refund
  authorized by subdivision (e) of this section and the credit allowed  by
  subdivision  (f)  of  section  eleven  hundred thirty-seven of this part
  subject to the provisions of such subdivisions; and (B) shall keep  such
  records  and  information  and cooperate with the commissioner to ensure
  the proper collection  and  remittance  of  tax  imposed,  collected  or
  required  to  be collected under this article and article twenty-nine of
  this chapter.
    (2) A marketplace seller who is a vendor is relieved from the duty  to
  collect tax in regard to a particular sale of tangible personal property
  subject  to  tax under subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred five of
  this article and shall not include the receipts from such  sale  in  its
  taxable  receipts  for  purposes of section eleven hundred thirty-six of
  this part if, in regard to such sale: (A)  the  marketplace  seller  can
  show  that such sale was facilitated by a marketplace provider from whom
  such seller has received in good faith a properly completed  certificate
  of  collection in a form prescribed by the commissioner, certifying that
  the marketplace provider is registered to collect  sales  tax  and  will
  collect  sales tax on all taxable sales of tangible personal property by
  the marketplace seller facilitated by the marketplace provider, and with
  such other information as the commissioner may prescribe;  and  (B)  any
  failure  of the marketplace provider to collect the proper amount of tax
  in regard to such sale was not the result  of  such  marketplace  seller
  providing  the  marketplace  provider  with  incorrect information. This
  provision shall be administered in a manner consistent with subparagraph
  (i) of paragraph one  of  subdivision  (c)  of  this  section  as  if  a
  certificate  of  collection  were  a resale or exemption certificate for
  purposes of such subparagraph, including with regard to the completeness
  of such certificate of collection and the timing of  its  acceptance  by
  the  marketplace  seller.  Provided  that,  with  regard to any sales of
  tangible personal property by a marketplace seller that are  facilitated
  by a marketplace provider who is affiliated with such marketplace seller
  within the meaning of paragraph one of subdivision (e) of section eleven
  hundred  one  of  this  article,  the marketplace seller shall be deemed
  liable as a person under a duty to act for such marketplace provider for
  purposes of subdivision one of section eleven hundred thirty-one of this
  part.
    (3) The commissioner may, in his or  her  discretion:  (A)  develop  a
  standard  provision,  or  approve a provision developed by a marketplace
  provider, in which the marketplace provider obligates itself to  collect
  the  tax  on  behalf  of  all  the  marketplace  sellers  for  whom  the
  marketplace provider facilitates sales of  tangible  personal  property,
  with  respect  to  all  sales that it facilitates for such sellers where
  delivery occurs in the state; and (B) provide by regulation or otherwise
  that the inclusion of such provision in the publicly-available agreement
  between the marketplace provider and marketplace seller  will  have  the
  same  effect  as  a  marketplace seller's acceptance of a certificate of
  collection from such marketplace provider under paragraph  two  of  this
  subdivision.




   § 1133. Liability for the tax. (a) (1) Except as otherwise provided in
  paragraph  two  of  this  subdivision  and  in  section  eleven  hundred
  thirty-seven of this part, every person  required  to  collect  any  tax
  imposed  by this article shall be personally liable for the tax imposed,
  collected or required to be  collected  under  this  article.  Any  such
  person  shall  have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from
  his customer or in respect to nonpayment of the tax by the  customer  as
  if the tax were a part of the purchase price of the property or service,
  amusement  charge  or  rent, as the case may be, and payable at the same
  time; provided, however, that the tax commission shall be  joined  as  a
  party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
    (2)  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  this article: (i) The
  commissioner shall grant the relief described in subparagraph  (iii)  of
  this  paragraph to a limited partner of a limited partnership (but not a
  partner of a limited liability partnership) or a  member  of  a  limited
  liability  company if such limited partner or member demonstrates to the
  satisfaction of the commissioner that such limited partner's or member's
  ownership interest and the percentage of the distributive share  of  the
  profits  and  losses  of  such  limited partnership or limited liability
  company are each less than fifty percent, and such  limited  partner  or
  member  was  not  under  a  duty  to act for such limited partnership or
  limited liability company in complying  with  any  requirement  of  this
  article. Provided, however, the commissioner may deny an application for
  relief  to any such limited partner or member who the commissioner finds
  has acted on behalf of such limited  partnership  or  limited  liability
  company  in  complying  with any requirement of this article or has been
  convicted of a crime provided in this chapter  or  who  has  a  past-due
  liability,  as such term is defined in section one hundred seventy-one-v
  of this chapter.
    (ii) Such limited partner or member must  submit  an  application  for
  relief,  on  a  form prescribed by the commissioner, and the information
  provided in such application must be true and complete in  all  material
  respects.  Providing  materially false or fraudulent information on such
  application shall disqualify such limited  partner  or  member  for  the
  relief described in subparagraph (iii) of this paragraph, shall void any
  agreement  with  the commissioner with respect to such relief, and shall
  result in such limited partner or member bearing  strict  liability  for
  the  total  amount of tax, interest and penalty owed by their respective
  limited partnership  or  limited  liability  company  pursuant  to  this
  subdivision.
    (iii)  A  limited  partner  of  a  limited  partnership or member of a
  limited liability company, who meets the requirements set forth in  this
  paragraph   and   whose  application  for  relief  is  approved  by  the
  commissioner, shall be liable for the percentage of the  original  sales
  and use tax liability of their respective limited partnership or limited
  liability  company  that  reflects  such  limited  partner's or member's
  ownership interest of distributive share of the profits  and  losses  of
  such  limited  partnership  or  limited  liability company, whichever is
  higher. Such original  liability  shall  include  any  interest  accrued
  thereon  up to and including the date of payment by such limited partner
  or member at the underpayment rate set by the commissioner  pursuant  to
  section  eleven  hundred forty-two of this part, and shall be reduced by
  the sum of any payments made by (A) the limited partnership  or  limited
  liability  company;  (B) any person required to collect tax not eligible
  for relief; and (C) any person required to collect tax who was  eligible
  for  relief  but had not been approved for relief by the commissioner at
  the time such payment was made. Provided, however, such limited  partner
  or  member  shall  not  be  liable  for any penalty owed by such limited


 partnership or limited liability company or any other partner or  member
  of  such  limited  partnership or limited liability company. Any payment
  made by a limited partner or member pursuant to the provisions  of  this
  paragraph  shall  not be credited against the liability of other limited
  partners or members of their respective limited partnership  or  limited
  liability  company  who  are  eligible  for  the  same relief; provided,
  however that the sum of the amounts owed by all of the persons  required
  to  collect  tax  of  a limited partnership or limited liability company
  shall not exceed the total liability  of  such  limited  partnership  or
  limited liability company.
    (b) Where any customer has failed to pay a tax imposed by this article
  to  the  person  required  to  collect the same, then in addition to all
  other rights, obligations and  remedies  provided,  such  tax  shall  be
  payable  by  the customer directly to the tax commission and it shall be
  the duty of the customer to file a return with the tax commission and to
  pay the tax to it within twenty days of the date the tax was required to
  be paid.
    (c) The tax commission may, whenever it deems  it  necessary  for  the
  proper enforcement of this article, provide by regulation that customers
  shall file returns and pay directly to the tax commission any tax herein
  imposed,  at  such times as returns are required to be filed and payment
  made by persons required to collect the tax.
    (d) (1) no person required to collect any tax imposed by this  article
  shall  advertise  or  hold  out to the public in any manner, directly or
  indirectly, that the tax imposed by this article is not considered as an
  element in the price, amusement charge or  rent  payable  by  customers.
  However, such person required to collect tax may advertise, hold out, or
  state  to a retail purchaser or to the public, that such person will pay
  the tax imposed by section eleven hundred five of this article on behalf
  of a retail purchaser, subject to the following conditions:
    (i) In so advertising, holding out, or stating to a  retail  purchaser
  or  to  the  public, such person required to collect tax shall expressly
  state on every bill, memorandum,  receipt  or  other  statement  of  the
  price, amusement charge or rent paid or payable given to such purchaser,
  that such person will pay the tax imposed by section eleven hundred five
  of  this  article on behalf of such purchaser, and such person shall not
  indicate or imply that the transaction is exempt or  excluded  from  any
  tax imposed by this article; and
    (ii)  Every bill, memorandum, receipt or other statement of the price,
  amusement charge or rent paid or payable given to such  purchaser  shall
  separately  state  the amount of tax due pursuant to such section eleven
  hundred five and that the tax was not  collected  from  such  purchaser.
  Such  person  required to collect tax shall hold such tax as trustee for
  and on account of the state; and
    (iii) A retail purchaser, who in good  faith  accepts  from  a  person
  required to collect any tax imposed by this article, a bill, memorandum,
  receipt  or  other statement of the price, amusement charge or rent that
  indicates the amount of tax due pursuant to such section eleven  hundred
  five  and  that  such person required to collect tax will be paying such
  tax on behalf of such purchaser, shall not be liable for the tax imposed
  by such section eleven  hundred  five,  or  any  interest  or  penalties
  thereon; provided, however that nothing in this subdivision shall exempt
  such  purchaser  from  any additional tax due pursuant to section eleven
  hundred ten of this article.
    (e) Applicability  of  Mobile  Telecommunications  Sourcing  Act.  The
  provisions of sections 119(c), 120, 121 and 122 of title 4 of the United
  States  Code  as  enacted  and  in  effect  on  July  twenty-eighth, two
  thousand,  to  the  extent  relevant  and  to  the  extent  required  by


 preemption,  shall  apply  to the provisions of this article in the same
  manner and with the same force and effect as if  the  language  of  such
  sections of such title 4 of the United States Code had been incorporated
  in  full into this article and had expressly referred to the taxes under
  this article, with such modifications as may be necessary  in  order  to
  adapt  the  language  of  such  provisions  to the taxes imposed by this
  article.
    (f) A marketplace provider is relieved of liability under this section
  for failure to collect the correct amount of tax to the extent that  the
  marketplace  provider  can  show  that the error was due to incorrect or
  insufficient information  given  to  the  marketplace  provider  by  the
  marketplace  seller. Provided, however, this subdivision shall not apply
  if the marketplace seller and marketplace provider are affiliated within
  the meaning of paragraph  one  of  subdivision  (e)  of  section  eleven
  hundred one of this article.




   § 1134. Registration. (a) (1) (i) Every person required to collect any
  tax  imposed by this article, other than a person who is a vendor solely
  by reason of clause (D), (E) or (F) of  subparagraph  (i)  of  paragraph
  eight  of subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred one of this article,
  commencing business or opening a  new  place  of  business,  (ii)  every
  person  purchasing  or  selling  tangible  personal  property for resale
  commencing business or opening a new  place  of  business,  (iii)  every
  person selling petroleum products including persons who or which are not
  distributors,  (iv) every person described in this subdivision who takes
  possession of or pays for business assets under circumstances  requiring
  notification  by such person to the commissioner pursuant to subdivision
  (c) of section eleven hundred  forty-one  of  this  chapter,  (v)  every
  person selling cigarettes including persons who or which are not agents,
  and  (vi)  every person described in subparagraph (i), (ii), (iii), (iv)
  or (v) of this paragraph or every person  who  is  a  vendor  solely  by
  reason  of clause (D), (E) or (F) of subparagraph (i) of paragraph eight
  of subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred one of this article who  or
  which  has had its certificate of authority revoked under paragraph four
  of this subdivision, shall file with the commissioner a  certificate  of
  registration,  in a form prescribed by the commissioner, at least twenty
  days prior to commencing business or opening a new place of business  or
  such  purchasing,  selling or taking of possession or payment, whichever
  comes first. Every person who is a vendor solely by reason of clause (D)
  of subparagraph (i) of paragraph eight of  subdivision  (b)  of  section
  eleven  hundred  one  of this article shall file with the commissioner a
  certificate of registration, in a form prescribed by such  commissioner,
  within thirty days after the day on which the cumulative total number of
  occasions  that  such  person came into the state to deliver property or
  services, for the immediately preceding four quarterly periods ending on
  the last day of February, May,  August  and  November,  exceeds  twelve.
  Every  person  who  is  a  vendor  solely  by  reason  of  clause (E) of
  subparagraph (i) of paragraph eight of subdivision (b) of section eleven
  hundred  one  of  this  article  shall  file  with  the  commissioner  a
  certificate  of registration, in a form prescribed by such commissioner,
  within thirty days after the day on which the cumulative total, for  the
  immediately  preceding  four quarterly periods ending on the last day of
  February, May, August and November, of such person's gross receipts from
  sales of property delivered in this state exceeds five hundred  thousand
  dollars  and  number of such sales exceeds one hundred. Every person who
  is a vendor solely by reason  of  clause  (F)  of  subparagraph  (i)  of
  paragraph eight of subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred one of this
  article  shall file with the commissioner a certificate of registration,
  in a form prescribed by such commissioner, within thirty days after  the
  day  on which tangible personal property in which such person retains an
  ownership interest is brought into this state by the person to whom such
  property is sold, where the person to whom such property is sold becomes
  or is a resident or uses such property in any manner in carrying  on  in
  this  state  any  employment, trade, business or profession. Information
  with respect to the notice requirements of a  purchaser,  transferee  or
  assignee  and  such  person's  liability  pursuant  to the provisions of
  subdivision (c) of section eleven  hundred  forty-one  of  this  chapter
  shall  be  included in or accompany the certificate of registration form
  furnished the applicant. The commissioner shall also include  with  such
  information  furnished  to  each applicant general information about the
  tax imposed under this article including information on  records  to  be
  kept,  returns  and  payments, notification requirements and forms. Such
  certificate of registration may be  amended  in  accordance  with  rules
  promulgated by the commissioner.


   (2)  Except  as  otherwise provided in this section, the commissioner,
  within five days after receipt of a certificate of registration filed as
  provided for in paragraph one of this subdivision, shall issue,  without
  charge,  to  each  registrant  a certificate of authority empowering the
  registrant  to  collect  the  tax  and  a  duplicate  thereof  for  each
  additional place of business of such  registrant.  Such  certificate  of
  authority  may  be  issued  for  a specified term of not less than three
  years, except that a certificate of authority issued to a  show  vendor,
  entertainment  vendor  or temporary vendor may be issued for a specified
  term of less than three years. Any certificate of authority referred  to
  in  this  paragraph shall be subject to renewal in accordance with rules
  promulgated by the commissioner. Whether  or  not  such  certificate  of
  authority  is  issued  for  a  specified term, such certificate shall be
  subject to suspension or revocation as provided  for  in  this  section.
  Each certificate or duplicate shall state the place of business to which
  it  is  applicable.  Such certificate of authority or duplicate shall be
  prominently displayed in the place of  business  of  the  registrant  to
  which  it  applies.  A  registrant  who  has  no  regular place of doing
  business shall attach such  certificate  to  each  of  the  registrant's
  carts,  stands, trucks or other merchandising devices. Such certificates
  of  authority   and   any   duplicate   shall   be   nonassignable   and
  nontransferable and shall be surrendered to the commissioner immediately
  upon  the registrant's ceasing to do business at the place named (unless
  the registrant amends the certificate of registration in accordance with
  rules promulgated by  the  commissioner)  or  in  the  event  that  such
  business never commenced.
    (3) A person, other than one described in clauses (A), (B), and (C) of
  subparagraph  (i)  of paragraph (8) of subdivision (b) of section eleven
  hundred one, and other than one described in clause (D), (E) or  (F)  of
  such  subparagraph who is required to file a certificate of registration
  with the commissioner, but who makes sales to persons within  the  state
  of  tangible  personal property or services, the use of which is subject
  to tax under  this  article,  may  if  such  person  so  elects  file  a
  certificate  of  registration  with  the  commissioner  who  may, in the
  commissioner's  discretion  and  subject  to  such  conditions  as   the
  commissioner may impose, issue to such person a certificate of authority
  to collect the compensating use tax imposed by this article.
    (4)  * (A)  Where  a  person  who holds a certificate of authority (i)
  willfully fails to file a report or return  required  by  this  article,
  (ii)  willfully files, causes to be filed, gives or causes to be given a
  report, return, certificate or affidavit  required  under  this  article
  which  is  false, (iii) willfully fails to comply with the provisions of
  paragraph two or three of subdivision  (e)  of  section  eleven  hundred
  thirty-seven  of  this article, (iv) willfully fails to prepay, collect,
  truthfully account for or pay over any tax imposed under this article or
  pursuant to the authority of article twenty-nine of  this  chapter,  (v)
  fails  to  obtain a bond pursuant to paragraph two of subdivision (e) of
  section eleven hundred thirty-seven of this part,  or  fails  to  comply
  with  a notice issued by the commissioner pursuant to paragraph three of
  such subdivision, (vi) has been convicted of a  crime  provided  for  in
  this  chapter,  (vii)  where  such person, or any person affiliated with
  such person as such term is defined in subdivision twenty-one of section
  four  hundred  seventy  of  this  chapter,  has  had  a  retail   dealer
  registration  issued  pursuant  to section four hundred eighty-a of this
  chapter revoked pursuant to  subparagraph  (iii)  of  paragraph  (a)  of
  subdivision  four  of  such section four hundred eighty-a, or (viii) has
  not obtained a valid  retail  dealer  registration  under  section  four
  hundred  eighty-a  of  this  chapter  and such person possesses or sells


 unstamped or unlawfully stamped packages of  cigarettes  three  or  more
  times  within  a  period  of  five years, the commissioner may revoke or
  suspend such  certificate  of  authority  and  all  duplicates  thereof.
  Provided,  however,  that  the  commissioner  may  revoke  or  suspend a
  certificate of authority based on (a) the grounds set  forth  in  clause
  (vi) of this subparagraph only where the conviction referred to occurred
  not  more  than  one year prior to the date of revocation or suspension;
  and provided further that where the commissioner revokes or  suspends  a
  certificate  of authority based on the grounds set forth in clause (vii)
  of this subparagraph, such suspension or revocation shall  continue  for
  as  long as the revocation of the retail dealer registration pursuant to
  section four hundred eighty-a of this chapter remains in effect, or  (b)
  the  grounds  set  forth  in  clause  (viii)  of this subparagraph, such
  suspension or revocation shall be for a period of five years.
    * NB Effective until December 31, 2024
    * (A) Where  a  person  who  holds  a  certificate  of  authority  (i)
  willfully  fails  to  file  a report or return required by this article,
  (ii) willfully files, causes to be filed, gives or causes to be given  a
  report,  return,  certificate  or  affidavit required under this article
  which is false, (iii) willfully fails to comply with the  provisions  of
  paragraph  two  or  three  of  subdivision (e) of section eleven hundred
  thirty-seven of this article, (iv) willfully fails to  prepay,  collect,
  truthfully account for or pay over any tax imposed under this article or
  pursuant  to  the  authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter, (v)
  has been convicted of a crime provided for in this chapter,  (vi)  where
  such  person,  or any person affiliated with such person as such term is
  defined in subdivision twenty-one of section  four  hundred  seventy  of
  this  chapter,  has  had a retail dealer registration issued pursuant to
  section four hundred eighty-a  of  this  chapter  suspended  or  revoked
  pursuant  to  subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (a) of subdivision four of
  such section four hundred eighty-a, or (vii) has not  obtained  a  valid
  retail  dealer  registration under section four hundred eighty-a of this
  chapter and such person  possesses  or  sells  unstamped  or  unlawfully
  stamped  packages  of  cigarettes three or more times within a period of
  five years, the commissioner may revoke or suspend such  certificate  of
  authority  and  all  duplicates  thereof.  Provided,  however,  that the
  commissioner may revoke or suspend a certificate of authority  based  on
  (a)  the grounds set forth in clause (v) of this subparagraph only where
  the conviction referred to occurred not more than one year prior to  the
  date  of  revocation  or suspension; and provided further that where the
  commissioner revokes or suspends a certificate of authority based on the
  grounds set forth in clause (vi) of this subparagraph,  such  suspension
  or revocation shall continue for as long as the revocation of the retail
  dealer  registration  pursuant  to section four hundred eighty-a of this
  chapter remains in effect, or (b) the grounds set forth in clause  (vii)
  of  this  subparagraph,  such  suspension  or  revocation shall be for a
  period of five years.
    * NB Effective December 31, 2024
    (B)  Where  a  person  files  a  certificate  of  registration  for  a
  certificate  of authority under this subdivision and in considering such
  application the commissioner ascertains that (i) any tax  imposed  under
  this  chapter  or  any  related  statute, as defined in section eighteen
  hundred of this chapter, has been finally determined to be due from such
  person and has not been paid in full, (ii) a tax due under this  article
  or any law, ordinance or resolution enacted pursuant to the authority of
  article  twenty-nine  of  this chapter has been finally determined to be
  due from an officer, director, partner or employee of such person,  and,
  where  such  person  is  a  limited  liability company, also a member or


 manager  of  such  person,  in  the  officer's,  director's,  partner's,
  member's,  manager's  or  employee's  capacity  as  a person required to
  collect tax on behalf of such person or another person and has not  been
  paid,  (iii)  such  person has been convicted of a crime provided for in
  this chapter within one year from the date on which such certificate  of
  registration is filed, (iv) an officer, director, partner or employee of
  such person, and, where such person is a limited liability company, also
  a  member  or  manager of such person, which officer, director, partner,
  member, manager or employee is a  person  required  to  collect  tax  on
  behalf  of  such  person filing a certificate of registration has in the
  officer's, director's,  partner's,  member's,  manager's  or  employee's
  capacity as a person required to collect tax on behalf of such person or
  of another person been convicted of a crime provided for in this chapter
  within  one year from the date on which such certificate of registration
  is filed, (v) a shareholder owning more than fifty percent of the number
  of shares of stock of such person (where such person is  a  corporation)
  entitling  the  holder  thereof to vote for the election of directors or
  trustees, who owned more than fifty percent of the number of such shares
  of another person (where such other person is a corporation) at the time
  any tax imposed under this chapter or any related statute as defined  in
  section  eighteen  hundred  of this chapter was finally determined to be
  due and where such tax has not been paid in full, or at  the  time  such
  other  person  was  convicted  of  a  crime provided for in this chapter
  within one year from the date on which such certificate of  registration
  is filed, (vi) a certificate of authority issued to such person has been
  revoked  or  suspended  pursuant  to  subparagraph (A) of this paragraph
  within one year from the date on which such certificate of  registration
  is  filed, (vii) a retail dealer registration issued pursuant to section
  four hundred eighty-a of this chapter to such person, or to  any  person
  affiliated  with  such  person  as  such  term is defined in subdivision
  twenty-one of section four hundred seventy of  this  chapter,  has  been
  revoked  pursuant  to subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (a) of subdivision
  four of such  section  four  hundred  eighty-a,  where  such  revocation
  remains in effect, or (viii) such person has not obtained a valid retail
  dealer  registration under section four hundred eighty-a of this chapter
  and has possessed or sold unstamped or unlawfully  stamped  packages  of
  cigarettes  three  or  more  times  within  a  period of five years, the
  commissioner may refuse to issue a certificate  of  authority;  provided
  however  that under the circumstances described in clause (viii) of this
  subparagraph, such person shall not be eligible to submit a  certificate
  of  registration  for  a certificate of authority until five years after
  its last possession or sale of unstamped or unlawfully stamped  packages
  of cigarettes within such five year period.
    (C)  In  any  of  the  foregoing  instances where the commissioner may
  suspend or revoke or refuse to issue a  certificate  of  authority,  the
  commissioner may condition the retention or issuance of a certificate of
  authority  upon the filing of a bond or the deposit of tax in the manner
  provided in paragraph two or three of subdivision (e) of section  eleven
  hundred thirty-seven.
    (D)  Notice  of  proposed  revocation,  suspension or refusal to issue
  shall be given to the person holding a certificate of  authority  issued
  pursuant  to  this  subdivision  or  to  a  person  applying  for such a
  certificate in the manner prescribed for a notice  of  determination  of
  tax  and  all  the  provisions of this article applicable to a notice of
  determination under section eleven hundred thirty-eight shall apply to a
  notice issued pursuant to this paragraph, insofar as such provisions can
  be made applicable to the notice authorized by this paragraph, with such
  modifications as may be necessary in order to adapt the language of such


 provisions to the notice authorized by this paragraph. In the case of  a
  person  applying  for  a  certificate of authority, a notice of proposed
  refusal  to  issue  shall  be  issued  within  five  days  after  timely
  registration  pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision. Upon timely
  application therefor, a hearing shall be  scheduled,  and  within  three
  months  from such application for hearing (determined with regard to any
  postponements of any scheduled hearing or conference made at the request
  of the applicant), the commissioner  shall  issue  either  a  notice  of
  refusal  or  a  certificate  of  authority. If the commissioner fails to
  issue a notice of refusal within such three month period (or such period
  as extended  pursuant  to  this  subdivision),  the  commissioner  shall
  immediately  upon  the  conclusion of such period issue a certificate of
  authority to the  applicant.  Such  notice  of  proposed  revocation  or
  suspension must be given to such person within three years from the date
  of  the act or omission described in subparagraph (A) of this paragraph,
  except that in the case of acts involving falsity or fraud, such  notice
  may be issued at any time. All of such notices shall contain a statement
  advising the person to whom it is issued that the suspension, revocation
  or refusal to issue may be challenged through a hearing process and that
  the  petition  for such challenge must be filed with the division of tax
  appeals within ninety days after the giving of such notice.
    (E) After  the  commissioner  has  suspended  or  revoked  a  person's
  certificate  of  authority,  by a notice of suspension or revocation, or
  has refused to issue a certificate of authority, by a notice of refusal,
  to such person and such decision has become final  as  provided  for  in
  this paragraph, or after a person's certificate of authority has expired
  and  such  person  has  failed to renew such certificate or obtain a new
  certificate of authority, such person is prohibited from engaging in any
  business in this state for which a certificate of authority is required.
  If despite such prohibition such person continues to be  so  engaged  in
  business,  the  commissioner  may  bring an action to enjoin such person
  from so engaging in business.
    (5)  If  the  commissioner  considers  it  necessary  for  the  proper
  administration  of  the sales and use taxes and prepaid taxes imposed by
  this article and pursuant to the authority  of  article  twenty-nine  of
  this  chapter, it may require every person under this section or section
  twelve hundred fifty-three of this chapter who holds  a  certificate  of
  authority  to file a new certificate of registration in such form and at
  such time as the  commissioner  may  prescribe  and  to  surrender  such
  certificate  of  authority. The commissioner may require such filing and
  such surrender not more often than once  every  three  years.  Upon  the
  filing  of  such  certificate  of registration and the surrender of such
  certificate of authority, the commissioner shall issue, within such time
  as the commissioner may  prescribe,  a  new  certificate  of  authority,
  without  charge,  to  each  registrant  and a duplicate thereof for each
  additional place of business of such registrant.
    (6) By January first, two thousand twenty-two,  the  department  shall
  create   and   maintain   a  publicly  accessible,  searchable  database
  containing the certificate of authority  number  and  any  corresponding
  identifying information for each vendor in the state.
    (b)  (1)  Every  show  promoter  shall, at least ten days prior to the
  opening of a show, file with the commissioner of taxation and finance  a
  notice stating the location and dates of such show, in a form prescribed
  by the commissioner of taxation and finance.
    (2)  The  commissioner of taxation and finance shall, within five days
  after the receipt of any  such  notice,  issue  to  the  show  promoter,
  without  charge,  a  permit  to operate such show, except as provided by
  paragraph five of this subdivision. No show promoter shall  rent,  lease


 or  grant  a  license  to use space for a show or operate a show without
  obtaining such permit. Such permit shall be prominently displayed at the
  main entrance to the show. However, if a notice required under paragraph
  one  has  been  properly filed, and if a permit has not been received by
  the show promoter prior to the opening of  the  show,  the  requirements
  contained  in  this subdivision with respect to obtaining and displaying
  such a permit shall be deemed to have been  complied  with,  unless  and
  until  the  show  promoter  receives  a  notice from the commissioner of
  taxation and finance, sent by registered or certified mail, denying  the
  application  for  a permit based on the existence of an order previously
  issued under paragraph five of this subdivision and in effect as of  the
  date  of  issuance  of such notice denying the application. An applicant
  shall have a right to a hearing  in  the  division  of  tax  appeals  to
  contest  such  a  notice of denial. If a permit is received after a show
  has commenced but before it has been terminated, the show promoter  must
  commence to display such permit as provided for in this paragraph.
    (3)  Any  show  promoter  who is a "person required to collect any tax
  imposed by this article" as defined in subdivision one of section eleven
  hundred thirty-one, shall comply with all  of  the  provisions  of  this
  article  relating  to such persons as well as with all of the provisions
  of this article relating to show promoters.
    (4) A show promoter shall not permit any person to display for sale or
  to sell tangible personal property or services subject to tax at a  show
  unless  such  person is registered under subdivision (a) of this section
  and displays  his  certificate  of  authority  in  accordance  with  the
  provisions of such subdivision.
    (5) Any show promoter who fails to file a notice of a show, operates a
  show  without a permit, fails to file a report of a show, files a report
  which is wilfully false, or fails to comply with any provision contained
  in this article or any regulation promulgated  by  the  commissioner  of
  taxation and finance pertaining to shows shall, after an opportunity for
  a  hearing  has  been  afforded,  be  subject  to  the revocation of all
  existing permits issued, pursuant to this section, to  operate  a  show.
  The commissioner of taxation and finance may, after an opportunity for a
  hearing  has  been  afforded,  also  issue  an  order  denying such show
  promoter a permit to operate a show for a period of not  more  than  six
  months  from the date of such order. Such penalties shall be in addition
  to any other penalties imposed under this chapter.
    (c) (1) Every entertainment promoter of an entertainment event  shall,
  at  least  twenty  days prior to the occurrence of such event, file with
  the commissioner a notice and application for an entertainment  promoter
  certificate,  stating  the  location  and  date of such event, in a form
  prescribed by the commissioner. The commissioner shall, within ten  days
  after  the  receipt  of  any  such  notice,  issue  to the entertainment
  promoter, without charge, an entertainment promoter certificate. No such
  promoter shall authorize an entertainment vendor to make sales  at  such
  an  event  if  such  promoter  has  not  obtained such certificate. Such
  certificate shall be prominently displayed at the main entrance  to  the
  event.  However,  if  a  notice  required  under this paragraph has been
  properly filed and if  a  certificate  has  not  been  received  by  the
  entertainment  promoter  prior  to the commencement of the entertainment
  event, the requirements contained in this subdivision  with  respect  to
  obtaining and displaying such a certificate shall be deemed to have been
  complied with, unless and until the entertainment promoter receives from
  the  commissioner  a  notice,  which  shall  be  sent  by  registered or
  certified mail, denying the application for a certificate based  on  the
  existence  of  any  order previously issued pursuant to this subdivision
  and in effect as of the date of issuance  of  such  notice  denying  the


 application.  An  applicant  shall  have  a  right  to  a hearing in the
  division of  tax  appeals  to  contest  such  notice  of  denial.  If  a
  certificate  is  received after an entertainment event has commenced but
  before it has ended, the entertainment promoter must commence to display
  such certificate as provided for in this paragraph.
    (2)  An  entertainment promoter shall not authorize any person to make
  taxable sales of tangible personal property at the  entertainment  event
  with respect to which he is an entertainment promoter unless such person
  is  registered  under  subdivision  (a)  of  this section and displays a
  certificate of authority in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  such
  subdivision.
    (3) An entertainment promoter who is a "person required to collect any
  tax  imposed  by  this article" as defined in subdivision one of section
  eleven hundred thirty-one, shall comply with all of  the  provisions  of
  this  article  relating  to  such  persons  as  well  as with all of the
  provisions of this article relating to entertainment promoters.
    (4) Any entertainment promoter who fails to comply with any  provision
  contained   in   this  article  or  any  regulation  prescribed  by  the
  commissioner pertaining to an entertainment promoter's requirements with
  respect to entertainment events, may, after an opportunity for a hearing
  has been  afforded,  be  subject  to  the  revocation  of  all  existing
  entertainment promoter certificates issued pursuant to this subdivision.
  The  commissioner  may also, after an opportunity for a hearing has been
  afforded,  issue  an  order  denying  such  entertainment  promoter   an
  entertainment  promoter  certificate relating to any entertainment event
  for a period of not more than six months from the date of such order.




   §  1135.  Records to be kept. (a) (1) Every person required to collect
  tax shall keep records of every sale or amusement  charge  or  occupancy
  and  of  all amounts paid, charged or due thereon and of the tax payable
  thereon, in such form as the commissioner of taxation and finance may by
  regulation require. Such records shall include a true copy of each sales
  slip, invoice, receipt, statement or memorandum upon  which  subdivision
  (a) of section eleven hundred thirty-two requires that the tax be stated
  separately.
    (2) In addition to the records required to be kept by paragraph one of
  this subdivision, retail food stores and other participants approved for
  participation in the federal food stamp program under or pursuant to the
  federal  food  stamp  act  of nineteen hundred seventy-seven (7 U.S.C. §
  2011 et seq.), as amended, whose receipts may be  subject  to  exemption
  afforded  by  subdivision  (k)  of section eleven hundred fifteen, shall
  keep  (A)  true  and  complete  copies  of  applications,   updates   of
  applications,  redemption certificates, returns and reports furnished to
  or by the United States government or this state or  their  agencies  in
  order  to  participate  in  the  food stamp program or to redeem coupons
  issued under or pursuant  to  such  federal  act,  and  (B)  records  of
  receipts  indicating  whether  payment  is  by  coupons  issued under or
  pursuant to such act.
    (b) Every show promoter shall keep a record of the date and  place  of
  each  show  and the name, address and certificate of authority number of
  every person whom he permits to display for sale  or  to  sell  tangible
  personal property or services subject to tax at such show.
    (c)  Every  entertainment promoter shall keep a record of the date and
  place of each entertainment event and the name, address and  certificate
  of  authority number of every person authorized by such promoter to make
  taxable sales of tangible personal property at such event.
    (d) Every  person  selling  or  holding  large  volumes  of  petroleum
  products  shall  keep  records  for  such  periods  and  in  the  manner
  prescribed by the commissioner pursuant to rules and  regulations.  Such
  records  shall  show  (1)  the  number  of gallons of petroleum products
  purchased, the price paid therefor, the amount of tax paid  pursuant  to
  the provisions of section eleven hundred two of this article and (2) the
  number of gallons sold, and the price paid by the purchaser to whom such
  person  sells  the petroleum products, and the amount of tax included in
  such price pursuant to the provisions of section eleven hundred  two  of
  this  article and the amount of tax collected pursuant to the provisions
  of subdivision (a) of  section  eleven  hundred  five  of  this  article
  applicable to such sale together with such additional information as the
  commissioner shall require. The amount of tax shall be calculated in the
  manner set forth in section eleven hundred eleven of this article.
    (e)  Every person selling or possessing large quantities of cigarettes
  shall keep records for such periods and in the manner prescribed by  the
  commissioner  pursuant to rules and regulations. Such records shall show
  (1) the number of cigarettes purchased, the  price  paid  therefor,  the
  person  from  whom such cigarettes were purchased, and the amount of tax
  paid pursuant to the provisions of section eleven hundred three of  this
  article  and  (2) the number of cigarettes sold, the person to whom such
  cigarettes are sold (other than a retail purchaser) and the  price  paid
  by  the  purchaser  to  whom  such  person sells the cigarettes, and the
  amount of tax included in such  price  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of
  section  eleven  hundred  three  of  this  article  or the amount of tax
  collected pursuant to the  provisions  of  subdivision  (a)  of  section
  eleven  hundred  five  of this article applicable to such sale, together
  with such additional information as the commissioner shall require.


   (f) Every materialman described in paragraph two of subdivision (a) of
  section eleven hundred thirty-two of this part shall, in addition to the
  records required to be kept by paragraph one of subdivision (a) of  this
  section,  keep  the  following  records  with  respect  to  each sale of
  building  materials  or  services  described  in  such  paragraph two of
  subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred thirty-two of this part  to  a
  contractor,  subcontractor  or repairman: (1) the date of such sale; (2)
  proof that the sale meets the qualifications described in such paragraph
  two; (3) the amount of credit, if any, extended by such  materialman  to
  such  contractor, subcontractor or repairman for each such sale; (4) the
  terms for payment of the purchase price or repayment of any such credit;
  and (5) the date or dates on which such purchase price is paid  or  such
  credit  is repaid, in part or whole, and the amount of each such payment
  or repayment. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision (g) of  this
  section,  the records referred to in this subdivision shall be preserved
  by such materialman for a period of three years from the date the tax on
  each such sale is paid over  to  the  commissioner  in  full;  provided,
  however,  that  the commissioner may consent to their destruction within
  that period or may require that they be kept longer.
    (g) Such records shall be available for inspection and examination  at
  any  time upon demand by the tax commission or its duly authorized agent
  or employee and shall be preserved for a period of three  years,  except
  that  the  tax  commission  may consent to their destruction within that
  period or may require that they be kept longer. Such records may be kept
  within the meaning of this section when reproduced on any  photographic,
  photostatic,  microfilm,  micro-card,  miniature  photographic  or other
  process which actually reproduced the original record.
    (h) Notwithstanding the provisions of section three hundred  five  and
  three  hundred  nine  of  the state technology law or any other law, the
  commissioner may require any person who has elected to  maintain  in  an
  electronic  format  any portion of the records required to be maintained
  by that person under  this  article,  to  make  the  electronic  records
  available  and  accessible to the commissioner, notwithstanding that the
  records are also maintained in a hard copy format.




   §  1136.  Returns.   (a)(1) Every person required to register with the
  commissioner as provided in section eleven hundred thirty-four  of  this
  part whose taxable receipts, amusement charges and rents total less than
  three hundred thousand dollars, or in the case of any such person who is
  a  distributor  whose  sales  of  petroleum products total less than one
  hundred thousand  gallons,  in  every  quarter  of  the  preceding  four
  quarters,  shall  only  file  a  return quarterly with the commissioner.
  Provided, however, that if the commissioner in the exercise  of  his  or
  her discretion deems it necessary to protect the revenues to be obtained
  under  this article, he or she may give notice requiring such person, in
  addition to filing a quarterly return,  to  file  either  short-form  or
  long-form part quarterly returns, as specified in such notice.
    (2)  Every  person  required  to  register  with  the  commissioner as
  provided in section  eleven  hundred  thirty-four  of  this  part  whose
  taxable  receipts,  amusement  charges  and  rents  total  three hundred
  thousand dollars or more, or in the case of any such  person  who  is  a
  distributor whose sales of petroleum products total one hundred thousand
  gallons  or  more, in any quarter of the preceding four quarters, shall,
  in addition to filing a quarterly return described in paragraph  one  of
  this  subdivision,  and  except  as otherwise provided in section eleven
  hundred two or eleven hundred three  of  this  article,  file  either  a
  long-form   or   short-form   part-quarterly  return  monthly  with  the
  commissioner.
    (3) However, a person required to register with  the  commissioner  as
  provided in section eleven hundred thirty-four of this part only because
  such  person  is  purchasing  or  selling tangible personal property for
  resale, and who is not required to  collect  any  tax  or  pay  any  tax
  directly   to  the  commissioner  under  this  article,  shall  file  an
  information return  annually  in  such  form  as  the  commissioner  may
  prescribe.  Likewise,  a  person, who is required to register and who is
  selling petroleum products who is not a distributor of motor fuel, shall
  file an information return  quarterly  or,  if  the  commissioner  deems
  necessary, monthly, in such form as the commissioner shall prescribe.
    (4)  The  return of a vendor of tangible personal property or services
  shall show such vendor's receipts from sales and the number  of  gallons
  of any motor fuel or diesel motor fuel sold and also the aggregate value
  of tangible personal property and services and number of gallons of such
  fuels  sold by the vendor, the use of which is subject to tax under this
  article,  and  the  amount  of  tax  payable  thereon  pursuant  to  the
  provisions  of  section  eleven  hundred  thirty-seven of this part. The
  return of a recipient of amusement charges shall show all  such  charges
  and the amount of tax thereon, and the return of an operator required to
  collect  tax  on  rents shall show all rents received or charged and the
  amount of tax thereon. The return of a marketplace seller shall  exclude
  the  receipts from a sale of tangible personal property facilitated by a
  marketplace provider if, in regard to such  sale:  (A)  the  marketplace
  seller   has   timely  received  in  good  faith  a  properly  completed
  certificate  of  collection  from  the  marketplace  provider   or   the
  marketplace   provider   has   included  a  provision  approved  by  the
  commissioner in the publicly-available agreement between the marketplace
  provider and the marketplace seller as described in subdivision  one  of
  section  eleven hundred thirty-two of this part, and (B) the information
  provided by the marketplace seller to  the  marketplace  provider  about
  such tangible personal property is accurate.
    (5)  The  returns  of  any seller of petroleum products shall show the
  number of  gallons  of  petroleum  products  sold,  together  with  such
  additional  information  as  the  commissioner shall require in order to
  certify the amount of taxes, penalties and  interest  payable  to  local


 taxing  jurisdictions  imposed  on the sale or use of petroleum products
  pursuant to the provisions of section twelve hundred sixty-one  of  this
  chapter.
    (6)  The  returns of any seller of cigarettes shall show the amount of
  prepaid tax assumed or paid thereon and passed  through,  together  with
  such additional information as the commissioner shall require.
    (7)  Taxable  receipts  as  used in this section shall include taxable
  receipts from the sale of petroleum  products  and  cigarettes  and  any
  receipts  from the sale of motor fuel or diesel motor fuel or cigarettes
  in this state whether or not such receipts  are  subject  to  the  taxes
  imposed  by  section  eleven  hundred  two, eleven hundred three, eleven
  hundred five or eleven hundred ten of this  article  and  regardless  of
  whether  the  provisions  of  section  eleven  hundred  twenty or eleven
  hundred twenty-one of this article are applicable to the  taxes  imposed
  in  respect  of  such  receipts  or  numbers of gallons of motor fuel or
  diesel motor fuel sold.
    (8) For purposes of this article the term  "long-form,  part-quarterly
  return"  shall  mean  a  return in a form determined by the commissioner
  providing for the calculation of the actual sales and  compensating  use
  taxes  for  the  preceding month in the manner set forth in subdivisions
  (a) and (b) of section eleven  hundred  thirty-seven  of  this  part.  A
  person  filing a long-form, part-quarterly return for each of the months
  contained in a quarter shall also be required to file a quarterly return
  for such quarter.
    (9) For purposes of this article the term "short-form,  part-quarterly
  return"  shall  mean a return which shall be available for use in filing
  as a return for the first two months of any quarter and only by a person
  required to file a return monthly who has had at least  four  successive
  quarterly  tax  periods  immediately  preceding  the month for which the
  return is to be filed and  who  elects  such  use,  and  is  in  a  form
  determined  by  the  commissioner  and  providing for the calculation of
  one-third of the total state and local sales and compensating use  taxes
  paid  by the person to the commissioner in the comparable quarter of the
  immediately preceding year under  this  article  and  as  taxes  imposed
  pursuant  to  the  authority  of article twenty-nine with respect to all
  receipts, amusement charges and rents.
    (b) The returns and information returns required by this section to be
  filed quarterly shall be filed for quarterly periods ending on the  last
  day  of February, May, August and November of each year, and each return
  and each information return shall be filed within twenty days after  the
  end  of  the  quarterly  period covered thereby. The returns required by
  this section to be filed monthly shall  be  filed  for  monthly  periods
  ending  on  the  last  day  of each month and each return shall be filed
  within twenty days after the end of each prior  month.  The  information
  returns  required  to  be filed annually shall be filed for twelve month
  periods ending on the last day of  May  of  each  year,  and  each  such
  information  return  shall  be filed within twenty days after the end of
  the twelve month period covered thereby.
    (c) The tax commission may  permit  or  require  returns  to  be  made
  covering other periods and upon such dates as it may specify. If the tax
  commission  deems  it  necessary  in  order to insure the payment of the
  taxes imposed by this article, it may require returns  to  be  made  for
  shorter   periods  than  those  prescribed  pursuant  to  the  foregoing
  subdivisions of this section, and upon such dates as it may specify.
    (d) The form of returns shall be prescribed by the tax commission  and
  shall  contain  such information as it may deem necessary for the proper
  administration of this  article.  The  commission  may  require  amended


 returns  to  be filed within twenty days after notice and to contain the
  information specified in the notice.
    (e) The tax commission may by regulation require lessors as defined in
  paragraph  (8)  of subdivision (d) of section eleven hundred one to file
  information returns showing all leases, subleases and  licenses  to  use
  granted  to  persons  who  make amusement charges, and may prescribe the
  form of such returns, the time  when  they  are  to  be  filed  and  the
  information to be contained therein.
    (f)  Every  show  promoter  shall file a report monthly, within twenty
  days after the end of the prior month, for all  shows  with  respect  to
  which  he  was a show promoter in such prior month, listing the date and
  place of each show and the name, address and  certificate  of  authority
  number,  by  show, of every person whom he permitted to display for sale
  or to sell tangible personal property or services subject to tax at such
  show.  Every person shall furnish the show promoter of any show at which
  he displays for sale or sells tangible  personal  property  or  services
  subject to tax, with a statement of his name, address and certificate of
  authority  number  for  the  show  promoter's  use  in filing the report
  required herein.
    (g) Every entertainment promoter shall file a report  monthly,  within
  twenty  days  after  the  end  of the prior month, for all entertainment
  events with respect to which he was an entertainment  promoter  in  such
  prior  month,  listing  the  date  and place of each such event, and the
  name, address and certificate of authority number, by  event,  of  every
  person  who  made  taxable  sales  of tangible personal property at such
  event.  Every  entertainment  vendor  shall  furnish  the  entertainment
  promoter  of  any entertainment event at which he makes taxable sales of
  tangible personal  property,  with  a  statement  containing  his  name,
  address  and  certificate  of  authority  number,  for the entertainment
  promoter's use in filing the report required herein.
    (h) The commissioner may, by regulation, require any person registered
  or required to be registered with the commissioner under section  eleven
  hundred  thirty-four of this article to file a report regarding sales in
  this state of tangible personal property or services by such  person  to
  itinerant  vendors  where  such  sales  are  sales  for resale. Any such
  report, if required to be filed by the commissioner, shall  contain  the
  name  and  certificate of authority number of every itinerant vendor who
  purchases tangible personal property or services for  resale  from  such
  person,  the  sales  for resale made to each such vendor and the amounts
  paid, charged or due thereon, together with such  other  information  as
  the commissioner may require. The commissioner may prescribe the form of
  such  report  and shall indicate the time when it is to be filed and the
  period to be covered, provided that such reports may not be required  to
  be filed more frequently than on a quarterly basis. For purposes of this
  subdivision,  the term "itinerant vendor" shall include a person with no
  permanent and fixed place of business in this state from which it  makes
  sales  or renders services subject to tax, such as street peddlers, show
  vendors or any similar  vendors  who  transport  a  supply  of  tangible
  personal  property  from  place to place, whether upon trucks, wagons or
  otherwise, exposing such property for sale, soliciting  and  negotiating
  sales,  and immediately delivering the property, but shall not include a
  person who makes sales  or  renders  services  by  sample,  brochure  or
  catalogue for future delivery.
    (i)  (1)  The  following  persons  must file, in addition to any other
  return required by this chapter, annual  information  returns  with  the
  commissioner  providing  the  information  specified  below  about their
  transactions with vendors, hotel operators, and recipients of  amusement
  charges:


   (A)  Every  insurer licensed to issue motor vehicle physical damage or
  motor vehicle property damage liability  insurance  for  motor  vehicles
  registered in this state if, during the period covered by the return, it
  has  paid consideration or an amount under an insurance contract for the
  servicing or repair of a motor vehicle on behalf of an insured. For each
  person  to  whom  the  insurer  has  paid  the  consideration  or amount
  described in the preceding sentence, the return must  report  the  total
  amount  paid  for that period, along with the other information required
  by paragraph two of this subdivision.
    (B) Every franchisor, as defined by section six hundred eighty-one  of
  the  general  business law, that has at least one franchisee, as defined
  by subdivision four of section six hundred  eighty-one  of  the  general
  business  law,  that  is  required to be registered under section eleven
  hundred thirty-four of this part. For each franchisee, the  return  must
  include  the gross sales of the franchisee in this state reported by the
  franchisee  to  the  franchisor,  the  total  amount  of  sales  by  the
  franchisor  to the franchisee, and any income reported to the franchisor
  by each franchisee, along with the information required by paragraph two
  of this subdivision.
    (C) Every wholesaler, as defined by section  three  of  the  alcoholic
  beverage control law, if it has made a sale of an alcoholic beverage, as
  defined  by  section  four  hundred  twenty  of  this  chapter,  without
  collecting sales or use tax during the period  covered  by  the  return,
  except  (i) a sale to a person that has furnished an exempt organization
  certificate to the wholesaler for that sale; or (ii) a sale  to  another
  wholesaler  whose  license under the alcoholic beverage control law does
  not allow it to make retail sales of the alcoholic  beverage.  For  each
  vendor,  operator,  or  recipient to whom the wholesaler has made a sale
  without collecting sales  or  compensating  use  tax,  the  return  must
  include the total value of those sales made during the period covered by
  the  return  (excepting  the  sales described in clauses (i) and (ii) of
  this subparagraph) and the vendor's,  operator's  or  recipient's  state
  liquor  authority license number, along with the information required by
  paragraph two of this subdivision.
    (D)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  subparagraph  (C)  of  this
  paragraph,  a person operating pursuant to any of the following licenses
  shall not be subject to any of the requirements of this subdivision: (i)
  a farm winery license, as  provided  in  section  seventy-six-a  of  the
  alcoholic  beverage  control  law; (ii) a winery license, as provided in
  section seventy-six of the alcoholic beverage  control  law,  where  the
  number  of  gallons  of  wine,  cider and mead produced annually by such
  person does not exceed the annual  limits  on  the  number  of  finished
  gallons  of  wine,  cider  and  mead  permitted to be produced by a farm
  winery under subdivision eight of section seventy-six-a of the alcoholic
  beverage control law; (iii) a farm distillery license,  as  provided  in
  subdivision two-c of section sixty-one of the alcoholic beverage control
  law; (iv) a distiller's license, as provided in section sixty-one of the
  alcoholic  beverage  control  law, where the number of gallons of liquor
  produced annually by such person does not exceed the  annual  limits  on
  the  number  of  gallons  of  liquor  permitted to be produced by a farm
  distillery under paragraph (f) of subdivision two-c of section sixty-one
  of the alcoholic beverage control law; (v) a  farm  cidery  license,  as
  provided in section fifty-eight-c of the alcoholic beverage control law;
  (vi)  a  cider producers' license, as provided in section fifty-eight of
  the alcoholic beverage control law, where the number of gallons of cider
  produced annually by such person does not exceed the  annual  limits  on
  the number of gallons of cider permitted to be produced by a farm cidery
  under subdivision ten of section fifty-eight-c of the alcoholic beverage


 control  law;  (vii)  a  farm  brewery  license,  as provided in section
  fifty-one-a of the alcoholic beverage control  law;  (viii)  a  brewer's
  license,  as  provided  in  section  fifty-one of the alcoholic beverage
  control  law,  where  the  number of finished barrels of beer, cider and
  braggot produced annually by such person  does  not  exceed  the  annual
  number  of  finished  barrels of beer, cider and braggot permitted to be
  produced by a farm brewery under subdivision ten of section  fifty-one-a
  of  the  alcoholic beverage control law; (ix) a farm meadery license, as
  provided in section thirty-one of the alcoholic beverage control law; or
  (x) a mead producers' license, as provided  in  section  thirty  of  the
  alcoholic  beverage control law, where the number of gallons of mead and
  braggot produced annually by such person  does  not  exceed  the  annual
  number  of finished barrels of mead and braggot permitted to be produced
  by a farm meadery under subdivision ten of  section  thirty-one  of  the
  alcoholic  beverage  control  law.  Nothing  in  this subparagraph shall
  exempt a person  operating  pursuant  to  multiple  licenses  under  the
  alcoholic beverage control law from the requirements of subparagraph (C)
  of  this  paragraph  if  such person produces an amount of any alcoholic
  beverage in excess of the amounts permitted to be produced annually by a
  person who holds only a farm winery, farm cidery, farm distillery,  farm
  brewery  or  farm  meadery  license  for  such  beverage, nor shall this
  section exempt any person  holding  a  wholesalers'  license  under  the
  alcoholic beverage control law from the requirements of subparagraph (C)
  of this paragraph.
    (2)  The  returns  required  by paragraph one of this subdivision must
  also include,  for  each  vendor,  operator,  or  recipient  about  whom
  information  is  required  to be reported under such paragraph, the name
  and address, and the certificate of authority or federal  identification
  number,  and  any  other  information  required by the commissioner. The
  commissioner  may,  in  the  commissioner's  discretion,   require   the
  reporting  of  less  than  all  the information otherwise required to be
  reported by this paragraph and paragraph one of this subdivision.
    (3) The returns required by paragraph one of this subdivision must  be
  filed  annually  on  or  before  March twentieth and must cover the four
  sales  tax  quarterly   periods   immediately   preceding   such   date.
  Notwithstanding  section  three hundred five of the state technology law
  or  any  other  law  to  the  contrary,  the  returns  must   be   filed
  electronically in the manner prescribed by the commissioner.
    (4)  Any  person required to file a return under paragraph one of this
  subdivision must, on or before March twentieth,  give  to  each  vendor,
  operator, or recipient about whom information is required to be reported
  in   the   return   the  information  pertaining  to  that  person.  The
  commissioner may prescribe a form to be used to provide the  information
  required to be given by this paragraph.
    (5)  Nothing  in  this  subdivision  is  to  be construed to limit the
  persons from  whom  the  commissioner  can  secure  information  or  the
  information  the commissioner can require from those persons pursuant to
  the commissioner's authority under section eleven hundred forty-three of
  this part or any other provision of law.




   §  1137-A.  Returns of estimated tax and payments. (a) Notwithstanding
  any  other  provision  of  this  article,  every  person  whose  taxable
  receipts,  amusement  charges  and  rents totaled three hundred thousand
  dollars or more in  the  quarterly  period  ending  November  thirtieth,
  nineteen  hundred  seventy-five,  shall  file,  with  or  as part of the
  quarterly return and  payment  due  March  twentieth,  nineteen  hundred
  seventy-six, a return setting forth the total sales and compensating use
  taxes  estimated  to  be  payable by such person for the month of March,
  nineteen hundred seventy-six calculated for such month in the manner set
  forth in subdivisions (a) and (b) of section eleven hundred thirty-seven
  and pay to the tax commission the  tax  so  calculated.  Any  adjustment
  necessary to properly report and pay the tax for March, nineteen hundred
  seventy-six  shall  be  reported on and paid with the monthly return due
  April twentieth, nineteen hundred seventy-six.  The penalty provided for
  in subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred forty-five shall apply  for
  purposes of the return and payment of estimated tax required to be filed
  and  paid  under  this  subdivision.  Provided,  however,  no penalty or
  interest shall be payable with respect to such  return  and  payment  of
  estimated  tax  if such return is timely filed, accompanied by a payment
  of not less than ninety percent of the tax as finally determined  to  be
  due  and  payable  for  March,  nineteen  hundred seventy-six. Provided,
  further, that interest at the rate authorized under subdivision nine  of
  section  eleven  hundred  forty-two, shall be payable upon the amount of
  any underpayment of the tax due with such return, but not  beyond  April
  twentieth, nineteen hundred seventy-six.
    (b)   For   the   period  commencing  March  first,  nineteen  hundred
  seventy-seven  and  ending  February  twenty-eighth,  nineteen   hundred
  eighty-three, every person required to file a monthly return pursuant to
  subdivision  (a) of section eleven hundred thirty-six, shall file, on or
  before each twentieth day of March, with  or  as  part  of  the  monthly
  return  and  payment  otherwise  due  in  such  month,  either:    (i) a
  long-form, part-quarterly return  setting  forth  the  total  sales  and
  compensating  use  taxes estimated to be payable by such person for such
  month of March calculated for such month in  the  manner  set  forth  in
  subdivisions  (a)  and  (b)  of section eleven hundred thirty-seven; or,
  (ii) in the event such person is otherwise eligible  and  so  elects,  a
  short-form,  part-quarterly  return,  and in either case, pay to the tax
  commission the tax calculated thereunder. Any  adjustment  necessary  to
  properly  report and pay the tax for March shall be reported on and paid
  with the monthly return due in April.
    (c)  For  the  period  commencing  March   first,   nineteen   hundred
  eighty-three   and   ending   February  twenty-eight,  nineteen  hundred
  ninety-one, every person required to file a monthly return  pursuant  to
  subdivision  (a)  of  section eleven hundred thirty-six of this article,
  shall file, on or before each twentieth day of March, with or as part of
  the monthly return and payment otherwise due  in  such  month,  a  March
  estimated  return  setting forth, either: (i) the sales and compensating
  use taxes estimated to be payable by such person for such month of March
  calculated for such month in the manner set forth in  paragraph  two  of
  subdivision  (c) of section eleven hundred thirty-seven; or, (ii) in the
  event such person has had at least four successive quarterly tax periods
  immediately preceding the March for which the return is to be filed  and
  so  elects, one-third of the sales and compensating use taxes payable by
  such person to the  commissioner  for  the  comparable  quarter  of  the
  immediately preceding year calculated for such comparable quarter in the
  manner  set  forth in paragraph one of subdivision (c) of section eleven
  hundred thirty-seven. In either case,  such  person  shall  pay  to  the
  commissioner the tax so calculated. Any adjustment necessary to properly


 report  and pay the tax for March shall be reported on and paid with the
  monthly return due in April.
    (d) Except as otherwise provided in this article and to the extent not
  inconsistent  with  this  section, all of the provisions of this article
  shall apply for purposes of the  estimated  tax  provided  for  in  this
  section.




   §  1138.  Determination  of  tax. (a) (1) If a return required by this
  article is not filed,  or  if  a  return  when  filed  is  incorrect  or
  insufficient,  the  amount  of  tax  due  shall  be  determined  by  the
  commissioner from such information as may be  available.  If  necessary,
  the tax may be estimated on the basis of external indices, such as stock
  on  hand,  purchases,  rental  paid, number of rooms, location, scale of
  rents or charges, comparable rents or charges,  type  of  accommodations
  and service, number of employees or other factors. In the case of retail
  food  stores  and  other  participants approved for participation in the
  federal food stamp program under or pursuant to the federal  food  stamp
  act  of  nineteen  hundred  seventy-seven  (7 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.), as
  amended, whose records are incomplete or inadequate  to  determine  tax,
  the  external indices upon which tax may be estimated and determined may
  also  include  information  contained  in   applications,   updates   of
  applications,  redemption  certificates,  returns and reports which such
  retail food stores and other participants furnish to or are furnished by
  the United States government or this state or their  agencies  in  order
  for such retail food stores and other participants to participate in the
  food stamp program or to redeem coupons issued under or pursuant to such
  food  stamp act and any other available information considered relevant.
  Notice of such determination shall be mailed to the  person  or  persons
  liable   for  the  collection  or  payment  of  the  tax.  A  notice  of
  determination shall be mailed by certified or  registered  mail  to  the
  person or persons liable for the collection or payment of the tax at his
  last known address in or out of this state. If such person or persons is
  deceased  or  under a legal disability, a notice of determination may be
  mailed to his last known address in or out of  this  state,  unless  the
  department   has  received  notice  of  the  existence  of  a  fiduciary
  relationship with respect to the taxpayer. After ninety  days  from  the
  mailing of a notice of determination, such notice shall be an assessment
  of  the  amount  of  tax  specified  in  such  notice, together with the
  interest, additions to tax and penalties stated in such  notice,  except
  only  for  any  such  tax  or other amounts as to which the taxpayer has
  within such ninety day period applied to the division of tax appeals for
  a  hearing,  or  unless  the  commissioner  of  his  own  motion   shall
  redetermine  the  same. If the notice of determination is addressed to a
  person outside of the United States, such period shall  be  one  hundred
  fifty days instead of ninety days.
    (2)  Whenever  such  tax is estimated as provided for in this section,
  such notice shall contain a statement in bold  face  type  conspicuously
  placed  on such notice advising the taxpayer: that the amount of the tax
  was estimated; that the tax may be challenged through a hearing process;
  and that the petition for such challenge must  be  filed  with  the  tax
  commission within ninety days.
    (3)  (A)  The  liability  of  a  purchaser,  transferee or assignee of
  business assets sold, transferred or assigned in bulk for the payment to
  the state of taxes determined to be due from the seller,  transferor  or
  assignor  arising  under  subdivision  (c)  of  section  eleven  hundred
  forty-one of this chapter  shall  be  an  assessment  of  the  liability
  determined  unless  the purchaser, transferee or assignee, within ninety
  days after the giving of notice by the tax commission to such purchaser,
  transferee or assignee of the total amount of any tax or taxes which the
  state claims to be due from the seller, transferor  or  assignor,  shall
  apply  to the tax commission for a hearing or unless the tax commission,
  on its own motion, shall  redetermine  such  liability.  Where  the  tax
  commission  determines  that  the amount of taxes claimed to be due from
  the seller, transferor or assignor is erroneous or excessive in whole or
  in part it shall, on behalf of the purchaser,  transferee  or  assignee,


 determine  the amount of tax or taxes properly due and if such amount is
  less than the amount of taxes for which the purchaser  would  have  been
  liable  in  the  absence  of  such  determination  it  shall reduce such
  liability  accordingly.  The  commission  may,  on its motion, abate, on
  behalf of the purchaser, transferee or assignee, any part of  the  taxes
  determined  to  be erroneous or excessive, whether or not such taxes had
  become finally and irrevocably fixed.
    (B) The liability, pursuant  to  subdivision  (a)  of  section  eleven
  hundred  thirty-three  of  this  article,  of  any  officer, director or
  employee of a corporation or  of  a  dissolved  corporation,  member  or
  employee  of  a  partnership or employee of an individual proprietorship
  who as such officer, director, employee or member is under a duty to act
  for  such  corporation,  partnership  or  individual  proprietorship  in
  complying  with  any  requirement  of  this article for the tax imposed,
  collected or required to be collected, or for the  tax  required  to  be
  paid  or  paid  over  to  the tax commission under this article, and the
  amount of such tax liability (whether or not a  return  is  filed  under
  this  article,  whether  or  not  such return when filed is incorrect or
  insufficient, or where the tax shown to be due on the return filed under
  this article has not been paid or has not been paid in  full)  shall  be
  determined  by  the  tax  commission  in  the  manner  provided  for  in
  paragraphs one and two of this subdivision. Such determination shall  be
  an  assessment of the tax and liability for the tax with respect to such
  person unless such person, within ninety days after the giving of notice
  of such determination, shall apply to the division of tax appeals for  a
  hearing.    If  such  determination  is  identical to or arises out of a
  previously issued determination of tax  of  the  corporation,  dissolved
  corporation,  partnership  or  individual  proprietorship for which such
  person is under a duty to act, an application filed with the division of
  tax  appeals  on  behalf  of  the  corporation,  dissolved  corporation,
  partnership  or individual proprietorship shall be deemed to include any
  and all subsequently  issued  personal  determinations  and  a  separate
  application  to  the  division of tax appeals for a hearing shall not be
  required. The tax commission  may,  nevertheless,  of  its  own  motion,
  redetermine  such  determination  of tax or liability for tax. Where the
  tax commission determines or redetermines that the amount of tax claimed
  to be due from a vendor of tangible personal  property  or  services,  a
  recipient  of  amusement charges, or an operator of a hotel is erroneous
  or excessive in whole or in part, it shall redetermine the amount of tax
  properly due from any such person as a person required  to  collect  tax
  with  respect to such vendor, recipient, or operator, and if such amount
  is less than the amount of tax for which such  person  would  have  been
  liable in the absence of such determination or redetermination, it shall
  reduce  such liability accordingly. Furthermore, the tax commission may,
  of its own motion, abate on behalf of any such person, any part  of  the
  tax  determined to be erroneous or excessive whether or not such tax had
  become finally and irrevocably fixed with respect to such person but  no
  claim  for  abatement may be filed by any such person. The provisions of
  this paragraph shall not be construed to limit in any manner the  powers
  of  the attorney general under subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred
  forty-one or the powers of the tax commission to issue a  warrant  under
  subdivision  (b)  of such section against any person whose liability has
  become finally and irrevocably fixed.
    (C) The liability of any person as an owner of a filling station,  for
  the   penalty   imposed  by  subparagraph  (vii)  of  paragraph  one  of
  subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred forty-five, and the amount  of
  such   penalty   shall   be  determined  by  the  tax  commission.  Such
  determination shall be an assessment of the amount of and liability  for


 penalty  with  respect  to such person unless such person, within ninety
  days after the giving of notice of such determination,  shall  apply  to
  the  tax commission for a hearing. The tax commission may, nevertheless,
  of  its  own  motion,  redetermine  such  determination or liability for
  penalty. Furthermore, the tax commission may, of its own  motion,  abate
  any  part of the penalty determined to be erroneous or excessive whether
  or not such penalty  has  become  finally  and  irrevocably  fixed  with
  respect  to  such  person but no claim for abatement may be filed by any
  such person. The provisions of this paragraph shall not be construed  to
  limit in any manner the powers of the attorney general under subdivision
  (a) of section eleven hundred forty-one of this article or the powers of
  the  tax  commission  to  issue  a warrant under subdivision (b) of such
  section against any  person  whose  liability  has  become  finally  and
  irrevocably fixed.
    (D)  The  liability  of any person, as an owner of a place of business
  selling cigarettes at retail, for the penalty  imposed  by  subparagraph
  (viii)  of  paragraph  one  of subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred
  forty-five of this article and the  amount  of  such  penalty  shall  be
  determined   by   the  commissioner.  Such  determination  shall  be  an
  assessment of the amount of and liability for such penalty with  respect
  to  such person, unless such person, within ninety days after the giving
  of notice of such determination, shall apply  to  the  division  of  tax
  appeals  for  a  hearing.  The  commissioner  may,  nevertheless, on the
  commissioner's own motion, redetermine such determination.  Furthermore,
  the  commissioner  may, on the commissioner's own motion, abate any part
  of the penalty determined to be erroneous or excessive  whether  or  not
  such  penalty  has  become finally and irrevocably fixed with respect to
  such person; but no claim for abatement may be filed by any such person.
  The provisions of this paragraph shall not be construed to limit in  any
  manner  the  powers  of  the  attorney  general under subdivision (a) of
  section eleven hundred forty-one of this article or the  powers  of  the
  commissioner  to  issue  a warrant under subdivision (b) of such section
  against any person whose liability has become  finally  and  irrevocably
  fixed.
    (E)  In  addition  to any other liability a credit card issuer or fuel
  distributor may have, the commissioner shall determine any or all of the
  following liabilities: (1) any tax, interest or penalty liability  of  a
  credit  card issuer or fuel distributor for any credit allowed or refund
  paid under subdivision (h) of section eleven hundred thirty-nine of this
  part which was erroneously, illegally or unconstitutionally  allowed  or
  paid  to such credit card issuer or fuel distributor, or (2) the penalty
  imposed by subparagraph (ix) of paragraph  one  of  subdivision  (a)  of
  section  eleven  hundred  forty-five of this part. In any such instance,
  the commissioner shall give the credit card issuer or  fuel  distributor
  notice  of  such  determination in the manner described in paragraph one
  and two of this subdivision. Such determination shall be  an  assessment
  of   any   such  liability  unless  such  credit  card  issuer  or  fuel
  distributor, within ninety days after the  giving  of  such  notice  and
  determination,  shall  apply  to  the  commissioner  for  a hearing. The
  commissioner may, nevertheless, of his or her  own  motion,  redetermine
  such   determination   or   liability   for  penalty.  Furthermore,  the
  commissioner may, of his or her  own  motion,  abate  any  part  of  the
  penalty  determined  to  be  erroneous  or excessive whether or not such
  penalty has become finally and irrevocably fixed with  respect  to  such
  issuer  or  fuel  distributor  but no claim of abatement may be filed by
  such issuer or fuel distributor. The provisions of this paragraph  shall
  not  be  construed  to  limit  in  any manner the powers of the attorney
  general under subdivision (a) of section  eleven  hundred  forty-one  of


 this  part  or  the  powers of the commissioner to issue a warrant under
  subdivision (b)  of  such  section  against  any  such  issuer  or  fuel
  distributor whose liability has become finally and irrevocably fixed.
    (4)  After  the hearing provided for in paragraph one or three of this
  subdivision, the division of tax appeals shall give notice  promptly  by
  registered  or certified mail of the determination of the administrative
  law judge to the petitioner and to  the  commissioner  of  taxation  and
  finance.  Such determination may be reviewed by the tax appeals tribunal
  as provided in article forty of this chapter. The decision  of  the  tax
  appeals  tribunal  may  be  reviewed as provided in section two thousand
  sixteen of this chapter. Such a proceeding for judicial review shall not
  be instituted unless the amount of any tax sought to be  reviewed,  with
  penalties  and  interest  thereon, if any, shall be first deposited with
  the commissioner of taxation and finance and there shall be  filed  with
  the  commissioner  of  taxation  and finance an undertaking, issued by a
  surety company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state  and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency  and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the supreme
  court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding  be  dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of the proceeding, or at the option of the
  petitioner  such undertaking filed with the commissioner of taxation and
  finance may be in a sum sufficient to cover  the  taxes,  penalties  and
  interest thereon stated in such determination plus the costs and charges
  which  may  accrue  against him in the prosecution of the proceeding, in
  which event the petitioner shall not be required to deposit such  taxes,
  penalties  and  interest as a condition precedent to the commencement of
  the proceeding. The preceding sentence shall not apply to  a  proceeding
  brought  to  review  a  determination  made  under  subparagraph  (B) of
  paragraph three of this subdivision.
    (b) If the tax commission believes that the collection of any tax will
  be jeopardized by delay it may determine the  amount  of  such  tax  and
  assess  the  same,  together with all interest and penalties provided by
  law, against any person liable therefor  prior  to  the  filing  of  his
  return  and  prior  to the date when his return is required to be filed.
  The amount so determined  shall  become  due  and  payable  to  the  tax
  commission  by  the  person  against  whom such a jeopardy assessment is
  made, as soon as notice  thereof  is  given  to  him  personally  or  by
  registered  or certified mail. The provisions of subdivision (a) of this
  section shall apply to any such determination except to the extent  that
  they  may  be  inconsistent with the provisions of this subdivision. The
  tax commission may abate  any  jeopardy  assessment  if  it  finds  that
  jeopardy  does  not exist. The collection of any jeopardy assessment may
  be stayed by filing with the tax commission a bond issued  by  a  surety
  company  authorized  to  transact business in this state and approved by
  the  superintendent  of  financial   services   as   to   solvency   and
  responsibility,  conditioned  upon  payment  of  the amount assessed and
  interest thereon, or any lesser amount to which such assessment  may  be
  reduced  by  the  tax  commission  or  by  a  proceeding  under  article
  seventy-eight of the  civil  practice  law  and  rules  as  provided  in
  subdivision (a), such payment to be made when the assessment or any such
  reduction  thereof  shall  have  become final and not subject to further
  review. If such a bond  is  filed  and  thereafter  a  proceeding  under
  article  seventy-eight  is  commenced  as  provided  in subdivision (a),
  deposit of the taxes, penalties  and  interest  assessed  shall  not  be
  required   as   a  condition  precedent  to  the  commencement  of  such
  proceeding. Where a jeopardy assessment is made, any property seized for
  the collection of the tax shall not be sold (1) until expiration of  the


 time  to  apply  for  a  hearing  as provided in subdivision (a) of this
  section, and  (2)  if  such  application  is  timely  filed,  until  the
  expiration  of  four months after the tax commission has given notice of
  its  determination  to  the  person against whom the assessment is made;
  provided, however, such property may be sold at any time if such  person
  has failed to attend a hearing of which he has been duly notified, or if
  he  consents  to  the sale, or if the tax commission determines that the
  expenses of conservation and maintenance will  greatly  reduce  the  net
  proceeds, or if the property is perishable.
    (c) A person liable for collection or payment of tax (whether or not a
  determination  assessing  a  tax  pursuant  to  subdivision  (a) of this
  section has been issued) shall be entitled to have a  tax  due  assessed
  prior  to  the  ninety-day period referred to in subdivision (a) of this
  section, by filing  with  the  tax  commission  a  signed  statement  in
  writing,  in such form as the tax commission shall prescribe, consenting
  thereto.
    (d) Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (a) of  this  section,
  the  provisions of this section shall not be applicable to the liability
  of a purchaser, transferee or assignee arising under the  provisions  of
  subdivision (c) of section eleven hundred forty-one of this chapter.




   §  1139.  Refunds.  (a) In the manner provided in this section the tax
  commission  shall  refund  or  credit  any  tax,  penalty  or   interest
  erroneously,  illegally  or  unconstitutionally  collected  or  paid  if
  application therefor shall be filed with the tax commission (i)  in  the
  case  of  tax paid by the applicant to a person required to collect tax,
  within three years after the date when  the  tax  was  payable  by  such
  person  to  the  tax  commission  as  provided in section eleven hundred
  thirty-seven, or (ii) in the case of a tax, penalty or interest paid  by
  the  applicant  to the tax commission, within three years after the date
  when such amount was payable under this article, or (iii) in the case of
  a tax due from the seller,  transferor  or  assignor  and  paid  by  the
  applicant  to  the  tax  commission  where the applicant is a purchaser,
  transferee or assignee liable for such tax pursuant to the provisions of
  subdivision (c) of section eleven hundred  forty-one  of  this  chapter,
  within  two  years  after  the giving of notice by the tax commission to
  such purchaser, transferee or assignee of the total amount of any tax or
  taxes which the state claims to be due from the  seller,  transferor  or
  assignor.  Such  application shall be in such form as the tax commission
  shall prescribe. No refund or credit shall be made to any person of  tax
  which he collected from a customer until he shall first establish to the
  satisfaction  of  the  tax  commission, under such regulations as it may
  prescribe, that he has repaid such tax to the customer.  Notwithstanding
  any  other provision of this article, if the time to file an application
  for refund or credit of any tax, penalty  or  interest  would  otherwise
  have   expired  on  or  before  December  nineteenth,  nineteen  hundred
  sixty-nine, the time for filing such application is hereby  extended  to
  and  including  December  twentieth, nineteen hundred sixty-nine, except
  that it shall be further extended, as provided  in  subdivision  (c)  of
  section  eleven  hundred  forty-seven, where a taxpayer has consented in
  writing to the extension of the period for assessment of additional tax.
    (b) If  an  application  for  refund  or  credit  is  filed  with  the
  commissioner  of  taxation and finance as provided in subdivision (a) of
  this section, the commissioner of taxation and finance  shall  grant  or
  deny  such  application in whole or in part within six months of receipt
  of the application in a form which is able to  be  processed  and  shall
  notify  such  applicant by mail accordingly. Such determination shall be
  final and irrevocable unless such applicant shall,  within  ninety  days
  after the mailing of notice of such determination, petition the division
  of  tax  appeals  for a hearing. After such hearing, the division of tax
  appeals shall mail notice of the determination of the administrative law
  judge to such applicant and to the commissioner of taxation and finance.
  Such determination may be  reviewed  by  the  tax  appeals  tribunal  as
  provided  in  article  forty  of  this  chapter. The decision of the tax
  appeals tribunal may be reviewed as provided  in  section  two  thousand
  sixteen of this chapter.
    (c) Claim for credit or refund of an overpayment of sales tax shall be
  filed  by  the  taxpayer within three years from the time the return was
  filed or two years from the time the tax was  paid,  whichever  of  such
  periods  expires  the later, or if no return was filed, within two years
  from the time the tax was paid. If the claim is filed within  the  three
  year  period,  the  amount  of the credit or refund shall not exceed the
  portion of the tax paid within the three years immediately preceding the
  filing of the claim plus the period of any extension of time for  filing
  the  return. If the claim is not filed within the three year period, but
  is filed within the two year period, the amount of the credit or  refund
  shall  not  exceed  the  portion  of  the  tax paid during the two years
  immediately preceding the filing  of  the  claim.  Except  as  otherwise
  provided  in  this section, if no claim is filed, the amount of a credit


 or refund shall not exceed the amount which  would  be  allowable  if  a
  claim  had  been  filed  on the date the credit or refund is allowed. No
  refund or credit shall be made of a tax, interest or penalty paid  after
  a  determination  by  the  commissioner  made pursuant to section eleven
  hundred thirty-eight unless it be  found  that  such  determination  was
  erroneous,  illegal  or  unconstitutional  or otherwise improper, by the
  division of tax appeals pursuant to article forty of this chapter or  by
  the  commissioner  of  his  own  motion, or in a proceeding for judicial
  review provided for in section two thousand sixteen of this chapter,  in
  which  event  a  refund  or credit shall be made of the tax, interest or
  penalty found to have been overpaid.
    (d) (1) Except in respect to an overpayment made on a return described
  in paragraph two of subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred thirty-six
  of this part or on a return described  in  subdivision  (c)  of  section
  eleven  hundred  thirty-seven-A  of this part, interest shall be allowed
  and paid upon any refund made or credit allowed pursuant to this section
  except as otherwise provided in paragraph two  of  this  subdivision  or
  subdivision  (e)  of  this  section and except that no interest shall be
  allowed or paid if the amount thereof would be  less  than  one  dollar.
  Such  interest  shall be at the overpayment rate set by the commissioner
  pursuant to section eleven hundred forty-two of this part, or if no rate
  is set, at the rate of six percent per annum from the date when the tax,
  penalty or interest refunded or credited was paid to  a  date  preceding
  the  date  of  the  refund check by not more than thirty days, provided,
  however, that for the purposes of this subdivision any tax  paid  before
  the  last  day  prescribed  for its payment shall be deemed to have been
  paid on such last day. In the case of a refund or credit  claimed  on  a
  return  of  tax which is filed after the last date prescribed for filing
  such return (determined with regard to extensions),  or  claimed  on  an
  application  for  refund or credit, no interest shall be allowed or paid
  for any day before the date on which the return or application is filed.
  For purposes of this subdivision, a return or application for refund  or
  credit  shall  not  be treated as filed until it is filed in processible
  form. A return or application is in a processible form if it is filed on
  a  permitted  form,  and  contains  the  taxpayer's  name,  address  and
  identifying  number and the required signatures, and sufficient required
  information (whether  on  the  return  or  application  or  on  required
  attachments)  to  permit  the mathematical verification of tax liability
  shown on the return or refund or credit claimed on the application.
    (2) If a refund is made or a credit is  allowed  within  three  months
  after  the  last  date  prescribed or permitted by extension of time for
  filing a return on which the refund or  credit  was  claimed  or  within
  three  months  after the return was filed, whichever is later, or within
  three months after an application for refund or credit is filed on which
  that refund or credit was claimed, no interest will be allowed  or  paid
  on that refund or credit.
    (e)  The  provisions  of subdivisions (a), (b) and (c) of this section
  shall be applicable to applications for refund  or  credit  pursuant  to
  section  eleven  hundred  nineteen and subdivision (e) of section eleven
  hundred thirty-two, except that an application for credit may be made as
  provided in such section or subdivision  and  except  that  no  interest
  shall be allowed or paid upon any refund made or credit allowed pursuant
  to such section or such subdivision.
    (f)  Where a consumer returns a motor vehicle to and receives a refund
  of the full purchase price, capitalized cost or a portion  thereof  from
  the  manufacturer  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of section one
  hundred ninety-eight-a or subdivision  five  of  section  three  hundred
  ninety-six-p  of  the general business law, the commissioner of taxation


 and finance shall refund to such consumer any tax paid by  the  consumer
  on  the  amount  of  the  purchase price, capitalized costs and fees and
  charges refunded by the manufacturer which  is  not  in  excess  of  the
  receipts  and  proportionate  to  the  receipts  subject to tax. All the
  provisions of this section shall apply to the refund authorized by  this
  subdivision,  provided,  however, that a request for a refund under this
  subdivision shall be timely made if such request for a  refund  is  made
  within  three  years  of  the  date  the refund from the manufacturer is
  received by a consumer  pursuant  to  subdivision  (c)  of  section  one
  hundred  ninety-eight-a of the general business law and further provided
  that interest allowable under subdivision (d) of this section  shall  be
  payable  from  the  date  which  is  three  months  after  the  date the
  application for refund in processible form is received.
    (g) The tax commission shall refund or credit any tax  imposed,  under
  subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred five or section eleven hundred
  ten, and paid on or after July first, nineteen hundred eighty-seven with
  respect to:
    (i)  tractors, trailers or semi-trailers, as such terms are defined in
  article one of the vehicle and traffic law, and  property  installed  on
  such  vehicles  for their equipping, maintenance or repair provided such
  vehicle is used in combination where the gross vehicle  weight  of  such
  combination exceeds twenty-six thousand pounds; and
    (ii)  services,  if performed upon tractors, trailers or semi-trailers
  described in paragraph (i) of this subdivision or on property  installed
  on such vehicles for their equipping, maintenance or repair.
    All  of  the  provisions  of  this  section  shall apply to the refund
  authorized  by  this  subdivision,  provided,  however,  that   interest
  allowable  under  subdivision  (d)  of  this section shall be payable in
  accordance with such subdivision but only from the date the tax, penalty
  or interest refunded or credited was paid, or was deemed  to  have  been
  paid,  to March thirty-first, nineteen hundred eighty-eight and from the
  date which is ninety days after the date the application for  refund  in
  processible form is received.
    (h)(1)  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  the  law to the contrary,
  pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision, the  commissioner  shall
  refund  or  credit to (i) a credit card issuer tax paid pursuant to this
  article in respect to motor fuel and diesel motor fuel  purchased  by  a
  government  entity  and paid for by such government entity with a credit
  card issued by such credit card issuer or (ii) a  fuel  distributor  tax
  paid  pursuant to this article in respect to motor fuel and diesel motor
  fuel purchased by a government entity and paid for  by  such  government
  entity  with  a  credit card issued by a credit card issuer. Such credit
  card issuer or such fuel distributor, as designated by the parties in  a
  written  designation  to  the  commissioner,  shall  be  the only person
  eligible to receive such refund or credit, provided that: (A) such taxes
  were actually paid to the commissioner; (B) the fuel so purchased by the
  government entity is for its  own  use  or  consumption  such  that  the
  purchase  qualifies  as  an  exempt purchase pursuant to an exception in
  paragraph five of subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred  sixteen  of
  this  article;  (C) the credit card issuer or fuel distributor meets the
  requirements  of  paragraph  two  of  this  subdivision;  and  (D)   the
  commissioner has not issued a notice pursuant to subdivision fourteen of
  section eleven hundred forty-two of this part indicating that the credit
  card  issuer  or fuel distributor is no longer allowed to claim a refund
  or credit under this subdivision for the fuel purchased by a  particular
  government  entity.  Such  application  for  credit  or  refund shall be
  submitted after the end of the quarter in which the vendor of the  motor
  fuel  or  diesel  motor fuel was required to report the tax liability it


 collected from the credit card issuer or fuel  distributor  pursuant  to
  section   eleven  hundred  thirty-six  of  this  part,  but  within  the
  applicable statute of limitations as required under this section.
    (2)  In  order to be eligible to receive the refund or credit provided
  for in paragraph one of this subdivision, the credit card issuer or fuel
  distributor shall: (A) file  with  the  commissioner  a  certificate  of
  registration  and receive a certificate of authority pursuant to section
  eleven hundred thirty-four of this part, if not already  so  registered,
  provided,  however,  the  credit  card  issuer or fuel distributor shall
  provide such additional information as the commissioner may require; (B)
  establish it has (i) not charged or otherwise received any tax,  or  any
  amount  purportedly  as  tax,  from  the  government  entity  making the
  purchase; and (ii) filed a written consent signed by  the  chief  fiscal
  officer of the government entity stating that no tax was charged to such
  government  entity  by  the  credit card issuer or fuel distributor, and
  that therefore the government entity has no claim for a credit or refund
  relating to its purchases of motor fuel or diesel  motor  fuel  effected
  with  the credit card issuer's credit card and that no such claim has or
  will be made by the government entity; (C) establish either that (i) the
  retail station or other vendor has been repaid  the  amount  of  tax  it
  charged  to the government entity on the government entity's purchase of
  the motor fuel or diesel  motor  fuel,  or  (ii)  obtained  the  written
  consent  of  the  retail station or other vendor to the allowance of the
  credit or refund to the credit card issuer or fuel distributor; and  (D)
  provide  such  detailed  transactional and jurisdictional information to
  the commissioner as the commissioner may require, in the form  requested
  by the commissioner.
    (3)(A)  The  term  "government  entity"  means  an entity described in
  paragraph one, two or three of subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred
  sixteen  of  this  article  or  any  diplomatic  mission  or  diplomatic
  personnel  who  are  permitted by the United States to purchase fuel and
  diesel motor fuel exempt from the taxes imposed pursuant to this article
  and articles twelve-A and thirteen-A of this chapter.
    (B) The term "credit card issuer" means a person  which  finances  the
  exempt  purchase  of  motor  fuel  or  diesel motor fuel by a government
  entity by means  of  a  credit  or  other  access  card  issued  to  the
  government entity by such person.
    (C)  The  term "fuel distributor" means any person who is a registered
  distributor under article twelve-A of this chapter and who is registered
  as a person required to collect tax pursuant to this article.
    (4) If any requirement of paragraph two of  this  subdivision  is  not
  met,  or  if  the  credit  card  issuer  and, where applicable, the fuel
  distributor, receive  a  notice  pursuant  to  subdivision  fourteen  of
  section  eleven  hundred forty-two of this article, then an amount equal
  to the  tax  imposed  by  this  article  shall  be  collected  from  the
  government entity, notwithstanding such entity's exempt status, and such
  government  entity shall be responsible for seeking any credit or refund
  which it may be allowed under this article.
    (5) The provisions of subdivisions (a), (b) and (c)  of  this  section
  shall also apply to an application for refund or credit pursuant to this
  subdivision,   except   to   the   extent  that  such  subdivisions  are
  inconsistent with this subdivision, and except that no interest shall be
  allowed or paid upon any refund made or credit allowed pursuant to  this
  subdivision. Any document required pursuant to this subdivision shall be
  in  such  form  and  contain  such information as the commissioner shall
  prescribe.
    (6) A credit card issuer or fuel distributor  designated  pursuant  to
  this  subdivision  to  receive  the  refund  or credit and its officers,


 directors, employees, managers and members under a duty to act for  such
  credit card issuer or fuel distributor in complying with any requirement
  of  this  article and, where such credit card issuer or fuel distributor
  is  a  partnership  or  limited  liability  company,  any member of such
  partnership or company shall be deemed to be persons required to collect
  tax and shall be personally liable in  accordance  with  section  eleven
  hundred  thirty-three  of  this  article with respect to the liabilities
  described in subparagraph (E) of paragraph three of subdivision  (a)  of
  section  eleven  hundred  thirty-eight  of  this  part.  Nothing in this
  subdivision shall be construed to require a credit card issuer to file a
  return pursuant to section eleven hundred thirty-six of this part unless
  otherwise required to do so by another  provision  of  this  article  or
  unless  the  commissioner,  in  his  or her discretion, determines it is
  necessary for the proper enforcement of this  article  for  credit  card
  issuers  or  distinct  classes  of such issuers to file such returns and
  gives notice of such determination to such issuers.
    (7) Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to exempt  (A)  the
  purchase of motor fuel or diesel motor fuel by a government entity where
  it is not the ultimate user or consumer of such fuel, or (B) any sale by
  a government entity of motor fuel or diesel motor fuel.




   §  1140.  Remedies exclusive. The remedies provided by sections eleven
  hundred thirty-eight and eleven hundred thirty-nine shall  be  exclusive
  remedies available to any person for the review of tax liability imposed
  by  this  article; and no determination or proposed determination of tax
  or determination on any application for  refund  shall  be  enjoined  or
  reviewed  by an action for declaratory judgment, an action for money had
  and received, or by any action or proceeding  other  than  a  proceeding
  under article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules.




   §  1141.  Proceedings to recover tax. (a) Whenever any person required
  to collect tax shall fail to collect or pay over  any  tax,  penalty  or
  interest  imposed  by  this article as therein provided, or whenever any
  customer shall fail to pay  any  such  tax,  penalty  or  interest,  the
  attorney general shall, upon the request of the tax commission, bring or
  cause  to  be  brought  an  action to enforce the payment of the same on
  behalf of the state of New York in any court of the state of New York or
  of any other state or of the United States.
    (b) As an additional or alternate remedy, the tax commission may issue
  a warrant, directed to the sheriff of any county commanding him to  levy
  upon  and  sell  the real and personal property of any person liable for
  the tax, which may be found within his county, for the  payment  of  the
  amount  thereof,  with  any  penalties  and  interest,  and  the cost of
  executing the warrant, and to return such warrant to the tax  commission
  and  to  pay  it the money collected by virtue thereof within sixty days
  after the receipt of such warrant. The sheriff shall  within  five  days
  after  the  receipt  of  the  warrant  file with the county clerk a copy
  thereof, and thereupon such clerk shall enter in the judgment docket the
  name of the person mentioned in the warrant and the amount of  the  tax,
  penalties and interest for which the warrant is issued and the date when
  such  copy  is  filed.  Thereupon the amount of such warrant so docketed
  shall become a lien upon the title to and interest in real and  personal
  property  of  the  person  against whom the warrant is issued. Such lien
  shall not apply to personal property unless such warrant is filed in the
  department of state. The sheriff shall then proceed upon the warrant, in
  the same manner, and with like  effect,  as  that  provided  by  law  in
  respect  to executions issued against property upon judgments of a court
  of record and for services in executing the warrant he shall be entitled
  to the same fees, which he may  collect  in  the  same  manner.  In  the
  discretion  of  the  tax  commission  a warrant of like terms, force and
  effect may be issued and directed to any  officer  or  employee  of  the
  department  of  taxation  and finance, and in the execution thereof such
  officer or employee shall have all the  powers  conferred  by  law  upon
  sheriffs,  but  shall be entitled to no fee or compensation in excess of
  the actual expenses paid in the performance of such  duty.    Upon  such
  filing  of  a  copy of a warrant, the tax commission shall have the same
  remedies to enforce the amount  due  thereunder  as  if  the  state  had
  recovered judgment therefor.
    (c)  Whenever  a  person  required  to  collect tax shall make a sale,
  transfer, or assignment in bulk of any part or the whole of his business
  assets,  otherwise  than  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business,   the
  purchaser,  transferee or assignee shall at least ten days before taking
  possession of the subject of  said  sale,  transfer  or  assignment,  or
  paying  therefor,  notify  the  tax commission by registered mail of the
  proposed sale and of the price, terms and conditions thereof whether  or
  not the seller, transferrer or assignor, has represented to, or informed
  the  purchaser,  transferee or assignee that he owes any tax pursuant to
  this article, and whether or not the purchaser, transferee, or  assignee
  has  knowledge that such taxes are owing, and whether any such taxes are
  in fact owing.
    Whenever the purchaser, transferee or  assignee  shall  fail  to  give
  notice  to the tax commission as required by the preceding paragraph, or
  whenever the tax commission shall inform the  purchaser,  transferee  or
  assignee that a possible claim for such tax or taxes exists, any sums of
  money,  property  or choses in action, or other consideration, which the
  purchaser, transferee or assignee is required to transfer  over  to  the
  seller,  transferrer  or  assignor  shall be subject to a first priority
  right and lien for any such taxes theretofore or  thereafter  determined


 to be due from the seller, transferrer or assignor to the state, and the
  purchaser,  transferee  or  assignee  is  forbidden  to  transfer to the
  seller, transferrer or assignor any such  sums  of  money,  property  or
  choses  in  action  to  the  extent  of the amount of the state's claim.
  Within ninety days of receipt of the notice of the  sale,  transfer,  or
  assignment   from   the  purchaser,  transferee  or  assignee,  the  tax
  commission shall give notice to the purchaser,  transferee  or  assignee
  and  to  the seller, transferrer, or assignor of the total amount of any
  tax or taxes  which  the  state  claims  to  be  due  from  the  seller,
  transferrer,  or  assignor to the state, and whenever the tax commission
  shall fail to give such notice to the purchaser, transferee, or assignee
  and the seller, transferrer, or assignor within ninety days from receipt
  of notice of the  sale,  transfer,  or  assignment,  such  failure  will
  release   the   purchaser,  transferee  or  assignee  from  any  further
  obligation to withhold any sums of money, property or choses in  action,
  or  other  consideration, which the purchaser, transferee or assignee is
  required to transfer over to the seller, transferrer or assignor, except
  that with respect to pending matters such ninety day periods  shall  not
  begin  to  run  until  ninety  days  after  the  effective  date of this
  provision. For failure to comply with the provisions of this subdivision
  the purchaser, transferee or assignee, in addition to being  subject  to
  the liabilities and remedies imposed under the provisions of article six
  of  the  uniform  commercial  code,  shall  be personally liable for the
  payment to the  state  of  any  such  taxes  theretofore  or  thereafter
  determined  to  be  due  to  the  state  from the seller, transferrer or
  assignor, except that the liability  of  the  purchaser,  transferee  or
  assignee  shall  be  limited  to an amount not in excess of the purchase
  price or fair market value of the business assets sold,  transferred  or
  assigned  to  such  purchaser,  transferee,  or  assignee,  whichever is
  higher, and such liability may be assessed  and  enforced  in  the  same
  manner  as the liability for tax under this article. Upon receipt within
  the ninety days as aforesaid of the notice of the total  amount  of  the
  state's  claim  from the tax commission, and demand for payment thereof,
  the purchaser, transferee or assignee may make payment of such claim  to
  the state from any sums of money, property, or choses in action withheld
  in  accord  with  the  provisions  of  this  paragraph, except that such
  payment shall be limited to an amount not  in  excess  of  the  purchase
  price  or fair market value of the business assets sold, transferred, or
  assigned to  such  purchaser,  transferee,  or  assignee,  whichever  is
  higher,  and  upon  making  the  payment, such purchaser, transferee, or
  assignee shall be relieved of all liability  for  such  amounts  to  the
  seller,  transferrer,  or  assignor,  and such amounts paid to the state
  shall be deemed  satisfaction  of  the  tax  liability  of  the  seller,
  transferrer, or assignor to the extent of the amount of such payment.
    Where  the  liability  of a purchaser, transferee or assignee, for the
  payment to the state of any such taxes determined to  be  due  from  the
  seller, transferrer or assignor, has been wholly paid or satisfied or no
  longer  exists,  the  tax  commission  shall  mail  to  such  purchaser,
  transferee or assignee a notice, addressed to his  last  known  address,
  setting  forth  that such liability has been wholly paid or satisfied or
  no longer exists. The tax commission shall include in  such  notice  the
  following additional information:
    (1)  the  name  and last known address of the purchaser, transferee or
  assignee;
    (2) the amount of the lien paid, satisfied or vacated; and
    (3) a statement to the effect that consumer  reporting  agencies  must
  delete  from  a  credit  file  any  reference to the particular tax lien
  within thirty days of receipt from the purchaser, transferee or assignee


 of such notice. Provided, however, no order or decree  in  a  bankruptcy
  proceeding shall be construed as giving rise to the requirement that the
  notice provided for in this paragraph be given.




   §  1142.  General  powers  of  the  tax commission. In addition to the
  powers granted to the tax commission  in  this  article,  it  is  hereby
  authorized and empowered:
    1.  To  make, adopt and amend rules and regulations appropriate to the
  carrying out of this article and the purposes thereof;
    2. To extend, for cause shown, the time of filing any return or report
  for a period not exceeding three months; and for cause shown,  to  remit
  penalties  but  not  interest  computed  at  the rate of six percent per
  annum;
    3. To delegate its functions hereunder to  a  deputy  commissioner  of
  taxation  and  finance or any employee or employees of the department of
  taxation and finance;
    4. To prescribe  methods  for  determining  the  amount  of  receipts,
  amusement  charges,  dues or rents and for determining which of them are
  taxable and which are nontaxable;
    5. To require any person required to  collect  tax  to  keep  detailed
  records  of  all  receipts,  amusement  charges, dues or rents received,
  charged or accrued, including those claimed to be nontaxable,  and  also
  of  the nature, type, value and amount of all purchases, sales, services
  rendered, admissions, memberships, occupancies, names and  addresses  of
  customers, and other facts relevant in determining the amount of tax due
  and to furnish such information upon request to the tax commission;
    6. To assess, determine, revise and readjust the taxes imposed by this
  article;
    7.  To  publish and maintain, as it deems necessary, lists of specific
  items of tangible personal property which are  found  to  be  foods  and
  drugs  exempt  from  tax  under paragraphs (1) and (3) of section eleven
  hundred fifteen. Assistance and cooperation in the formulation  of  such
  lists  shall be provided by the department of health upon request by the
  tax commission.
    8. To make  such  provision  as  it  deems  necessary  for  the  joint
  administration  of the state and local taxes imposed by this article and
  authorized by article twenty-nine of the tax law,  including  the  joint
  reporting,  assessment,  collection,  determination  and  refund of such
  taxes, and for that purpose to prescribe by regulation that any  of  the
  commission's  functions  under  said  articles,  and any returns, forms,
  statements, documents or information to be submitted to  the  commission
  under  said  articles,  any books and records to be kept for purposes of
  the taxes imposed or authorized  by  said  articles,  any  schedules  of
  amounts  to  be collected under said articles, any registration required
  under said articles, and the payment of taxes under said articles  shall
  be on a joint basis with respect to the taxes imposed by said articles.
    9.  To  set  the  overpayment  and  underpayment rates of interest for
  purposes of sections  eleven  hundred  thirty-nine  and  eleven  hundred
  forty-five  of  this  part.  Such  rates  shall  be  the overpayment and
  underpayment rates of interest set pursuant to subsection (e) of section
  one thousand ninety-six of this chapter, but the underpayment rate shall
  not be less than seven and one-half percent per annum.  Any  such  rates
  set  by  the  commissioner shall apply to taxes, or any portion thereof,
  which remain or become due or overpaid on or after  the  date  on  which
  such  rates  become  effective  and  shall  apply  only  with respect to
  interest computed or computable  for  periods  or  portions  of  periods
  occurring  in  the  period  during  which  such  rates are in effect. In
  computing the amount of any interest required  to  be  paid  under  this
  article  by  the  commissioner  or  by the taxpayer, or any other amount
  determined by reference to such amount of interest,  such  interest  and
  such  amount shall be compounded daily. The preceding sentence shall not
  apply for purposes of computing the amount of any interest  for  failure


 to  pay  estimated  tax  under  subparagraph  (iv)  of  paragraph one of
  subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred forty-five of this part.
    10.  To  delegate  from  time to time and in whole or in part, when it
  deems it to be in the best interests of the state, to  the  commissioner
  of  finance of the city of New York and his employees and agents, and to
  the county executives of Nassau and Suffolk counties and their employees
  and agents its power to examine the books and records of any  person  in
  the  city  of  New  York  or  the  counties of Nassau and Suffolk who is
  subject to the taxes imposed by or required to file returns pursuant  to
  this  article;  provided, however, that (a) such delegation shall relate
  solely to examining books and records and  not  to  review,  assessment,
  appeal,  or any other action taken on the basis of such examination, (b)
  every examination made pursuant to such delegation shall be conducted in
  accordance with the direction, methods,  rules,  practices,  procedures,
  and  regulations  of  the  commissioner  of taxation and finance, (c) no
  power shall be delegated to re-examine books  and  records  for  periods
  previously  examined  by  the  commissioner of taxation and finance, his
  agents or employees, and (d) such  delegation  shall  limit  the  county
  executives  of  Nassau  and Suffolk counties to examine only those books
  and records of persons within their respective counties.
    11. To make such provision pursuant to rules and regulations  for  the
  joint  administration, in whole or in part, of the state and local taxes
  imposed by this article and authorized by article  twenty-nine  of  this
  chapter  upon  the  sale  of petroleum products and the taxes imposed by
  article twelve-A of this chapter and authorized to be  imposed  by  such
  article,   including   the   joint  reporting,  assessment,  collection,
  determination and  refund  of  such  taxes,  and  for  that  purpose  to
  prescribe  that any of the commissioner's functions under said articles,
  and any returns, forms,  statements,  documents  or  information  to  be
  submitted to the commissioner under said articles, any books and records
  to  be  kept  for  purposes  of  the taxes imposed or authorized by said
  articles, any schedules of amounts to be collected under said  articles,
  any  registration required under said articles, and the payment of taxes
  under said articles shall be on a joint basis with respect to the  taxes
  imposed by said articles.
    12.  To  make such provision pursuant to rules and regulations for the
  joint administration, in whole or in part, of the taxes imposed by  this
  article  and  pursuant  to  the authority of article twenty-nine of this
  chapter upon the sale or use of cigarettes  and  the  taxes  imposed  by
  article   twenty   of  this  chapter,  including  the  joint  reporting,
  assessment, collection, determination and refund of such taxes, and, for
  that purpose, to prescribe that  any  of  the  commissioner's  functions
  under  such  articles,  any  returns,  forms,  statements,  documents or
  information to be submitted to the commissioner under such articles, any
  books and records required to be kept for purposes of the taxes  imposed
  or authorized by such articles, any schedules of amounts to be collected
  under  such articles, any registration required under such articles, and
  the payment of taxes by stamp, meter impression or otherwise under  such
  articles  shall be on a joint basis with respect to the taxes imposed or
  authorized by such articles.
    13. To authorize a qualified person who is not the vendor with respect
  to a motor vehicle to collect any tax due under this article or pursuant
  to the authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter upon the sale or
  for the use of such motor vehicle, at the time such person performs  the
  function  of  registering such vehicle or accepting an application for a
  certificate of title of such vehicle. A qualified person is a person (i)
  who is registered with the commissioner as provided  in  section  eleven
  hundred  thirty-four  of this article (other than a person who elects to


 file a certificate of registration under paragraph three of  subdivision
  (a)  of  section  eleven hundred thirty-four of this article unless such
  person agrees to subject itself to the jurisdiction of this state  as  a
  condition  for  issuance  of  such  certificate  of registration and for
  authorization under this subdivision) and (ii) who the  commissioner  of
  motor  vehicles has certified to the commissioner is a person authorized
  by the commissioner  of  motor  vehicles  to  perform  the  function  of
  registering   a   motor  vehicle  or  accepting  an  application  for  a
  certificate of title of a motor vehicle, pursuant to  the  authority  of
  the  vehicle  and traffic law. Where such a qualified person has been so
  authorized by the commissioner and performs  such  function  or  accepts
  such  an  application,  (A)  such  person shall be deemed to be a person
  required to collect tax with respect to the sale or use  of  such  motor
  vehicle;  (B)  such  person  shall collect the tax as trustee for and on
  account of the state, in accordance with the provisions  of  subdivision
  (a)  of  section  eleven  hundred  thirty-two  of this article; (C) such
  person shall be personally liable for  the  tax  imposed,  collected  or
  required  to  be  collected  under  this article and pursuant to article
  twenty-nine of this chapter, as well as  any  penalty  and  interest  in
  connection  therewith,  and for any moneys collected purportedly as tax;
  (D) such person shall be subject  to  and  comply  with  all  the  other
  provisions  of  this article and article twenty-nine of this chapter and
  of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and to all the requirements
  and obligations thereof, and have all the benefits and entitlements,  of
  a  person required to collect tax under this article and pursuant to the
  authority of such article twenty-nine with respect to such sale  or  use
  and  such tax required to be collected, as if the person were the vendor
  with respect to such motor vehicle, provided, however,  that  no  person
  qualified  under  this  article  shall  receive  the  credit  allowed by
  subdivision (f) of section eleven hundred thirty-seven of this part; (E)
  such person shall keep such additional records, provide such  additional
  information  and  cooperate  with  the  commissioner, as provided by the
  commissioner, to ensure the proper  collection  and  remittance  of  tax
  imposed,  collected  or  required to be collected under this article and
  such article twenty-nine; and (F) notwithstanding any provision  of  law
  to  the  contrary,  such  person  and  any  officer,  director, manager,
  employee or agent of such person shall be deemed to be a person  who  in
  any  manner has acquired knowledge of the contents of a return or report
  filed with the commissioner pursuant to this article  and  such  article
  twenty-nine,  with  respect  to  any  information  such  person  or such
  officer, director, manager, employee or agent  acquired  in  conjunction
  with  performing  such  function  of  registering  a  motor  vehicle  or
  accepting such an application for a certificate of title; and  any  such
  information  so  acquired  shall  be deemed to be the contents of such a
  return or report, for purposes of section eleven  hundred  forty-six  of
  this  article.  The  term "such person" as used in the previous sentence
  shall include any officer, director, manager or employee of such person,
  who as such officer, director, manager or employee is under  a  duty  to
  act for such person in complying with any requirement of this article or
  such  article  twenty-nine or who is otherwise subject to complying with
  any such requirement of this article  or  article  twenty-nine  of  this
  chapter  and  any  member of a partnership or limited liability company.
  For purposes of this subdivision, the term "motor  vehicle"  shall  have
  the  same  meaning that such term has for purposes of subdivision (f) of
  section  eleven  hundred  thirty-two  of  this  article.  In  order   to
  effectuate  the  authority  granted by this paragraph and to enforce and
  administer the taxes  imposed  by  this  article  and  pursuant  to  the
  authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter:


   (a)  The  commissioner may modify the requirements to file returns and
  to pay or pay over tax or other moneys in section ten of  this  chapter,
  sections  eleven  hundred  thirty-six and eleven hundred thirty-seven of
  this article and in such article twenty-nine, with  respect  to  returns
  required  to  be  filed  under  this  article  or  pursuant  to  article
  twenty-nine of this chapter and taxes and moneys required to be paid  or
  paid  over  under  such sections ten and eleven hundred thirty-seven and
  article twenty-nine, by qualified  persons  authorized  to  collect  tax
  under  this  subdivision, where the commissioner provides that any class
  of such persons shall pay or pay  over  such  taxes  or  moneys  to  the
  commissioner of motor vehicles as agent of the commissioner.
    (b)  Any  authorization  granted  pursuant to the opening paragraph of
  this subdivision shall be evidenced  by  a  certificate  issued  by  the
  commissioner and may be for a specified term; and, if such authorization
  is  for  a  specified term, it shall be subject to renewal in accordance
  with rules promulgated by the commissioner. A qualified person  to  whom
  the  commissioner  has  issued  such  a  certificate  shall  display the
  certificate prominently at the place where  such  person  performs  such
  function or accepts such an application.
    (c)  In  addition  to  the  commissioner's authority in section eleven
  hundred thirty-four of this article,  the  commissioner  may  revoke  or
  suspend  the  authority  granted  to a qualified person pursuant to this
  subdivision if such person fails to comply with any requirement of  this
  article or article twenty-nine of this chapter or if the commissioner of
  motor  vehicles  advises  the commissioner that such person is no longer
  certified to perform the functions described in the opening paragraph of
  this subdivision.
    (d) In addition to any other general or specific authority under  this
  article  to  make,  adopt  and  amend rules, regulations, procedures and
  forms, the commissioner may make, adopt and  amend  rules,  regulations,
  procedures  and  forms  necessary  for the proper administration of this
  subdivision, to ensure the integrity and qualifications  of  any  person
  seeking  authorization  under the opening paragraph of this subdivision,
  and to ensure the proper collection,  payment  over  and  protection  of
  taxes  imposed  and  revenues  to  be  obtained  under  this article and
  pursuant to the  authority  of  article  twenty-nine  of  this  chapter,
  together  with  any  related penalties and interest and moneys collected
  purportedly as tax.
    (e) The commissioner  of  motor  vehicles  shall  cooperate  with  the
  commissioner   and  provide  such  information  and  assistance  as  the
  commissioner requires, to enable  the  commissioner  to  carry  out  the
  commissioner's  responsibilities under this article, article twenty-nine
  of this chapter and the purposes thereof; and the commissioner of  motor
  vehicles  shall  require  a  qualified person authorized pursuant to the
  opening  paragraph  of  this  subdivision  to  file  with   either   the
  commissioner  of  motor  vehicles or the commissioner a bond issued by a
  surety company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state  and
  approved  by the superintendent of financial services as to solvency and
  responsibility, or other security acceptable  to  the  commissioner,  in
  such  amounts  as  the  commissioner  may  fix, to secure the payment or
  payment over of any tax, penalties or interest due or which  may  become
  due  from such person under this article or pursuant to the authority of
  article twenty-nine of this chapter, as well as any moneys collected  by
  such  person  purportedly  as tax imposed by this article or pursuant to
  article twenty-nine.
    (f) Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to mean or  provide
  that  a  person required to collect tax shall not be required to collect
  tax when such person sells a motor vehicle to a purchaser who  seeks  or


 may seek to register or submit an application for a certificate of title
  for  such vehicle with another person authorized to collect tax pursuant
  to the opening paragraph of this subdivision. Where a person required to
  collect  tax  is the vendor of a motor vehicle, such person must collect
  any tax due from the purchaser without regard to the other provisions of
  this subdivision.
    14. To issue a notice to a credit card issuer and,  where  applicable,
  the  fuel  distributor,  and  any  government  entity, as such terms are
  defined in subdivision (h) of section eleven hundred thirty-nine of this
  part, that, as of the date specified by the commissioner in such notice,
  the credit card issuer or fuel distributor shall no longer  be  eligible
  to  apply  for refunds or credit with respect to purchases of motor fuel
  or diesel motor fuel by such government entity,  the  government  entity
  shall  no  longer  be eligible to employ any other credit card issuer or
  fuel distributor pursuant to such subdivision (h) and no such claim  for
  credit  or  refund  will  be  allowed  or  paid  in accordance with such
  subdivision (h), where the commissioner  has  determined  that  (a)  the
  motor  fuel or diesel motor fuel purchased through the use of the credit
  card issuer's credit card was not for the government entity's own use or
  consumption or (b) it is necessary for the proper  enforcement  of  this
  article   to  issue  such  notice.  The  commissioner,  in  his  or  her
  discretion, may cancel or suspend the operation of such notice where the
  credit  card  issuer,  fuel  distributor,  where  applicable,  and   the
  government  entity  establish,  to the commissioner's satisfaction, that
  appropriate steps have been  undertaken  to  rectify  the  circumstances
  leading  to  the issuance of such notice. In such case, the commissioner
  will  notify  the  credit  card  issuer  or  fuel   distributor,   where
  applicable,  that  the  designated  person will be eligible to apply for
  refunds or credits pursuant to subdivision (h) of section eleven hundred
  thirty-nine of this part in accordance with such terms as set  forth  by
  the  commissioner. Nothing in this subdivision shall be deemed to affect
  the eligibility of the government entity to claim a refund or credit for
  tax paid on motor fuel or diesel motor  fuel  it  purchased  where  such
  purchase   qualifies   for  exemption  pursuant  to  paragraph  five  of
  subdivision (b) of section  eleven  hundred  sixteen  of  this  article.
  Notwithstanding  any  other provision of law, if the credit card issuer,
  fuel distributor, where applicable, or government  entity  disputes  any
  aspect of the notice issued pursuant to this subdivision:
    (i)  the  credit  card issuer, fuel distributor, where applicable, and
  the government entity who receive such a notice shall have the right  to
  have  the issuance of such notice reviewed by the commissioner or his or
  her designee by contacting the department at a telephone  number  or  an
  address to be disclosed in the notice within ten days of the recipient's
  receipt  of  the  notice.  The recipient may present written evidence or
  arguments in support of its claim, or the  recipient  may  appear  at  a
  scheduled  conference  with the commissioner or such designee to present
  oral arguments  and  written  and  oral  evidence  in  support  of  such
  position.  The  commissioner or such designee is authorized to delay the
  effective date of the notice to enable the recipient to present  further
  evidence or arguments in connection with the issuance of the notice. The
  commissioner   or   such   designee  shall  cancel  the  notice  if  the
  commissioner or such designee is not satisfied by a preponderance of the
  evidence that the facts  underlying  such  notice  do  not  support  the
  issuance of such notice.
    (ii)  except as provided for in paragraph (i) of this subdivision, the
  credit card issuer, fuel distributor or the government entity shall  not
  have any right to a hearing under any other provision of this chapter to
  challenge  the issuance of such notice. Rather, such determination shall


 be reviewable only by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of  the
  civil   practice  law  and  rules,  provided,  however,  that  (A)  such
  proceeding is commenced within four months of the date the  commissioner
  issued such notice or, if such notice is disputed, within four months of
  the  date the commissioner or such designee upholds such notice in whole
  or in  part,  (B)  the  credit  card  issuer,  fuel  distributor,  where
  applicable,  and  any affected government entity are named as parties to
  the action, and (C) the only issue  which  may  be  considered  by  such
  review  is  whether  such  notice  was  within  the  discretion  of  the
  commissioner under this article. Such proceeding shall be instituted  in
  Albany  county.  Upon  the filing of such petition, the court shall have
  jurisdiction to set aside such notice or to dismiss  the  petition.  The
  jurisdiction of the supreme court shall be exclusive and its order shall
  be  final,  subject  to  review by the appellate division of the supreme
  court and the court of appeals in the same manner and form and with  the
  same  effect  as provided by law for appeal from a judgment in a special
  proceeding. All such proceedings  for  review  shall  be  heard  on  the
  petition,  transcript  and other papers, and on appeal shall be heard on
  the record, without requirement of printing.
    (15) To publish a list on  the  department's  website  of  marketplace
  providers  whose  certificates  of  authority  have been revoked and, if
  necessary to  protect  sales  tax  revenue,  provide  by  regulation  or
  otherwise  that a marketplace seller who is a vendor will be relieved of
  the duty  to  collect  tax  for  sales  of  tangible  personal  property
  facilitated  by  a  marketplace  provider  only  if,  in addition to the
  conditions prescribed by paragraph two of  subdivision  (l)  of  section
  eleven  hundred  thirty-two  of  this  part  being met, such marketplace
  provider is not on such list at the commencement of the quarterly period
  covered thereby.




   §  1142-A.  Special  requirements relating to the service of providing
  parking, garaging or storing for  motor  vehicles.    (a)  Every  person
  required  to collect the taxes described in paragraph six of subdivision
  (c) of section eleven hundred five, subdivision (c)  of  section  eleven
  hundred  seven  and  paragraph  one of subdivision (a) of section twelve
  hundred  twelve-A  of  this  chapter,  or,  if  the  tax  described   in
  subdivision  (c)  of section eleven hundred seven of this article is not
  in  effect,  a  similar  tax  imposed  pursuant  to  the  authority   of
  subdivision  (a)  of  section  twelve  hundred ten of this chapter, in a
  county with a population density in excess of fifty thousand persons per
  square mile in any city in this state having a population of one million
  or more, shall be subject to the requirements set forth in this section,
  except as otherwise provided herein.
    (b) Every person described in subdivision (a) of  this  section  shall
  keep  records  in addition to the records required to be kept by section
  eleven hundred thirty-five of  this  article.  Such  additional  records
  shall include copies of each ticket or other documentation given to each
  purchaser  of  such  service,  which  such  person  shall be required to
  furnish to each such  purchaser  at  the  initiation  of  such  parking,
  garaging  or  storing,  except  as hereinafter provided. Such tickets or
  other documentation shall be  consecutively  numbered  or  issued  by  a
  computer,  in  a manner approved by the commissioner, and shall indicate
  the date and time of entry of the motor vehicle. The date  and  time  of
  exit  of  such  motor  vehicle  shall also be indicated on the ticket or
  other documentation (or  the  copy  thereof)  retained  by  such  person
  described  in  subdivision  (a) of this section except where such person
  charges a flat fee for any such service based on time elapsed, the price
  for such service is indicated on the ticket or  other  memorandum  as  a
  flat  fee  and  it  is  not  the  practice  of  such person to date- and
  time-stamp the ticket or other documentation when the purchaser pays for
  such service for which a flat fee is charged. In the case of  a  monthly
  or longer term purchaser to whom such a ticket or other documentation is
  issued,   such   ticket   or  other  documentation  shall  include  such
  purchaser's (1) printed name and signature or (2) identification  number
  assigned  to  such  purchaser  by  such  person required to collect tax.
  Provided, however, that where such person required to collect tax  sells
  such  service  on  a  monthly or longer term basis and issues a computer
  access card or a prenumbered decal or tag to the  purchaser,  then  such
  person  shall  not  be  required  to  give  such  a ticket or such other
  documentation to any such purchaser to whom such card, decal or tag  has
  been  issued,  or  to  retain  copies  thereof.  Such person required to
  collect tax shall  retain  a  list  containing  the  name,  address  and
  signature of each monthly or other longer-term purchaser of service, the
  valid  period  of such monthly or longer-term service, and the number of
  authorized vehicles entitled to such parking services, without regard to
  whether a ticket or other documentation is issued to such purchaser.
    (c) Such persons required to collect tax, described in subdivision (a)
  of this section, shall file, together  with,  and  as  a  part  of,  the
  returns  required  under  sections  eleven hundred thirty-six and twelve
  hundred fifty-one of this chapter, a  report  or  schedule,  or  make  a
  separate  entry thereon, in the discretion of the commissioner, for each
  separate garage, parking lot or  other  place  of  business  where  such
  person  provides parking, garaging or storing services in such a county.
  Such report or schedule shall not include any receipts from any  garage,
  parking  lot  or  other place of business located outside such a county.
  Such report  or  schedule  shall  identify  the  specific  location  and
  address, and licensed capacity if licensed, of each such garage, parking
  lot  or  other  place  of business. If such garage, parking lot or other


 place of business has been licensed by an agency of a city,  the  report
  or  schedule shall include any applicable license number. Such report or
  schedule shall include for each monthly  period  included  therein  such
  schedules  of additional information, data and other matters as shall be
  prescribed by the commissioner of taxation  and  finance.  Such  returns
  required  under  sections  eleven  hundred thirty-six and twelve hundred
  fifty-one for such persons described in subdivision (a) of this  section
  shall be deemed incomplete and not filed unless the separate information
  required  to  be reported for each separate garage, parking lot or other
  place of business is contained therein.
    (d) Upon the arrival of the commissioner, or any  authorized  employee
  of  the  department or agent of such commissioner or such department, at
  the  premises  of  a  person  required  to  collect  tax,  described  in
  subdivision  (a)  of  this section, the announcing by such commissioner,
  agent or employee of his or her presence and the display of his  or  her
  identification  to  such  person  or  to any officer or employee of such
  person, such commissioner, employee or agent may, during the hours  that
  such premises are open for business, enter and walk about the portion of
  the  premises in such a county where such person required to collect tax
  provides  such  service  of  parking,  garaging  or  storing  for  motor
  vehicles.  Such  person  and  the officers and employees of such persons
  shall not interfere with the commissioner or such employee or agent when
  such commissioner,  employee  or  agent  enters  and  walks  about  such
  premises  to  observe or record the make, model and license plate number
  of any vehicle parked, entering, exiting or being operated  within  such
  premises,  the length of time such vehicle is on such premises, the true
  motor vehicle capacity of the premises, and the  series  of  tickets  or
  other  memoranda,  and  their  numbers,  being issued at the time of the
  observation or recording. Such  entering  and  walking  about  and  such
  observation and recording are to be performed only in connection with an
  examination  of  a return, report or schedule, or entry thereon, of such
  person required to be filed under or pursuant to  articles  twenty-eight
  and  twenty-nine  of this chapter or in connection with the liability of
  such person for tax required to be  shown  on  such  return,  report  or
  schedule,  or  during  the  consideration  of  the initiation of such an
  examination. Nothing in this section shall authorize or be construed  to
  authorize  a  forced  entry into the premises; a search of the premises,
  with or without a warrant; the entry into any vehicle or compartment  or
  container  thereof,  whether  locked  or  unlocked;  the  seizure of any
  person, property, books, records, documents or other matter or thing; or
  the use of any information obtained by such observation or recording  in
  any  civil or criminal proceeding. Provided, however, that: (1) any such
  information may be used to assess, determine, fix, collect,  enforce  or
  administer  any  tax,  fee,  penalty  or  interest imposed on the person
  required to collect tax, described in subdivision (a) of  this  section,
  under  or  pursuant  to  articles  twenty-eight  and twenty-nine of this
  chapter; and (2) may be used in the prosecution of any crime or  offense
  related  thereto  pursuant  to  articles twenty-eight and twenty-nine of
  this chapter or the penal law where such information was obtained either
  as a result of the entry and walking about of an area as  to  which  the
  person  required  to  collect  the  tax has no reasonable expectation of
  privacy or as a result of a lawful investigative  procedure  other  than
  the  entry  and  walking  about authorized pursuant to this subdivision.
  Such entry and walking about shall be sought and made  only  during  the
  hours  that  such  premises  are  open for business. The commissioner of
  taxation and finance, such employee of the department and such agent  of
  the commissioner or such department shall not be required to give notice
  to such person or such person's representative of an intent to enter the


 premises  prior  to  the  time that such commissioner, employee or agent
  arrives at such person's premises.
    (e)  Every  person described in subdivision (a) of this section shall,
  upon receipt of a certificate  of  authority  and  on  an  annual  basis
  thereafter,  provided  such person periodically re-registers and remains
  in possession  of  such  certificate  of  authority,  receive  from  the
  commissioner  a  copy  of subdivision (d) of this section, a copy of all
  rules and regulations adopted thereunder, and a written  explanation  of
  the  power of the commissioner of taxation and finance to enter and walk
  about and the limitations thereon. Provided, however,  that  absence  of
  notice  will  not  constitute  a defense in any proceeding brought under
  this chapter.
    (f) The commissioner shall prepare, have  printed  and  distribute  to
  every  person  described  in  subdivision (a) of this section, a sign or
  poster that provides notice that the premises of such person are subject
  to periodic inspections by the department for purposes of enforcing this
  article. Such sign or poster must have conspicuous lettering in at least
  seventy-two point bold face type, except that such sign or poster  shall
  be captioned with the word "notice" in at least two inch lettering. Such
  person  shall  prominently  display such sign or poster in each place of
  business  where  such  person  provides  parking,  garaging  or  storing
  services.
    (g)  An  organization  described  in subdivision (a) of section eleven
  hundred sixteen of this article shall be exempt from the requirements of
  this section. Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed  to  exempt
  any  other  person from the requirements of this section, whether or not
  such other person operates a garage, parking or other place of  business
  or  sells  the  services  of  providing parking, garaging or storing for
  motor vehicles for or on behalf  of  such  an  organization  or  on  the
  property of such an organization.
    (h)  The  failure  of  any person described in subdivision (a) of this
  section to keep any of the records required to be kept by such person in
  the manner provided for any portion of the period during which  tax  can
  be  determined  or  the  inability of the commissioner or any authorized
  employee of the department, or agent of either of  them,  to  enter  and
  walk  about  such  person's  premises  for  the  purposes  described  in
  subdivision (d) of this section due to such person's lack of cooperation
  or interference in affording such entering and walking  about  for  such
  purposes  shall  be  sufficient grounds under subdivision (a) of section
  eleven hundred thirty-eight of this  article  for  the  commissioner  to
  estimate  on  the  basis  of  such  external  indices  selected  by  the
  commissioner the amount of tax that is due from such person.
    (i) The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations  necessary
  to implement the provisions of this section.
    (j)  The  commissioner,  by  regulation,  shall  establish  procedures
  designed to require implementation of subdivision (d) of this section in
  a manner that will not unreasonably interfere with the operation of  the
  person  described  in  subdivision  (a) of this section, with respect to
  such person providing the service of parking,  garaging  or  storing  of
  motor vehicles. Such regulations shall take into account reasonable time
  periods  for  such  commissioner,  agent  or  employee  to arrive at the
  premises of such person.
    (k) If a person described in  subdivision  (a)  of  this  section  can
  demonstrate  to  the  satisfaction  of  the commissioner that due to the
  limited annual liability incurred under this article, the provisions  of
  this  section  create  undue  hardship for such person, then such person
  shall not be required to comply with the  provisions  of  this  section;
  provided,  however,  that  such  person  must  comply  with  such  other


 recordkeeping  requirements  as  the  commissioner  may   require.   The
  commissioner  shall  establish general rules for which such hardship can
  be claimed.




   §  1143. Administration of oaths and compelling testimony. (a) The tax
  commission or its employees or agents duly designated and authorized  by
  it  shall have power to administer oaths and take affidavits in relation
  to any matter or proceeding in the exercise of their powers  and  duties
  under  this article. The tax commission shall have power to subpoena and
  require the attendance of witnesses and the production of books,  papers
  and  documents to secure information pertinent to the performance of its
  duties hereunder and of the enforcement of this article and  to  examine
  them  in  relation thereto, and to issue commissions for the examination
  of witnesses who are out of the state or unable to attend before  it  or
  excused from attendance.
    (b)  A  justice  of  the  supreme court either in court or at chambers
  shall  have  power  summarily  to  enforce  by  proper  proceedings  the
  attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production and examination
  of  books,  papers  and  documents called for by the subpoena of the tax
  commission under this article.
    (c) The officers  who  serve  the  summons  or  subpoena  of  the  tax
  commission and witnesses attending in response thereto shall be entitled
  to the same fees as are allowed to officers and witnesses in civil cases
  in  courts of record, except as herein otherwise provided. Such officers
  shall be the sheriff of any county and his duly  appointed  deputies  or
  any  officers  or  employees  of the department of taxation and finance,
  designated to serve such process.




   §  1144.  Reference  to tax. Whenever reference is made in placards or
  advertisements or in any other publications to any tax imposed  by  this
  article,  such  reference  shall be in substantially the following form:
  "sales and use tax"; except that in  any  bill,  receipt,  statement  or
  other  evidence  or  memorandum  of  sale,  services rendered, amusement
  charges, dues, rent  or  occupancy,  issued  or  employed  by  a  person
  required  to collect tax, if the tax is required to be stated separately
  thereon as  provided  in  subdivision  (a)  of  section  eleven  hundred
  thirty-two, the word "tax" will suffice.




   § 1145. Penalties and interest. (a) (1) (i) Any person failing to file
  a  return or to pay or pay over any tax to the tax commission within the
  time required by or pursuant to this article (determined with regard  to
  any  extension  of  time  for  filing  or  paying) shall be subject to a
  penalty of ten percent of the amount of tax due if such failure  is  for
  not  more  than  one  month,  with  an  additional  one percent for each
  additional  month  or  fraction  thereof  during  which   such   failure
  continues,  not  exceeding  thirty  percent  in the aggregate. Provided,
  however, in the case of a failure to file such return within sixty  days
  of  the date prescribed for filing of such return by or pursuant to this
  article (determined with regard to any extension of  time  for  filing),
  the  penalty  imposed  by  this  subparagraph shall not be less than the
  lesser of one hundred dollars or  one  hundred  percent  of  the  amount
  required  to  be  shown  as  tax  on such return. For the purpose of the
  preceding sentence, the amount of tax required to be shown on the return
  shall be reduced by the amount of any part of the tax which is  paid  on
  or  before  the date prescribed for payment of the tax and by the amount
  of any credit against the tax which may be claimed upon the  return.  In
  the  case of a failure to file a return by a person required to register
  with  the  tax  commission  as  provided  in  section   eleven   hundred
  thirty-four,  in no event shall the penalty for failure to file a return
  be less than fifty dollars.
    (ii) If any amount of tax is not paid  on  or  before  the  last  date
  prescribed  in  this article for payment, interest on such amount at the
  rate of fourteen and one-half percent per annum or at  the  underpayment
  rate  set  by  the  commissioner  pursuant  to  section  eleven  hundred
  forty-two of this part, whichever is greater,  shall  be  paid  for  the
  period  from  such  last  date  to  the  date  paid,  whether or not any
  extension  of  time  for  payment  was  granted.  Interest  under   this
  subparagraph  shall  not  be paid if the amount thereof is less than one
  dollar.
    (iii) If the commissioner of taxation and finance determines that such
  failure or delay was due to reasonable cause  and  not  due  to  willful
  neglect,  he  shall  remit  all of such penalty and that portion of such
  interest that exceeds  the  interest  that  would  be  payable  if  such
  interest  were computed at the underpayment rate set by the commissioner
  of taxation and finance pursuant to section  eleven  hundred  forty-two.
  The  commissioner  shall  promulgate  rules  and  regulations as to what
  constitutes reasonable cause.
    (iv) Provided, however, in the case  of  a  long-form,  part-quarterly
  return, no penalty or interest shall be payable with respect to a return
  and  payment  of  estimated  tax  required  to  be  filed and paid under
  subdivisions (a) and (b) of section eleven  hundred  thirty-seven-A  for
  March,  nineteen  hundred  seventy-six,  nineteen hundred seventy-seven,
  nineteen hundred seventy-eight, nineteen hundred seventy-nine,  nineteen
  hundred   eighty,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-one  and  nineteen  hundred
  eighty-two, if such returns are timely filed, accompanied by  a  payment
  of  not  less than ninety percent of the tax as finally determined to be
  due and  payable  for  March,  nineteen  hundred  seventy-six,  nineteen
  hundred  seventy-seven, nineteen hundred seventy-eight, nineteen hundred
  seventy-nine, nineteen hundred eighty, nineteen hundred  eighty-one  and
  nineteen  hundred  eighty-two.  Provided, further, that interest, at the
  rate  authorized  under  subdivision  nine  of  section  eleven  hundred
  forty-two,  shall  be payable upon the amount of any underpayment of the
  tax due with the  returns  due  on  March  twentieth,  nineteen  hundred
  seventy-six,    nineteen   hundred   seventy-seven,   nineteen   hundred
  seventy-eight, nineteen hundred seventy-nine, nineteen  hundred  eighty,
  nineteen  hundred  eighty-one  and  nineteen hundred eighty-two, for the


 period of such underpayment, but not beyond the due  date  of  the  next
  part-quarterly return.
    (v)  Provided,  further,  in  the case of a March estimated return, no
  penalty or interest shall be  payable  with  respect  to  a  return  and
  payment of estimated tax required to be filed and paid under subdivision
  (c) of section eleven hundred thirty-seven-A for March, nineteen hundred
  eighty-three  and  each  subsequent  March  through and including March,
  nineteen hundred ninety, if such returns are timely  filed,  accompanied
  by  a  payment of either: (A) not less than ninety percent of the tax as
  finally determined to be due and payable for the month of March in which
  the March estimated tax return is required to be filed; or  (B)  in  the
  event such person has had at least four successive quarterly tax periods
  immediately  preceding the March twentieth for which the return is to be
  filed, at least one-third  of  the  sales  and  compensating  use  taxes
  payable  by  such  person to the commissioner of taxation and finance in
  the comparable quarter of the immediately preceding year. However, where
  interest is payable because of a failure to  meet  the  requirements  of
  either  clause (A) or (B) of this subparagraph such interest shall be at
  the underpayment rate  authorized  under  subdivision  nine  of  section
  eleven  hundred forty-two upon any underpayment of the amount of tax due
  for the period of such underpayment, but not beyond the due date of  the
  next  part-quarterly  return.  For  purposes  of  this subparagraph, the
  underpayment of the amount of tax  due  shall  be:  (A)  the  difference
  between  the  amount  paid  and  ninety  percent  of  the amount finally
  determined  to  be  due  and  payable  for   March,   nineteen   hundred
  eighty-three and for March of each subsequent year through and including
  March,  nineteen  hundred ninety, or (B) if such person has had at least
  four successive quarterly tax periods immediately  preceding  the  March
  for  which  the return was filed, the difference between the amount paid
  and one-third of the sales and compensating use taxes  payable  by  such
  person to the commissioner for the comparable quarter of the immediately
  preceding  year  under  this article, whichever is less. Notwithstanding
  the preceding sentence, for purposes of this subparagraph: (1)  the  tax
  as finally determined to be due and payable for such month of March, and
  (2)  the  sales  and  compensating  use taxes payable for the comparable
  quarter of the immediately  preceding  year;  shall  not  include  taxes
  imposed  by section eleven hundred seven or eleven hundred eight of this
  article or pursuant to the authority  of  article  twenty-nine  of  this
  chapter.  Provided,  however, all other provisions of this article shall
  apply in the determination of such taxes.
    (vi) Any person required by this article to file a return,  who  omits
  from  the  total  amount  of  state and local sales and compensating use
  taxes required to be shown on a return an amount which is in  excess  of
  twenty-five  percent of the amount of such taxes required to be shown on
  the return shall be subject to a penalty equal to  ten  percent  of  the
  amount  of such omission. The amount of the omission under the preceding
  sentence shall be reduced by that  portion  of  the  omission  which  is
  attributable to the tax treatment of any item by such person if there is
  or  was  substantial  authority  for  such  treatment,  or any item with
  respect to which the relevant facts affecting the item's  tax  treatment
  are adequately disclosed in the return or in a statement attached to the
  return.  If  the tax commission determines that such omission was due to
  reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect, it shall remit  all  of
  such  penalty.  The  penalty provided for in this subparagraph shall not
  apply to any return of estimated tax required to be filed under  section
  eleven hundred thirty-seven-A.
    (vii) Any owner of a filling station who shall willfully and knowingly
  have  in  his custody, possession or under his control any motor fuel or


 diesel motor fuel on which (A) the prepaid tax imposed by section eleven
  hundred two  of  this  article  has  not  been  assumed  or  paid  by  a
  distributor  registered  as such under article twelve-A of this chapter,
  or  (B)  the  prepaid  tax imposed by section eleven hundred two of this
  article was required to have been passed through to him and has not been
  included in the cost of such fuel to him shall be liable for  a  penalty
  in the amount of twice the tax so not assumed or paid, or included. Such
  penalty  shall  be  determined, assessed, collected and paid in the same
  manner as taxes imposed by this article and all the provisions  of  this
  article  relating  thereto  shall be deemed also to refer to the penalty
  imposed by this paragraph  and,  for  this  purpose,  the  term  "person
  required  to  collect  tax"  shall  be  deemed  to include an owner of a
  filling station. Such penalty may be determined at any time within three
  years after such motor fuel or diesel motor fuel shall  have  come  into
  his  custody,  possession or control. For purposes of this subparagraph,
  such owner shall willfully and knowingly have in his custody, possession
  or under his control motor fuel or diesel motor fuel on which  (A)  such
  tax  has not been assumed or paid by a distributor registered as such or
  (B) such tax was required to have been passed through to him and has not
  been included in the cost of such fuel  to  him  where  such  owner  has
  knowledge  of  the requirement that such taxes be paid and where, to his
  knowledge, such taxes have not been so included. For  purposes  of  this
  subparagraph,  it  shall  be  presumptive evidence that such owner shall
  willfully and knowingly have in his custody,  possession  or  under  his
  control  motor  fuel  or diesel motor fuel (A) on which such tax has not
  been assumed or paid by a distributor registered as such or (B) on which
  such tax was required to have been passed through to  him  and  has  not
  been  included  in the cost of such fuel to him where such owner has not
  received the certification required by subdivision (h) of section eleven
  hundred thirty-two of this article at the time of delivery of such motor
  fuel  or  diesel  motor  fuel  or,  in  those  circumstances  where  the
  commissioner has authorized the delivery of such certification at a time
  after  delivery  of  the  motor  fuel  or diesel motor fuel, at the time
  prescribed by the commissioner.
    (viii) Any person required to collect  tax  who  sells  cigarettes  at
  retail  and  who  shall  willfully  and  knowingly have in such person's
  custody or possession or under such person's control any  cigarettes  on
  which  (A)  the  prepaid  tax imposed by section eleven hundred three of
  this article has not been assumed or paid by an agent licensed  as  such
  under  article twenty of this chapter, or (B) the prepaid tax imposed by
  such section eleven hundred three  was  required  to  have  been  passed
  through  to  such  person  and has not been included in the cost of such
  cigarettes to such person, shall be liable for a penalty in  the  amount
  of twice the tax not so assumed or paid, or included. Such penalty shall
  be  determined, assessed, collected and paid in the same manner as taxes
  imposed by this article and all the provisions of this article  relating
  thereto  shall  be  deemed  also to refer to the penalty imposed by this
  subparagraph. Such penalty may be determined at any  time  within  three
  years  after  such cigarettes shall have come into such person's custody
  or possession or under such  person's  control.  For  purposes  of  this
  subparagraph,  such  person  shall  willfully and knowingly have in such
  person's custody or possession or under such person's control cigarettes
  on which (A) such tax has not been assumed or paid by an agent  licensed
  as  such  under  article  twenty  of  this  chapter, or (B) such tax was
  required to have been passed through to such person  and  has  not  been
  included  in  the  cost  of  such  cigarettes to such person, where such
  person has knowledge of the requirement  that  such  taxes  be  paid  or
  assumed or so included and where, to such person's knowledge, such taxes


 have  not  been  so paid or assumed or so included. For purposes of this
  subparagraph, it shall be presumptive evidence that  such  person  shall
  willfully  and  knowingly have in such person's custody or possession or
  under  such  person's  control  cigarettes on which (A) such tax has not
  been assumed or paid by an agent authorized as such under  such  article
  twenty  or (B) such tax was required to have been passed through to such
  person and has not been included in the cost of such cigarettes to  such
  person  where such person has not received the certification required by
  subdivision (k) of section eleven hundred thirty-two of this article  at
  the time of delivery of such cigarettes or, in those circumstances where
  the  commissioner has authorized the delivery of such certification at a
  time after delivery of the cigarettes, at the  time  prescribed  by  the
  commissioner.
    (ix)  In  addition to any other penalty or interest under this article
  or other law, any credit card issuer or fuel distributor, as defined  in
  subdivision  (h) of section eleven hundred thirty-nine of this part, who
  receives a refund or credit pursuant to such subdivision knowing, at the
  time the refund application is filed or the credit is  taken,  that  the
  motor  fuel  or  diesel  motor fuel purchased was not for the government
  entity's own use or consumption, shall be liable for a  penalty  in  the
  amount  of  the  tax  refunded or credited, plus applicable interest due
  under this article.
    (2) If the failure to pay or pay over  any  tax  to  the  commissioner
  within the time required by this article is due to fraud, in lieu of the
  penalties  and  interest  provided  for in subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of
  paragraph one of this subdivision, there shall be added to the tax (i) a
  penalty of two times the amount of the tax due, plus  (ii)  interest  on
  such  unpaid  tax at the rate of fourteen and one-half percent per annum
  or the underpayment rate of interest set by the commissioner pursuant to
  section eleven hundred forty-two of this part, whichever is greater, for
  the period beginning on the last day prescribed by this article for  the
  payment  of such tax (determined without regard to any extension of time
  for paying) and ending on the day on which such tax is paid.
    (3) (i) Any person required to obtain a certificate of authority under
  section eleven hundred thirty-four of this part who, without  possessing
  a  valid  certificate of authority, (A) sells tangible personal property
  or services subject to tax, receives amusement  charges  or  operates  a
  hotel, (B) purchases or sells tangible personal property for resale, (C)
  sells  petroleum products, or (D) sells cigarettes shall, in addition to
  any other penalty imposed by this chapter, be subject to a penalty in an
  amount not exceeding five hundred dollars for the  first  day  on  which
  such  sales  or  purchases  are  made,  plus an amount not exceeding two
  hundred dollars for each subsequent day on which such sales or purchases
  are made, not to exceed ten thousand dollars in the aggregate.
    (ii) Any person who fails to surrender a certificate of authority when
  a notice of revocation or suspension has become final shall, in addition
  to any other penalty imposed by this chapter, be subject to a penalty in
  an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars for the first day  of  such
  failure,  together with a penalty in an amount not exceeding two hundred
  dollars for each subsequent day of  such  failure,  not  to  exceed  ten
  thousand dollars in the aggregate.
    (iii)  Any person described in paragraph one or two of subdivision (a)
  of section eleven hundred thirty-four who takes possession  of  or  pays
  for  business  assets under circumstances requiring notification by such
  person to the tax commission pursuant  to  subdivision  (c)  of  section
  eleven   hundred   forty-one  without  having  filed  a  certificate  of
  registration pursuant to section eleven hundred  thirty-four  shall,  in


 addition  to  any other penalty imposed by this chapter, be subject to a
  penalty in an amount not exceeding two hundred dollars.
    (iv)  If  the  tax  commission  determines  that  any  failure  or act
  described in this paragraph was due to reasonable cause and not  due  to
  willful neglect, it may remit all or part of such penalty.
    (4)  Any  person  required by this article to display a certificate of
  authority, who fails to display such certificate in the manner  required
  by  this article or any rule or regulation adopted by the tax commission
  in connection with such requirement shall,  in  addition  to  any  other
  penalty  imposed  by  this  chapter,  be  subject  to a penalty of fifty
  dollars. If the tax commission determines that such failure was  due  to
  reasonable  cause  and  not  due to willful neglect, it may remit all or
  part of such penalty.
    (5) Any person who issues  a  false  or  fraudulent  resale  or  other
  exemption  certificate  or  document  with intent to evade tax shall, in
  addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter, be subject  to  a
  penalty  of  one hundred percent of the tax that would have been due had
  there not been a misuse of such certificate or document and a penalty of
  fifty dollars for each such certificate or document.
    (6) The tax commission shall promulgate rules and  regulations  as  to
  what constitutes reasonable cause for purposes of this subdivision.
    (7)  The penalties and interest provided for in this subdivision shall
  be paid and disposed of in the same manner as other revenues  from  this
  article.  Such  penalties  and  interest  may  be  determined, assessed,
  collected and enforced in the same manner as the  tax  imposed  by  this
  article. Interest under this subdivision shall be compounded daily.
    (b)  Cross-reference: For criminal penalties, see article thirty-seven
  of this chapter.
    (c) Any person failing to file a return or to pay any tax required  to
  be  prepaid  to  the  commissioner  with respect to motor fuel or diesel
  motor fuel pursuant to the provisions of section eleven hundred  two  of
  this article within the time required by this article shall, in addition
  to  any  other  penalty provided in this article or otherwise imposed by
  law, be subject to a penalty equal to the amount of tax required  to  be
  so  prepaid  pursuant  to  the provisions of such section eleven hundred
  two.  If the commissioner determines that such failure to file a  return
  or  to  pay  any  such  tax  was  due to reasonable cause and not due to
  willful neglect, he shall remit all or any part of such penalty.
    (d) The certificate of the tax commission to the effect that a tax has
  not been paid, that a return, bond or registration certificate  has  not
  been  filed,  or  that information has not been supplied pursuant to the
  provisions of this article shall be presumptive evidence thereof.
    (e) Any officer, director, shareholder or employee of a corporation or
  of a dissolved corporation, any employee of a partnership, any  employee
  or  manager  of  a  limited  liability  company,  or  any employee of an
  individual proprietorship, who as such officer,  director,  shareholder,
  employee  or  manager  is  under  a  duty  to  act for such corporation,
  partnership, limited liability company or  proprietorship  in  complying
  with any requirement of this article, and any member of a partnership or
  limited  liability  company,  which  fails to pay the tax required to be
  prepaid by section eleven hundred two or eleven hundred  three  of  this
  article,  shall,  in  addition  to  other  penalties provided by law, be
  liable for a penalty equal to the total amount of the tax not paid, plus
  penalties and interest computed pursuant  to  subdivision  (a)  of  this
  section  as  if such person were a distributor under article twelve-a of
  this  chapter  or  an  agent  under  article  twenty  of  this  chapter,
  respectively.  If  the commissioner determines that such failure was due
  to reasonable cause and not due to  willful  neglect,  the  commissioner


 shall  remit all or part of such penalty imposed under this subdivision.
  Such penalty shall be determined, assessed, collected and  paid  in  the
  same  manner as the tax required to be prepaid by section eleven hundred
  two  or  eleven  hundred  three, as the case may be, of this article and
  shall be disposed of as provided with respect  to  moneys  derived  from
  either  such  tax,  respectively.  Provided,  however,  that the penalty
  provided for by this subdivision shall not be imposed on any  person  on
  account  of  the  failure  of such a distributor or agent to pay the tax
  required to be prepaid by section eleven hundred two or  eleven  hundred
  three,  respectively,  of this article if such person is liable for such
  tax pursuant to subdivision (b) of such section eleven  hundred  two  or
  subdivision (b) of such section eleven hundred three, respectively.
    (f)  Any entertainment promoter who authorizes an entertainment vendor
  to make taxable sales of tangible personal property at an  entertainment
  event  with  respect to which he is a promoter, where such vendor is not
  registered under subdivision (a) of section eleven  hundred  thirty-four
  shall,  in  addition  to  any  other penalty provided in this article or
  otherwise imposed by law, be subject to a penalty of not more  than  ten
  thousand dollars with respect to each such entertainment event.
    (g)  (1)  Any  person  failing  to  keep any of the additional records
  required to be kept pursuant to section eleven  hundred  forty-two-A  of
  this  article,  shall, in addition to any other penalty provided in this
  article or otherwise imposed by law, be  subject  to  a  penalty  in  an
  amount  not  to  exceed five hundred dollars where such records have not
  been kept for a month or part thereof. Such penalty for failure to  keep
  such  records  shall not be imposed and collected more than once for any
  such failure to keep records for such month or part thereof.
    (2) Any person described in subdivision (a) of section eleven  hundred
  forty-two-A  of  this  chapter  who fails to consent to the entering and
  walking about for  the  purposes  described  in  such  section,  or  who
  interferes  with  the  commissioner  or  any  authorized employee of the
  department, or the agent of either of them, with respect to entering and
  walking about for the purposes  described  in  such  section,  or  whose
  employee  fails  to consent or interferes with such entering and walking
  about for the purposes described in such section, shall, in addition  to
  any  other penalty provided in this article or otherwise imposed by law,
  be subject to a penalty in an amount not to exceed five hundred  dollars
  for  the  first  day of such failure to consent or the first day of such
  interference. Each subsequent day any such  failure  to  consent  to  or
  interference  with  such entering and walking about shall occur shall be
  subject to an additional penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars.  In
  no  event,  shall  such  penalties  exceed  ten  thousand dollars in the
  aggregate.
    (3) If the commissioner determines that  such  failure  to  keep  such
  records  described  in  paragraph  one  of this subdivision or that such
  failure to consent to or such interference with the entering and walking
  about described  in  paragraph  two  of  this  subdivision  was  due  to
  reasonable  cause and not due to willful neglect, the commissioner shall
  remit all or any part of such penalty. Such penalties shall be paid  and
  disposed of in the same manner as other revenues from this article. Such
  penalties shall be determined, assessed, collected, paid and enforced in
  the  same  manner  as  the  tax  imposed  by  this  article  and all the
  provisions of this article relating to tax shall be deemed also to apply
  to the penalties imposed by this subdivision.
    (h) (1) Any person required to file a report pursuant  to  subdivision
  (h)  of  section eleven hundred thirty-six of this article, who fails to
  include the name or certificate of authority  number  of  any  itinerant
  vendor or the sales for resale made to such vendor and the amounts paid,


 charged  or  due thereon, required to be included in such report, or who
  fails to include such information which is true and correct,  shall,  in
  addition  to  any  other  penalty  provided in this article or otherwise
  imposed  by  law,  be  subject  to  a penalty computed by multiplying an
  amount not to exceed fifty dollars by the number  of  itinerant  vendors
  required to be included in such report that are not so included (whether
  or  not  such  a  report  is filed) or for which incomplete or incorrect
  information has been reported.
    (2)  Any  person  failing  to  file  a  report  required  pursuant  to
  subdivision  (h)  of  section  eleven hundred thirty-six of this article
  within the time required by regulations  promulgated  pursuant  to  such
  subdivision,  shall,  in  addition to any other penalty provided in this
  article or otherwise imposed by law, be  subject  to  a  penalty  in  an
  amount not to exceed five hundred dollars for each such failure.
    (3)  In  no  event  shall the penalty imposed by paragraph one of this
  subdivision, or the aggregate of the penalties imposed by paragraphs one
  and two of this subdivision, exceed five thousand dollars for any twelve
  month period commencing June first and ending May  thirty-first  of  the
  following year.
    (4)  If  the  commissioner  determines  that  any  failure  to include
  information, or to include true and correct  information,  in  a  report
  required  to  be filed, or failure to timely file a report, as described
  in this subdivision, was due to reasonable cause and not due to  willful
  neglect,  the  commissioner  shall  remit  all  or  part  of  any of the
  penalties imposed  under  this  subdivision.  Such  penalties  shall  be
  determined,  assessed,  collected, paid, disposed of and enforced in the
  same manner as taxes imposed by this article and all the  provisions  of
  this  article  relating  thereto  shall  be deemed also to refer to such
  penalties.
    * (i) Any person required to  make  or  maintain  records  under  this
  article  (but  not  including  the records required under section eleven
  hundred forty-two-A of this part) who fails to make or maintain or  make
  available  to the commissioner these records is subject to a penalty not
  to exceed one thousand dollars for the first quarter or part thereof for
  which the failure occurs and not to exceed  five  thousand  dollars  for
  each  additional  quarterly period or part thereof for which the failure
  occurs. This penalty is in addition to any other penalty provided for in
  this article but may not be imposed and collected  more  than  once  for
  failures  for  the  same  quarterly  period  or  part  thereof.  If  the
  commissioner determines that a failure  to  make  or  maintain  or  make
  available  records  in  any quarter was entirely due to reasonable cause
  and not to willful neglect, the  commissioner  must  remit  the  penalty
  imposed  for  that quarter. These penalties will be paid and disposed of
  in the same manner as other revenues from this article. These  penalties
  will  be  determined, assessed, collected, paid and enforced in the same
  manner as the tax imposed by this article, and  all  the  provisions  of
  this  article  relating  to  tax  will  be  deemed  also to apply to the
  penalties imposed by this  subdivision.  For  purposes  of  the  penalty
  imposed  by this subdivision, a person will be considered to have failed
  to make or maintain the  required  records  when  the  records  made  or
  maintained  by  that  person  for  a  quarterly period make it virtually
  impossible to verify sales receipts or the taxability of those  receipts
  and to conduct a complete audit.
    * NB There are 3 sb (i)'s
    * (i)(1)  Every  person  required  to  file  an  information return by
  subdivision (i) of section eleven hundred thirty-six of  this  part  who
  (A) fails to provide any of the information required by paragraph one or
  two of subdivision (i) of section eleven hundred thirty-six of this part


 for  a  vendor, operator, or recipient, or who fails to include any such
  information that is true and correct (whether or not such  a  report  is
  filed) for a vendor, operator, or recipient, or (B) fails to provide the
  information  required  by  paragraph  four of subdivision (i) of section
  eleven hundred thirty-six  of  this  part  to  a  vendor,  operator,  or
  recipient  specified  in  paragraph  four  of subdivision (i) of section
  eleven hundred thirty-six of this part, will, in addition to  any  other
  penalty provided in this article or otherwise imposed by law, be subject
  to  a  penalty of five hundred dollars for ten or fewer failures, and up
  to fifty dollars for each additional failure.
    (2) Every person failing to file an  information  return  required  by
  subdivision (i) of section eleven hundred thirty-six of this part within
  the   time  required  by  subdivision  (i)  of  section  eleven  hundred
  thirty-six of this part will, in addition to any other penalty  provided
  for in this article or otherwise imposed by law, be subject to a penalty
  in  an  amount not to exceed two thousand dollars for each such failure,
  provided that the minimum penalty under this paragraph is  five  hundred
  dollars.
    (3)  In  no  event  will  the penalty imposed by paragraph one, or the
  aggregate of the penalties imposed under paragraphs one and two of  this
  subdivision, exceed ten thousand dollars for any annual filing period as
  described  by  paragraph  three  of  subdivision  (i)  of section eleven
  hundred thirty-six of this part.
    (4) If the commissioner determines that any of the failures  that  are
  subject to penalty under this subdivision was entirely due to reasonable
  cause  and  not  due to willful neglect, the commissioner must remit the
  penalty  imposed  under  this  subdivision.  These  penalties  will   be
  determined,  assessed,  collected, paid, disposed of and enforced in the
  same manner as taxes imposed by this article and all the  provisions  of
  this  article  relating  thereto  will  be deemed also to refer to these
  penalties.
    * NB There are 3 sb (i)'s
    * (i) Aiding  or  assisting  in  the  giving  of  fraudulent  returns,
  reports,  statements or other documents. Any person who, with the intent
  that tax be evaded, for a fee or other compensation or as an incident to
  the performance  of  other  services  for  which  that  person  receives
  compensation,  aids or assists in, or procures, counsels, or advises the
  preparation or presentation under this article, or  in  connection  with
  any   matter   arising  under  this  article,  of  any  return,  report,
  declaration, statement or other document that is fraudulent or false  as
  to any material matter, or supplies any false or fraudulent information,
  whether or not such falsity or fraud is with the knowledge or consent of
  the  person  authorized  or  required  to  present  that return, report,
  declaration, statement  or  other  document,  will  pay  a  penalty  not
  exceeding  five  thousand  dollars. The definitions in subsection (l) of
  section ten hundred eighty-five of this chapter apply for  the  purposes
  of this penalty.
    * NB There are 3 sb (i)'s
    * (j)  Any  person  required  to  make  or maintain records under this
  article who fails to present and make  available  these  records  in  an
  auditable  form  is  subject  to  a  penalty  not to exceed one thousand
  dollars for each quarterly period or  part  thereof  for  which  records
  maintained  by  that person are not presented and made available by that
  person in auditable form, even if these records are adequate  to  verify
  credits,  receipts, and the taxability thereof and to perform a complete
  audit. This penalty is in addition to any other penalty provided for  in
  this  article,  but will not be imposed and collected more than once for
  these failures for the same quarterly period or  part  thereof.  If  the


 commissioner  determines  that any failure described in this subdivision
  for a quarterly period was entirely due to reasonable cause and  not  to
  willful  neglect,  the  commissioner  must remit the penalty imposed for
  that quarter. The penalties imposed by this subdivision will be paid and
  disposed  of  in  the  same  manner as other revenues from this article.
  These penalties  will  be  determined,  assessed,  collected,  paid  and
  enforced  in the same manner as the tax imposed by this article, and all
  the provisions of this article relating to tax will be  deemed  also  to
  apply  to the penalties imposed by this subdivision. For purposes of the
  penalty imposed by this subdivision, a person will be considered to have
  failed to present and make records available in auditable form when  the
  records  presented  by  that  person  for  that  quarter lack sufficient
  organization, such as  by  date,  invoice  number,  sales  receipts,  or
  sequential numbering, or are otherwise inadequate (without reorganizing,
  reordering  or otherwise rearranging the records into an auditable form)
  to permit direct reconciliation  of  the  receipts,  invoices  or  other
  source  documents with the entries for the quarterly period in the books
  and records and on the returns of that person.
    * NB There are 2 sb (j)'s
    * (j) False or fraudulent document penalty. Any taxpayer that  submits
  a  false  or  fraudulent document to the department will be subject to a
  penalty of one hundred dollars per document submitted, or  five  hundred
  dollars  per  tax  return submitted. This penalty will be in addition to
  any other penalty provided by law.
    * NB There are 2 sb (j)'s
    (k) Any person who, having elected to maintain in an electronic format
  any portion or all of the records he or she  is  required  to  make  and
  maintain  by  this  article,  fails  to  present  and make these records
  available and accessible to the commissioner in  electronic  format,  is
  subject  to  a  penalty  not  to  exceed  five thousand dollars for each
  quarterly period or part thereof for which these electronic records  are
  not   presented   and   made  available  and  accessible  upon  request,
  notwithstanding that the records may also be maintained and available in
  hard copy format. This penalty is  in  addition  to  any  other  penalty
  provided  for in this article, but may not be imposed and collected more
  than once for a failure for the same quarterly period or  part  thereof.
  Provided, however, nothing in this subdivision will prevent the separate
  imposition,  if applicable, of any penalty imposed by subdivision (i) or
  (j) of this section for the same quarterly period or  part  thereof.  If
  the  commissioner  determines  that  the  failure  to  present  and make
  electronically  maintained  records  available  and  accessible  for   a
  quarterly period was entirely due to reasonable cause and not to willful
  neglect,  the  commissioner  must  remit  the  penalty  imposed for that
  quarter. These penalties will be paid and disposed of in the same manner
  as other revenues from this article. These penalties will be determined,
  assessed, collected, paid and enforced in the same  manner  as  the  tax
  imposed by this article, and all the provisions of this article relating
  to  tax  will  be  deemed  also  to apply to the penalty imposed by this
  subdivision. For purposes of the penalty imposed by this subdivision,  a
  failure to present and make available and accessible a record maintained
  in  electronic  format  includes  not  only  the denial of access to the
  requested records that were  maintained  electronically,  but  also  the
  failure   to   make  available  to  the  commissioner  the  information,
  knowledge,  or  means  necessary  to  access  and  otherwise   use   the
  electronically  maintained  records in the inspection and examination of
  these records.




   §  1146.  Returns  to be secret.  (a) Except in accordance with proper
  judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for
  the commissioner, any officer or employee of the department of  taxation
  and  finance,  any  person  engaged or retained by such department on an
  independent contract basis, or any person who in any manner may  acquire
  knowledge  of  the  contents  of  a  return  or  report  filed  with the
  commissioner pursuant to this article, to divulge or make known  in  any
  manner  any  particulars  set  forth  or disclosed in any such return or
  report. The officers charged  with  the  custody  of  such  returns  and
  reports  shall  not  be  required  to produce any of them or evidence of
  anything contained in them in any action or  proceeding  in  any  court,
  except  on  behalf  of the commissioner in an action or proceeding under
  the provisions of the tax law or  in  any  other  action  or  proceeding
  involving  the  collection  of a tax due under this chapter to which the
  state or the commissioner is a party or a claimant, or on behalf of  any
  party  to any action, proceeding or hearing under the provisions of this
  article when the returns, reports or facts shown  thereby  are  directly
  involved  in  such action, proceeding or hearing, in any of which events
  the court, or in the case of a hearing, the commissioner may require the
  production of, and may admit into evidence, so  much  of  said  returns,
  reports  or  of the facts shown thereby, as are pertinent to the action,
  proceeding or hearing and no more. The commissioner  may,  nevertheless,
  publish  a  copy  or  a summary of any decision rendered after a hearing
  required by this article. Nothing herein shall be construed to  prohibit
  the  delivery  to  a person who has filed a return or report or his duly
  authorized representative of a certified copy of any  return  or  report
  filed  in  connection  with  his  tax.    Nor  shall  anything herein be
  construed to prohibit the delivery to a person required to  collect  the
  tax under this article or a purchaser, transferee or assignee personally
  liable under the provisions of subdivision (c) of section eleven hundred
  forty-one of this chapter for the tax due from the seller, transferor or
  assignor, of any return or report filed under this article in connection
  with  such  tax  provided,  however, that there may be delivered only so
  much of said return, report  or  of  the  facts  shown  thereby  as  are
  pertinent  to a determination of the taxes due or liability owed by such
  person or purchaser, transferee or assignee and no more or  to  prohibit
  the   publication   of  statistics  so  classified  as  to  prevent  the
  identification of particular returns or reports and the  items  thereof,
  or the inspection by the attorney general or other legal representatives
  of  the  state of the return or report of any person required to collect
  or pay the tax who shall bring action to review the tax  based  thereon,
  or  against  whom  an  action  or proceeding under this chapter has been
  recommended by the commissioner of taxation and finance or the  attorney
  general  or  has  been  instituted,  or the inspection of the returns or
  reports  required  under  this  article  by  the  comptroller  or   duly
  designated  officer  or  employee  of  the state department of audit and
  control, for purposes of the audit of a refund of  any  tax  paid  by  a
  person  required to collect or pay the tax under this article. Provided,
  further, nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit  the  disclosure,
  in  such  manner as the commissioner deems appropriate, of the names and
  other appropriate  identifying  information  of  those  persons  holding
  certificates of authority pursuant to section eleven hundred thirty-four
  of this article, those persons whose certificates of authority have been
  suspended or revoked, those persons whose certificates of authority have
  expired,  those persons who have filed a certificate of registration for
  a certificate of authority where the commissioner has refused to issue a
  certificate of authority, those persons holding direct  payment  permits
  pursuant  to  section  eleven  hundred thirty-two or those persons whose


 direct  payment  permits  have  been  suspended  or   revoked   by   the
  commissioner;   and  provided  further  that  nothing  herein  shall  be
  construed to prohibit the disclosure, in such manner as the commissioner
  deems  appropriate,  of  information related to the tax on admissions to
  race tracks and simulcast facilities to the  gaming  commission  or  the
  division of the budget.
    (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision (a) of this section,
  the  tax commission may, in its discretion, permit the proper officer of
  any city, county or school  district  imposing  any  tax  authorized  by
  article  twenty-nine,  or the authorized representative of such officer,
  to inspect any return filed under this article, or may furnish  to  such
  officer  or his authorized representative an abstract of any such return
  or supply him with information concerning an item contained in any  such
  return,  or  disclosed  by any investigation of tax liability under this
  article; but such  permission  shall  be  granted  or  such  information
  furnished  only  if  such  city,  county  or  school district shall have
  furnished the tax  commission  with  all  information  requested  by  it
  pursuant to article twenty-nine of this chapter and shall have permitted
  the  tax  commission  or  its  authorized  representative  to  make  any
  inspection of returns or reports filed with such city, county or  school
  district  which  the  tax commission may have requested pursuant to said
  section.
    (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision (a) of this section,
  the tax commission, in its discretion, may require or permit any or  all
  persons  liable  for  any  tax or required to collect any tax imposed by
  this article,  to  make  payment  to  banks,  banking  houses  or  trust
  companies designated by the tax commission and to file returns with such
  banks,   banking  houses  or  trust  companies  as  agents  of  the  tax
  commission, in  lieu  of  paying  any  such  tax  directly  to  the  tax
  commission. However, the tax commission shall designate only such banks,
  banking  houses  or  trust  companies  as  are already designated by the
  comptroller  as  depositories  pursuant  to   section   eleven   hundred
  forty-eight.
    (d) Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision (a) of this section,
  the  tax  commission  may  permit  the  secretary of the treasury of the
  United States or his delegates, or the proper tax officer of  any  state
  imposing   a   sales   or   compensating  use  tax,  or  the  authorized
  representative of either such officer, to inspect any return filed under
  this  article,  or  may  furnish  to  such  officer  or  his  authorized
  representative  an  abstract  of  any  such  return  or  supply him with
  information  concerning  an  item  contained  in  any  such  return,  or
  disclosed  by any investigation of tax liability under this article, but
  such permission shall be granted or such information furnished  only  if
  the  laws  of  the United States or of such other state, as the case may
  be, grant substantially similar privileges to the commission or  officer
  of this state charged with the administration of the tax imposed by this
  article,  and  only  if  such information is to be used for tax purposes
  only; and provided further the commissioner of taxation and finance  may
  furnish  to  the  commissioner  of  internal  revenue  or his authorized
  representative such returns filed  under  this  article  and  other  tax
  information,  as  he  may  consider  proper, for use in court actions or
  proceedings under the internal revenue code, whether civil or  criminal,
  where  a  written  request therefor has been made to the commissioner of
  taxation and finance by the secretary of  the  treasury  of  the  United
  States  or  his  delegates, provided the laws of the United States grant
  substantially similar powers to the secretary of  the  treasury  of  the
  United  States  or his delegates. Where the commissioner of taxation and
  finance has so authorized use of returns and other information  in  such


 actions  or  proceedings,  officers  and  employees of the department of
  taxation and finance may testify  in  such  actions  or  proceedings  in
  respect to such returns or other information.
    (e)  Returns  and  reports filed under this article shall be preserved
  for three years and thereafter until the tax commission orders  them  to
  be destroyed.
    (f)  (1)  Any  officer or employee of the state who willfully violates
  the provisions of subdivision (a) of this  section  shall  be  dismissed
  from  office  and be incapable of holding any public office for a period
  of five years thereafter.
    (2) Cross-reference: For criminal penalties, see article  thirty-seven
  of this chapter.
    (g) Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision (a) of this section,
  if  the commissioner determines that a person required to collect tax is
  liable for any tax, penalty or interest under this article or is  liable
  for a penalty under subdivision (e) of section eleven hundred forty-five
  of  this article with respect to any failure, upon request in writing of
  such person, the commissioner shall disclose in writing to  such  person
  (1)  the  name  of any other person required to collect tax or any other
  person liable for such penalty  under  such  subdivision  (e)  whom  the
  commissioner  has  determined  to be liable for the same tax, penalty or
  interest or for such penalty with  respect  to  such  failure,  and  (2)
  whether  the  commissioner has attempted to collect such tax, penalty or
  interest or such penalty from such other person, the general  nature  of
  such collection activities, and the amount collected.
    (h)  (1)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of subdivision (a) of this
  section, upon written request from the chairperson of the  committee  on
  ways  and  means  of  the  United  States  House of Representatives, the
  chairperson of the committee on finance of the United States Senate,  or
  the  chairperson of the joint committee on taxation of the United States
  Congress, the commissioner shall furnish such committee with any current
  or prior year returns or reports specified in  such  request  that  were
  filed  under  this  article  by  the  president  of  the  United States,
  vice-president of  the  United  States,  member  of  the  United  States
  Congress representing New York state, or any person who served in or was
  employed  by the executive branch of the government of the United States
  on the executive staff of the president, in the executive office of  the
  president,  or  in an acting or confirmed capacity in a position subject
  to confirmation by the United States senate; or, in New  York  state:  a
  statewide  elected  official, as defined in paragraph (a) of subdivision
  one of section seventy-three-a of  the  public  officers  law;  a  state
  officer  or employee, as defined in subparagraph (i) of paragraph (c) of
  subdivision one of  such  section  seventy-three-a;  a  political  party
  chairperson,  as  defined  in  paragraph  (h) of subdivision one of such
  section  seventy-three-a;  a  local  elected  official,  as  defined  in
  subdivisions  one  and  two  of section eight hundred ten of the general
  municipal law; a person appointed, pursuant to  law,  to  serve  due  to
  vacancy  or  otherwise  in  the position of a local elected official, as
  defined in subdivisions one and two of section eight hundred ten of  the
  general  municipal law; a member of the state legislature, or a judge or
  justice of the unified court system; or filed by  a  partnership,  firm,
  association,  corporation,  joint-stock company, trust or similar entity
  directly or indirectly controlled  by  any  individual  listed  in  this
  paragraph,  whether  by  contract,  through  ownership  or  control of a
  majority  interest  in  such  entity,  or  otherwise,  or  filed  by   a
  partnership,  firm, association, corporation, joint-stock company, trust
  or similar entity of which any individual listed in this paragraph holds
  ten percent or more of the voting securities of  such  entity;  provided


 however that, prior to furnishing any return or report, the commissioner
  shall  redact any copy of a federal return (or portion thereof) attached
  to, or any information on a federal return that is  reflected  on,  such
  report  or  return, and any social security numbers, account numbers and
  residential address information.
    (2) No  returns  or  reports  shall  be  furnished  pursuant  to  this
  subdivision unless the chairperson of the requesting committee certifies
  in  writing that such returns or reports have been requested related to,
  and in furtherance of, a legitimate  task  of  the  Congress,  that  the
  requesting  committee  has  made  a written request to the United States
  secretary of the treasury for related  federal  returns  or  reports  or
  return or report information, pursuant to 26 U.S.C. Section 6103(f), and
  that  if  such  requested  returns  or  reports  are inspected by and/or
  submitted  to  another  committee,  to  the  United  States   House   of
  Representatives,  or  to  the United States Senate, then such inspection
  and/or submission shall occur in a manner consistent with federal law as
  informed by the requirements and procedures  established  in  26  U.S.C.
  Section 6103(f).


   § 1147. Notices and limitations of time. (a) (1) Any notice authorized
  or required under the provisions of this article may be given by mailing
  the  same  to  the person for whom it is intended in a postpaid envelope
  addressed to such person at the address given in the last  return  filed
  by  him pursuant to the provisions of this article or in any application
  made by him or, if no return has been filed or application made, then to
  such address as may be obtainable. A notice of  determination  shall  be
  mailed  promptly  by  registered  or certified mail. The mailing of such
  notice shall be presumptive evidence of the receipt of the same  by  the
  person  to  whom  addressed.  Any  period  of  time  which is determined
  according to the provisions of this article  by  the  giving  of  notice
  shall commence to run from the date of mailing of such notice.
    (2)  If  any  return,  claim, statement, notice, application, or other
  document required to be filed, or  any  payment  required  to  be  made,
  within  a  prescribed  period  or  on  or before a prescribed date under
  authority of any provision of this article is, after such period or such
  date, delivered by United States mail to  the  tax  commission,  bureau,
  office,  officer  or  person  with  which  or with whom such document is
  required to be filed, or to which or to whom such payment is required to
  be made, the date of the United States postmark stamped on the  envelope
  shall be deemed to be the date of delivery. This subdivision shall apply
  only  if  the  postmark date falls within the prescribed period or on or
  before the prescribed date for the  filing  of  such  document,  or  for
  making  the  payment, including any extension granted for such filing or
  payment, and only if such document or payment was deposited in the mail,
  postage prepaid, properly  addressed  to  the  tax  commission,  bureau,
  office,  officer  or  person  with  which  or  with whom the document is
  required to be filed or to which or to whom such payment is required  to
  be  made. If any document is sent by United States registered mail, such
  registration shall be  prima  facie  evidence  that  such  document  was
  delivered  to  the  tax commission, bureau, office, officer or person to
  which or to whom addressed. To the extent that the tax commission  shall
  prescribe  by  regulation,  certified  mail  may  be  used  in  lieu  of
  registered mail under this section. This subdivision shall apply in  the
  case  of postmarks not made by the United States Post Office only if and
  to the extent provided by regulation of the tax commission.
    (3) When the last day  prescribed  under  authority  of  this  article
  (including  any  extension  of  time)  for  performing  any act falls on
  Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday  in  the  state  of  New  York,  the
  performance of such act shall be considered timely if it is performed on
  the  next  succeeding  day  which  is  not a Saturday, Sunday or a legal
  holiday.
    (4)(A) Any reference in paragraph  two  of  this  subdivision  to  the
  United  States  mail  shall  be  treated as including a reference to any
  delivery service designated by the secretary  of  the  treasury  of  the
  United  States  pursuant  to  section  seventy-five  hundred  two of the
  internal revenue code  and  any  reference  in  paragraph  two  of  this
  subdivision  to a postmark by the United States mail shall be treated as
  including a reference to any date  recorded  or  marked  in  the  manner
  described  in  section  seventy-five hundred two of the internal revenue
  code by a designated delivery service.  If the commissioner  finds  that
  any  delivery service designated by such secretary is inadequate for the
  needs of the state, the commissioner may withdraw such  designation  for
  purposes   of  this  article.    The  commissioner  may  also  designate
  additional  delivery  services   meeting   the   criteria   of   section
  seventy-five  hundred  two  of the internal revenue code for purposes of
  this article, or may withdraw any such designation if he  finds  that  a
  delivery service so designated is inadequate for the needs of the state.


 Any  reference in paragraph two of this subdivision to the United States
  mail shall be treated as including a reference to any  delivery  service
  designated  by  the  commissioner  and any reference in paragraph two of
  this  subdivision  to  a  postmark  by  the  United States mail shall be
  treated as including a reference to any date recorded or marked  in  the
  manner  described  in  section  seventy-five hundred two of the internal
  revenue code by a delivery service designated by the commissioner.
    (B) Any equivalent of registered or certified mail designated  by  the
  United  States secretary of the treasury, or as may be designated by the
  commissioner pursuant to the same criteria used by  such  secretary  for
  such  designations  pursuant  to section seventy-five hundred two of the
  internal  revenue  code,  shall  be  included  within  the  meaning   of
  registered   or  certified  mail  as  used  in  paragraph  two  of  this
  subdivision.    If  the  commissioner  finds  that  any  equivalent   of
  registered  or  certified  mail  designated  by  such  secretary  or the
  commissioner is inadequate for the needs of the state, the  commissioner
  may withdraw such designation for purposes of this article.
    (b)  The  provisions  of the civil practice law and rules or any other
  law relative to limitations of time  for  the  enforcement  of  a  civil
  remedy shall not apply to any proceeding or action taken by the state or
  the  tax  commission to levy, appraise, assess, determine or enforce the
  collection of any tax or penalty  provided  by  this  article.  However,
  except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with intent
  to evade the tax no assessment of additional tax shall be made after the
  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the filing of a
  return; provided, however, that  where  no  return  has  been  filed  as
  provided  by law, the tax may be assessed at any time. Where a purchaser
  furnishes a vendor with a false or fraudulent certificate of  resale  or
  other  exemption  certificate or other document with intent to evade the
  tax, the tax may be assessed against such purchaser  at  any  time.  For
  purposes  of  this  subdivision,  a  return  filed  before  the last day
  prescribed by law or regulation for the filing  thereof  or  before  the
  last day of any extension of time for the filing thereof shall be deemed
  to  be  filed  on  such last day. Notwithstanding any other provision of
  this article, if the time to assess additional tax would otherwise  have
  expired  on  or before December nineteenth, nineteen hundred sixty-nine,
  the time to assess  such  additional  tax  is  hereby  extended  to  and
  including  December  twentieth, nineteen hundred sixty-nine, except that
  it may be further  extended  by  a  taxpayer's  consent  in  writing  as
  provided in subdivision (c) hereof.
    (c)  Where,  before the expiration of the period prescribed herein for
  the assessment of an additional tax, a taxpayer has consented in writing
  that such period be extended the amount of such additional tax  due  may
  be  determined  at  any  time within such extended period. The period so
  extended may be further extended by subsequent consents in writing  made
  before  the  expiration  of  the  extended  period.  If  a  taxpayer has
  consented in writing to the extension of the period for assessment,  the
  period  for  filing  an  application  for  credit  or refund pursuant to
  section eleven hundred thirty-nine shall not expire prior to six  months
  after  the  expiration  of  the period within which an assessment may be
  made pursuant to the consent  to  extend  the  time  for  assessment  of
  additional tax.
    (d)  The  limitation  of  time  for  the assessment of additional tax,
  shall, after the mailing of a notice of determination, be suspended with
  respect to the amount of additional tax asserted in  such  notice  until
  the  expiration of the time for filing a petition contesting such notice
  or, if a timely petition with respect to the  amount  asserted  in  such
  notice  has  been  filed  with  the  division  of tax appeals, until the


 determination of the administrative law judge or the decision of the tax
  appeals tribunal has become final. A determination of an  administrative
  law  judge  in  the  division  of  tax  appeals  shall  become  final in
  accordance  with  subdivision  four  of section two thousand ten of this
  chapter. A decision of the tax appeals tribunal shall become final  upon
  the  expiration of the period specified in paragraph four of subdivision
  (a) of section eleven hundred thirty-eight of this article for making an
  application for review if no such application has been duly made  within
  such  time,  or, if such application has been duly made, upon expiration
  of the time for all further judicial review, or upon  the  rendering  by
  the tax appeals tribunal of a decision in accordance with the mandate of
  the  court  on review. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for the purpose of
  making an application for  review,  the  decision  of  the  tax  appeals
  tribunal  shall  be deemed final on the date the notice of such decision
  is served as provided in section two thousand sixteen of this chapter.




   §  1148.  Deposit  and disposition of revenue. (a) All taxes, interest
  and penalties collected or  received  by  the  commissioner  under  this
  article shall be deposited and disposed of pursuant to the provisions of
  section one hundred seventy-one-a of this chapter; provided however, the
  comptroller  shall  on  or before the twelfth day of each month, pay all
  such taxes, interest and penalties  collected  under  this  article  and
  remaining  to  the comptroller's credit in such banks, banking houses or
  trust companies at the  close  of  business  on  the  last  day  of  the
  preceding month, into the general fund of the state treasury.
    (b)  Provided however, before the funds may be distributed pursuant to
  subdivision (a) of this section, such  funds  shall  be  distributed  as
  otherwise   provided   in   sections   ninety-two-d,  ninety-two-h,  and
  ninety-two-r of the state finance law and sections eleven  hundred  two,
  eleven hundred four and eleven hundred nine of this article.
    (c)   Provided  however,  after  funds  are  distributed  pursuant  to
  subdivision (b) of this section but before such  funds  are  distributed
  pursuant to subdivision (a) of this section, funds shall be deposited by
  the  comptroller  into the New York central business district trust fund
  established pursuant to section ninety-nine-ff of the state finance  law
  in  accordance with the following schedule: (1) in state fiscal year two
  thousand nineteen - two thousand twenty, one hundred twelve million five
  hundred thousand dollars; (2) in state fiscal year two thousand twenty -
  two thousand twenty-one, one hundred fifty million dollars; and  (3)  in
  state  fiscal year two thousand twenty-one - two thousand twenty-two and
  every succeeding state fiscal year, an amount equal to one  hundred  one
  percent  of  the  amount  deposited  in  the immediately preceding state
  fiscal year. The funds deposited into  the  New  York  central  business
  district trust fund shall be deposited monthly in equal installments.




   §  1150.  Special  fee  on  paging  devices.  (a) For purposes of this
  section the following definitions shall apply:
    (1) "Paging service." The  providing  of  a  system  for  transmitting
  signals to a paging device.
    (2)   "Paging   device."   A  mobile  or  portable  receiver  designed
  principally to receive transmissions intended to  summon  or  alert  the
  user of the device.
    (b)  Imposition. (1) There is hereby imposed and there shall be paid a
  fee on each paging device used or authorized for use in conjunction with
  a paging service, where such service is provided for consideration.  The
  amount  of  the  fee shall be one dollar for each such paging device for
  each month, or portion thereof, during which such device is so  used  or
  authorized for use.
    (2)  (A)  Collection  and  payment. Such fee shall be collected by the
  vendor of the paging service from the purchaser of the paging service.
    (B) Where the fee imposed under paragraph one of this  subdivision  is
  not  required  to  be  collected by the vendor under subparagraph (A) of
  this paragraph, the purchaser of  such  service  shall  remit  such  fee
  directly to the commissioner of taxation and finance.
    (3) Returns with payment. (A) Every person required to collect the fee
  under subparagraph (A) of paragraph two of this subdivision shall file a
  return  and  pay the fee required to be collected to the commissioner of
  taxation and finance on or before the twentieth day after the  close  of
  the  quarterly  period in which the paging device was used or authorized
  for use, as such period is described in paragraph (b) of section  eleven
  hundred thirty-six of this article.
    (B)  A  purchaser subject to subparagraph (B) of paragraph two of this
  subdivision shall file a return and pay the  fee  required  to  be  paid
  within  twenty  days after the close of such quarterly period in which a
  paging device subject to the fee was used or authorized for use.
    (4) Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the  contrary,  a
  person  described  in  paragraph one, two or three of subdivision (a) of
  section eleven hundred sixteen of this article, and any  voluntary  fire
  or  ambulance  company  exempt from the taxes imposed under this article
  pursuant to paragraph four of subdivision (a) of such section, shall not
  be subject to the fee imposed by this section.
    (c) The  fee  imposed  by  this  section  shall  be  administered  and
  collected  in a like manner as the taxes imposed under this article, and
  the definitions and the provisions  applicable  to  the  administration,
  collection,  determination,  enforcement,  and  disposition of the taxes
  imposed by this article shall apply to the fee imposed by  this  section
  insofar  as  such provisions can be made applicable to such fee with the
  limitations set forth herein and such modifications as may be  necessary
  in order to adapt such provisions to the fee so imposed. Such provisions
  shall  apply  with  the same force and effect as if the language of such
  provisions had been set forth in full in this section and had  expressly
  referred  to  the  fee imposed by this section except to the extent that
  any of such provisions is either inconsistent with or is not relevant to
  this section. Provided, however, any reference in this  article  to  the
  term  "tax"  shall be read as "fee" and the exemption provisions in part
  three of this article shall not apply except as  provided  in  paragraph
  four  of  subdivision  (b)  of  this  section.  Every person required to
  collect or pay the fee provided for in  this  section  shall  keep  such
  records as may be required by the commissioner.




   §  1160.  Special tax on passenger car rentals. (a) (1) In addition to
  any tax imposed under any other article of this chapter, there is hereby
  imposed and there shall be paid a tax of six percent upon  the  receipts
  from  every  rental  of  a  passenger car which is a retail sale of such
  passenger car.
    (2) Except to the extent that a  passenger  car  rental  described  in
  paragraph one of this subdivision has already been or will be subject to
  the  tax  imposed  under such paragraph and except as otherwise exempted
  under this article, there is hereby imposed on every  person  and  there
  shall  be  paid a use tax for the use within this state of any passenger
  car rented by the user, which is a purchase at retail of such  passenger
  car, but not including any lease of a passenger car to which subdivision
  (i)  of  section  eleven  hundred  eleven  of  this chapter applies. For
  purposes of this paragraph, the tax shall be at the rate of six  percent
  of  the consideration given or contracted to be given for such property,
  or for the use of such property, including any charges for  shipping  or
  delivery  as  described in paragraph three of subdivision (b) of section
  eleven hundred one  of  this  chapter,  but  excluding  any  credit  for
  tangible  personal  property  accepted  in part payment and intended for
  resale.
    (b) For purposes of this  section,  the  following  definitions  shall
  apply:
    (1)  Motor  vehicle. A motor vehicle as defined in section one hundred
  twenty-five of  the  vehicle  and  traffic  law,  but  not  including  a
  motorcycle.
    (2)  Passenger  car.  A motor vehicle having a gross vehicle weight of
  nine thousand pounds or less with a seating capacity of nine persons  or
  less designed for passenger transportation.
    (3)  Rental. The transfer of possession of a motor vehicle, whether or
  not the motor vehicle is required to be or is registered by this  state,
  for a consideration, without the transfer of the ownership of such motor
  vehicle,  but  not  including  a  lease  described in subdivision (i) of
  section eleven hundred eleven of this chapter.
    (c) The provisions of this section shall not apply to peer-to-peer car
  sharing as defined in section nine hundred of the general  business  law
  and which is subject to the taxes set forth in article twenty-eight-D of
  this chapter.




   §  1165.  Administrative provisions. The taxes imposed by this article
  shall be administered and collected in a like manner as and jointly with
  the taxes imposed by sections eleven hundred five and eleven hundred ten
  of article twenty-eight of this chapter. All of the provisions  of  such
  article  twenty-eight  (except  sections  eleven  hundred  seven, eleven
  hundred eight, eleven hundred forty-eight, and, for purposes of the  tax
  imposed  by  section  eleven hundred sixty, section eleven hundred nine)
  relating to or applicable to the administration, collection  and  review
  of  the  taxes  imposed  by such sections eleven hundred five and eleven
  hundred ten, including, but not limited to, the provisions  relating  to
  definitions,  exemptions,  returns,  personal  liability  for  the  tax,
  collection of tax from the customer, collection of tax at  the  time  of
  registration  of a motor vehicle and payment of tax by a person required
  to file a return, shall apply to the taxes imposed by  this  article  so
  far  as  such  provisions can be made applicable to the taxes imposed by
  this article with such limitations as set forth in this article and such
  modifications as may be necessary in order to adapt such language to the
  taxes so imposed. Such provisions shall apply with the  same  force  and
  effect as if the language of those provisions had been set forth in full
  in  this  article  except  to  the  extent  that any provision is either
  inconsistent with a provision of this article or is not relevant to  the
  taxes  imposed  by  this  article.  For  purposes  of  this article, any
  reference in article twenty-eight to the tax or taxes  imposed  by  such
  article  shall  be  deemed to refer to the taxes imposed by this article
  also unless a different meaning is clearly required. Provided,  further,
  however,  that  the  provisions  of  subdivision seven of section eleven
  hundred eighteen of this chapter shall apply to the taxes on uses within
  this state imposed by this article only in the event that  the  rate  of
  the retail sales or use tax paid, under the conditions described in such
  subdivision  seven,  to any other state or jurisdiction within any other
  state exceeds the aggregate rate of the  compensating  use  tax  imposed
  under  section  eleven  hundred ten of this chapter and any compensating
  use tax imposed pursuant to the authority of article twenty-nine of this
  chapter, and in such event only with respect to the  difference  between
  the  rate  paid  to  such  other  state or jurisdiction thereof and such
  aggregate rate. Provided, further, that for purposes of this article and
  for  articles  twenty-eight  and  twenty-nine  of  this   chapter,   the
  provisions of section eleven hundred seventeen of this chapter shall not
  apply  to  the rental, as such term is defined in this article, of motor
  vehicles and that the provisions contained  in  section  eleven  hundred
  thirty-six  of  this  chapter  with  respect  to filing a part-quarterly
  return monthly and section eleven hundred thirty-seven-A of this chapter
  relating to returns and payments of estimated tax shall not apply to the
  taxes imposed under this article.




   § 1166. Transitional provisions. With respect to the tax imposed under
  section  eleven  hundred  sixty  of  this  article effective June first,
  nineteen hundred ninety, the provisions of subdivision  (a)  of  section
  eleven  hundred  six  of  this  chapter shall apply, except that for the
  purposes of this section, all references in said subdivision (a) of such
  section eleven hundred six to August first, nineteen hundred sixty-five,
  shall be read as referring to the effective date of such section  eleven
  hundred  sixty,  and  all  references  in  said  subdivision (a) of such
  section eleven hundred six to April first, nineteen  hundred  sixty-five
  shall  be  read  as  referring  to  the  date  four  months prior to the
  effective date of such section  eleven  hundred  sixty.  Nothing  herein
  contained  shall  be  deemed to change the taxable status of any sale or
  use which occurred prior to such effective date,  and  provided  further
  that the reference in subdivision one of section eleven hundred eighteen
  of  this  chapter to August first, nineteen hundred sixty-five, shall be
  read as referring to the effective date of section eleven hundred  sixty
  of this article.




   § 1166-a. Special supplemental tax on passenger car rentals within the
  metropolitan  commuter  transportation  district. (a) In addition to the
  tax imposed under section eleven hundred sixty of this  article  and  in
  addition  to  any  tax  imposed under any other article of this chapter,
  there is hereby imposed and there shall be paid a tax at the rate of six
  percent upon the receipts from every rental of a passenger car which  is
  a  retail  sale  of  such passenger car within the metropolitan commuter
  transportation district as defined in subsection (a)  of  section  eight
  hundred of this chapter.
    (b)  Except  to  the  extent  that a passenger car rental described in
  subdivision (a) of this section, or section eleven  hundred  sixty-six-b
  of  this article, has already been or will be subject to the tax imposed
  under such subdivision or section and except as otherwise exempted under
  this article, there is hereby imposed on every person and there shall be
  paid  a  use  tax  for  the  use  within   the   metropolitan   commuter
  transportation  district  as  defined in subsection (a) of section eight
  hundred of this chapter; of any passenger car rented by the user that is
  a purchase at retail of such passenger car, but not including any  lease
  of  a  passenger  car to which subdivision (i) of section eleven hundred
  eleven of this chapter applies. For purposes of  this  subdivision,  the
  tax  shall  be  at the rate of six percent of the consideration given or
  contracted to be given for  such  property,  or  for  the  use  of  such
  property, including any charges for shipping or delivery as described in
  paragraph three of subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred one of this
  chapter,  but  excluding  any  credit  for  tangible  personal  property
  accepted in part payment and intended for resale.
    (c) The provisions of this section shall not apply to peer-to-peer car
  sharing as defined in section nine hundred of the general  business  law
  and which is subject to the taxes set forth in article twenty-eight-D of
  this chapter.




   § 1166-b. Special supplemental tax on passenger car rentals outside of
  the  metropolitan  commuter  transportation district. (a) In addition to
  the tax imposed under section eleven hundred sixty of this  article  and
  in  addition to any tax imposed under any other article of this chapter,
  there is hereby imposed and there shall be paid a tax at the rate of six
  percent upon the receipts from every rental of a passenger car  that  is
  not  subject  to the tax described in section eleven hundred sixty-six-a
  of this article, but which is a retail sale of such passenger car within
  the state.
    (b) Except to the extent that a  passenger  car  rental  described  in
  subdivision (a) of this section or in section eleven hundred sixty-six-a
  of  this article, has already been subject to the tax imposed under such
  subdivision or section, and except  as  otherwise  exempted  under  this
  article, there is hereby imposed on every person and there shall be paid
  a  use  tax  for the use within the state of any passenger car rented by
  the user that is a purchase at retail of such  passenger  car,  but  not
  including  any  lease  of  a  passenger  car to which subdivision (i) of
  section eleven hundred eleven of this chapter applies. For  purposes  of
  this  subdivision,  the  tax  shall be at the rate of six percent of the
  consideration given or contracted to be given for such property, or  for
  the use of such property, including any charges for shipping or delivery
  as  described  in  paragraph  three of subdivision (b) of section eleven
  hundred one of this chapter,  but  excluding  any  credit  for  tangible
  personal property accepted in part payment and intended for resale.
    (c) The provisions of this section shall not apply to peer-to-peer car
  sharing  as  defined in section nine hundred of the general business law
  and which is subject to the taxes set forth in article twenty-eight-D of
  this chapter.




   § 1167. Deposit and disposition of revenue. 1. All taxes, interest and
  penalties  collected  or received by the commissioner under this article
  shall be deposited and disposed of pursuant to the provisions of section
  one hundred seventy-one-a of this chapter, except that  after  reserving
  amounts  in  accordance  with  such section one hundred seventy-one-a of
  this chapter, the remainder shall be paid  by  the  comptroller  to  the
  credit  of  the  highway  and  bridge  trust fund established by section
  eighty-nine-b of the state finance law, provided,  however:  (a)  taxes,
  interest  and penalties collected or received pursuant to section eleven
  hundred sixty-six-a of this article shall be deposited and  disposed  of
  pursuant to subdivision two of this section; and (b) taxes, interest and
  penalties  collected  or  received  pursuant  to  section eleven hundred
  sixty-six-b of this article shall be paid to the credit  of  the  public
  transportation  systems  operating  assistance  account  established  by
  section eighty-eight-a of the state finance law.
    2. All taxes, interest, and penalties collected  or  received  by  the
  commissioner  pursuant  to  section  eleven  hundred sixty-six-a of this
  article shall be deposited daily with such  responsible  banks,  banking
  houses  or  trust companies, as may be designated by the comptroller, in
  trust for the credit of the metropolitan  transportation  authority.  An
  account  may  be  established  in one or more of such depositories. Such
  deposits will be kept separate and apart from all  other  money  in  the
  possession  of  the  comptroller.  Of  the  total  revenue  collected or
  received under this article, the comptroller shall retain such amount as
  the commissioner may determine to be necessary for  refunds  under  this
  article.  On  or  before  the twelfth day of each month, after reserving
  such amount for such refunds and deducting such amounts for such  costs,
  the  commissioner  shall  certify  to  the comptroller the amount of all
  revenues received pursuant to this article during the prior month  as  a
  result of the tax imposed, including any interest and penalties thereon.
  The amount of revenues so certified over the prior three months in total
  shall  be  paid  over  by  the  fifteenth  day of the last month of each
  calendar quarter from such  account,  without  appropriation,  into  the
  corporate  transportation  account  of  the  metropolitan transportation
  authority special assistance fund established by section twelve  hundred
  seventy-a  of  the  public authorities law, to be applied as provided in
  paragraph (e) of subdivision four of such section.




   §  1170.  Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as
  the "simplified sales and use tax administration act".




   § 1171. Definitions. As used in this article:
    (a) "Agreement" means the streamlined sales and use tax agreement.
    (b)  "Certified  automated system" means software certified jointly by
  the states that are signatories to the agreement to  calculate  the  tax
  imposed  by  each jurisdiction on a transaction, determine the amount of
  tax to remit to the appropriate state, and  maintain  a  record  of  the
  transaction.
    (c)  "Certified  service provider" means an agent certified jointly by
  the states that are signatories to the agreement to perform all  of  the
  seller's sales tax functions.
    (d)  "Department"  means the New York state department of taxation and
  finance.
    (e) "Person" shall have the same meaning as ascribed to such  term  by
  subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred one of this chapter.
    (f)  "Sales  tax"  means  the  sales  tax  imposed pursuant to article
  twenty-eight of this chapter and pursuant to the  authority  of  article
  twenty-nine  of  this  chapter, to the extent covered by the streamlined
  sales and use tax agreement authorized and directed to be  entered  into
  by section eleven hundred seventy-three of this article.
    (g)  "Seller"  means  any  person  making sales, leases, or rentals of
  personal property or services.
    (h) "State" means any state of the United States and the  District  of
  Columbia.
    (i)  "Use  tax"  means  the  compensating  use tax imposed pursuant to
  article twenty-eight of this chapter and pursuant to  the  authority  of
  article  twenty-nine  of  this  chapter,  to  the  extent covered by the
  streamlined sales and use tax agreement authorized and  directed  to  be
  entered into by section eleven hundred seventy-three of this article.




   §  1172.  Legislative finding. The legislature finds that a simplified
  sales and use tax system will reduce and over time eliminate the  burden
  and  cost for all vendors to collect New York state's sales and use tax.
  The legislature further finds that New York state should enter  into  an
  agreement  with  one  or more states to simplify and modernize sales and
  use tax administration in order to substantially reduce  the  burden  of
  tax compliance for all sellers and for all types of commerce.




   § 1173. Authority to enter agreement. (a) The department is authorized
  and  directed  to enter into the streamlined sales and use tax agreement
  with one or more states to simplify and  modernize  sales  and  use  tax
  administration  in  order  to  substantially  reduce  the  burden of tax
  compliance for all sellers and for all types of commerce. In furtherance
  of the agreement, the department is authorized to act jointly with other
  states that are members of the  agreement  to  establish  standards  for
  certification  of  a  certified service provider and certified automated
  system and establish performance standards for multistate sellers.
    (b) The  department  is  further  authorized  to  take  other  actions
  reasonably  required  to  implement  the  provisions  set  forth in this
  article. Other actions authorized by this section include, but  are  not
  limited  to,  the  adoption  of  rules  and  regulations  and  the joint
  procurement,  with  other  member  states,  of  goods  and  services  in
  furtherance of the cooperative agreement.
    (c) New York state shall be represented by four delegates, one of whom
  shall be appointed by the temporary president of the senate, one of whom
  shall  be appointed by the speaker of the assembly, one of whom shall be
  appointed by the governor and one of whom shall be the  commissioner  or
  his  or  her  designee.  In the event of a disagreement between the four
  delegates on how the state of New York shall vote within such  governing
  board,  the vote shall be cast only in accord with the unanimous opinion
  of the delegate appointed by the temporary president of the senate,  the
  delegate  appointed  by  the  speaker  of  the assembly and the delegate
  appointed by  the  governor.  Such  delegates  shall  be  authorized  to
  represent New York state before the other states that are signatories to
  the agreement.




   §  1174.  Relationship  to  state  law.  No provision of the agreement
  authorized by this article in whole or part invalidates  or  amends  any
  provision of the law of New York state. Adoption of the agreement by New
  York  state  does  not  amend  or  modify  any  law  of  New York state.
  Implementation of any condition of the  agreement  in  New  York  state,
  whether adopted before, at, or after membership of New York state in the
  agreement,  shall  be  exclusively done by a separate act or acts of the
  legislature.




   §  1175.  Agreement  requirements. The department shall not enter into
  the streamlined  sales  and  use  tax  agreement  unless  the  agreement
  requires each state to abide by the following requirements:
    (a)  The agreement must set restrictions to limit over time the number
  of state rates.
    (b) The agreement must establish uniform standards for the following:
    (1) The sourcing of transactions to taxing jurisdictions.
    (2) The administration of exempt sales.
    (3) Sales and use tax returns and remittances.
    (c) The agreement must require states to  develop  and  adopt  uniform
  definitions  of  sales  and use tax terms. The definitions must enable a
  state to preserve its ability to make policy  choices  not  inconsistent
  with the uniform definitions.
    (d)  The  agreement  must  provide  a central, electronic registration
  system that allows a seller to register to collect and remit  sales  and
  use taxes for all signatory states.
    (e)  The  agreement  must  provide  that registration with the central
  registration system and the collection of sales and  use  taxes  in  the
  signatory states will not be used as a factor in determining whether the
  seller has nexus with a state for any tax.
    (f)  The  agreement  must  provide  for  reduction  of  the burdens of
  complying with local sales and use taxes through the following:
    (1) Restricting variances between the state and local tax bases.
    (2) Requiring states to administer any sales and use taxes  levied  by
  local  jurisdictions  within  the  state  so that sellers collecting and
  remitting these taxes will not have to register or  file  returns  with,
  remit  funds  to,  or be subject to independent audits from local taxing
  jurisdictions.
    (3) Restricting the frequency of changes in the local  sales  and  use
  tax  rates  and  setting  effective  dates  for the application of local
  jurisdictional boundary changes to local sales and use taxes.
    (4) Providing notice of changes in local sales and use tax  rates  and
  of changes in the boundaries of local taxing jurisdictions.
    (g)  The agreement must outline any monetary allowances that are to be
  provided by the states to sellers or certified service providers.
    (h) The agreement must require each state to certify  compliance  with
  the  terms of the agreement prior to joining and to maintain compliance,
  under the laws of the member state, with all provisions of the agreement
  while a member.
    (i) The agreement must require each state to adopt  a  uniform  policy
  for  certified  service providers that protects the privacy of consumers
  and maintains the confidentiality of tax information.
    (j) The agreement must provide for  the  appointment  of  an  advisory
  council  of  private  sector  representatives and an advisory council of
  non-member state representatives to consult with in  the  administration
  of the agreement.




   §  1176.  Cooperating  sovereigns.  The  agreement  authorized by this
  article  is  an  accord  among  individual  cooperating  sovereigns   in
  furtherance  of  their  governmental functions. The agreement provides a
  mechanism  among  the  member  states  to  establish  and   maintain   a
  cooperative, simplified system for the application and administration of
  sales and use taxes under the duly adopted law of each member state.




   §  1177.  Limited  binding  and  beneficial  effect. (a) The agreement
  authorized by this article binds and inures only to the benefit  of  New
  York  state  and the other member states. No person, other than a member
  state, is an intended beneficiary of the agreement.  Any  benefit  to  a
  person  other  than a state is established by the laws of New York state
  and the other member states and not by the terms of the agreement.
    (b) Consistent with subdivision (a) of this section, no  person  shall
  have  any cause of action or defense under the agreement or by virtue of
  New York state's approval of the agreement. No person may challenge,  in
  any action brought under any provision of law, any action or inaction by
  any  department,  agency, or other instrumentality of New York state, or
  any political subdivision of New York  state  on  the  ground  that  the
  action or inaction is inconsistent with the agreement.
    (c)  No  law  of  New  York  state, or the application thereof, may be
  declared invalid as to any person or circumstance on the ground that the
  provision or application is inconsistent with the agreement.




   * §  1178.  Seller  and  third  party  liability.  (a) (1) A certified
  service provider is the agent of  a  seller,  with  whom  the  certified
  service  provider  has  contracted, for the collection and remittance of
  sales and use taxes.  As  the  seller's  agent,  the  certified  service
  provider  is  liable  for sales and use tax due each member state on all
  sales transactions it processes for the seller except as set out in this
  section.
    (2) A seller that contracts with a certified service provider  is  not
  liable  to  the state for sales or use tax due on transactions processed
  by the certified service provider unless the seller  misrepresented  the
  type  of  items  it sells or committed fraud. In the absence of probable
  cause to believe that the seller has committed fraud or made a  material
  misrepresentation,   the   seller   is  not  subject  to  audit  on  the
  transactions processed by the certified service provider.  A  seller  is
  subject to audit for transactions not processed by the certified service
  provider. The member states acting jointly may perform a system check of
  the  seller  and  review  the  seller's  procedures  to determine if the
  certified service provider's system  is  functioning  properly  and  the
  extent  to  which  the  seller's transactions are being processed by the
  certified service provider.
    (b) A person that provides a certified automated system is responsible
  for the proper functioning of that system and is liable to the state for
  underpayments of tax attributable to errors in the  functioning  of  the
  certified  automated  system.  A  seller that uses a certified automated
  system remains responsible and is liable to the state for reporting  and
  remitting tax.
    (c)  A seller that has a proprietary system for determining the amount
  of tax due on transactions and has signed an  agreement  establishing  a
  performance  standard  for  that system is liable for the failure of the
  system to meet the performance standard.
    * NB Not effective per letter by DOT received August 30, 2006




   §  1180.  Definitions.  For  the purposes of the taxes imposed by this
  article, the following terms shall mean:
    (a) "Vapor product" means any noncombustible liquid or gel, regardless
  of the presence of nicotine  therein,  that  is  manufactured  in  to  a
  finished  product  for use in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
  electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, vaping pen, hookah pen  or  other
  similar  device.  "Vapor product" shall not include any product approved
  by the United States food and drug administration as a drug  or  medical
  device,  or  manufactured  and  dispensed  pursuant  to  title five-A of
  article thirty-three of the public health law.
    (b)  "Vapor  products  dealer"  means  a  person   licensed   by   the
  commissioner to sell vapor products in this state.




   §  1181.  Imposition  of  tax. In addition to any other tax imposed by
  this chapter or other law, there is  hereby  imposed  a  tax  of  twenty
  percent  on receipts from the retail sale of vapor products sold in this
  state. The tax is imposed on the purchaser and collected  by  the  vapor
  products  dealer as defined in subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred
  eighty of this article, in trust for and on account of  the  state.  The
  taxes  imposed  under this section shall not apply to adult-use cannabis
  products subject to tax under article twenty-C of this chapter.




   §  1182.  Imposition of compensating use tax. (a) Except to the extent
  that vapor products have already been or will  be  subject  to  the  tax
  imposed  by  section  eleven  hundred eighty-one of this article, or are
  otherwise exempt under this article, there is hereby imposed a  use  tax
  on  every  use  within  the  state  of  vapor products: (1) purchased at
  retail; and (2) manufactured or processed by the user if  items  of  the
  same  kind  are  sold  by him or her in the regular course of his or her
  business.
    (b) For purposes of paragraph one of subdivision (a) of this  section,
  the  tax  shall  be  at  the rate of twenty percent of the consideration
  given or contracted to be given for  such  vapor  product  purchased  at
  retail.  For  purposes  of  paragraph  two  of  subdivision  (a) of this
  section, the tax shall be at the rate of twenty percent of the price  at
  which  such items of the same kind of vapor product are offered for sale
  by the user, and the mere storage, keeping, retention or withdrawal from
  storage of such  vapor  product  by  the  person  that  manufactured  or
  processed such vapor product shall not be deemed a taxable use by him or
  her.
    (c) The tax due pursuant to this section shall be paid and reported no
  later  than  twenty  days  after  such  use  on a form prescribed by the
  commissioner.




   §  1183.  Vapor  products  dealer  registration and renewal. (a) Every
  person who intends to sell vapor products in  this  state  must  receive
  from the commissioner a certificate of registration prior to engaging in
  business.  Such  person  must electronically submit a properly completed
  application for a certificate of registration for each location at which
  vapor products will be sold in this state, on a form prescribed  by  the
  commissioner,  and  shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application
  fee of three hundred dollars.
    (b) A vapor products dealer certificate of registration shall be valid
  for the calendar year for which it is issued unless earlier suspended or
  revoked. Upon the expiration of the term stated on  the  certificate  of
  registration,  such certificate shall be null and void. A certificate of
  registration shall not  be  assignable  or  transferable  and  shall  be
  destroyed  immediately  upon  the  vapor  products  dealer ceasing to do
  business as specified in such certificate or  in  the  event  that  such
  business never commenced.
    (c) Every vapor product dealer shall publicly display a vapor products
  dealer  certificate  of  registration  in each place of business in this
  state where vapor products are sold at retail. A vapor  products  dealer
  who  has  no regular place of business shall publicly display such valid
  certificate on each of its carts, stands, trucks or other  merchandising
  devices through which it sells vapor products.
    (d)  (1)  The  commissioner  shall  refuse  to  issue a certificate of
  registration to any applicant who does not possess a  valid  certificate
  of  authority  under section eleven hundred thirty-four of this chapter.
  In addition, the commissioner may  refuse  to  issue  a  certificate  of
  registration, or suspend, cancel or revoke a certificate of registration
  issued  to  any person who: (A) has a past-due liability as that term is
  defined in section one hundred seventy-one-v of this  chapter;  (B)  has
  had  a  certificate of registration under this article or any license or
  registration provided for in this chapter revoked within one  year  from
  the  date on which such application was filed; (C) has been convicted of
  a crime provided for in this chapter within one year from  the  date  on
  which  such  application was filed; (D) willfully fails to file a report
  or return required by this article; (E) willfully files,  causes  to  be
  filed,  gives  or  causes  to  be given a report, return, certificate or
  affidavit required by this article which is false; (F)  willfully  fails
  to collect or truthfully account for or pay over any tax imposed by this
  article;  or (G) whose place of business is at the same premises as that
  of a person whose vapor products dealer registration  has  been  revoked
  and  where  such  revocation is still in effect, unless the applicant or
  vapor  products  dealer  provides   the   commissioner   with   adequate
  documentation demonstrating that such applicant or vapor products dealer
  acquired the premises or business through an arm's length transaction as
  defined  in  paragraph  (e)  of  subdivision one of section four hundred
  eighty-a of this chapter.
    (2) In addition to the grounds  provided  in  paragraph  one  of  this
  subdivision,  the  commissioner  shall  refuse to issue a certificate of
  registration and shall cancel or suspend a certificate  of  registration
  as  directed by an enforcement officer pursuant to article thirteen-F of
  the public health law. Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  law  to  the
  contrary,   an   applicant   whose  application  for  a  certificate  of
  registration is refused or a vapor products dealer whose registration is
  cancelled or suspended under this paragraph shall have  no  right  to  a
  hearing  under  this chapter and shall have no right to commence a court
  action or  proceeding  or  to  any  other  legal  recourse  against  the
  commissioner  with  respect to such refusal, suspension or cancellation;
  provided, however, that nothing herein shall  be  construed  to  deny  a


 vapor  products  dealer a hearing under article thirteen-F of the public
  health law or to prohibit vapor products dealers from commencing a court
  action or proceeding  against  an  enforcement  officer  as  defined  in
  section thirteen hundred ninety-nine-aa of the public health law.
    (e)  If a vapor products dealer is suspended, cancelled or revoked and
  such vapor products dealer sells vapor products through  more  than  one
  place of business in this state, the vapor products dealer's certificate
  of  registration issued to that place of business, cart, stand, truck or
  other merchandising device, where  such  violation  occurred,  shall  be
  suspended,  revoked  or  cancelled.  Provided,  however,  upon  a  vapor
  products dealer's third suspension, cancellation or revocation within  a
  five-year period for any one or more businesses owned or operated by the
  vapor  products  dealer, such suspension, cancellation, or revocation of
  the vapor products dealer's certificate of registration shall  apply  to
  all  places  of  business  where  he or she sells vapor products in this
  state.
    (f) Every holder of a certificate  of  registration  must  notify  the
  commissioner  of  changes  to  any  of  the  information  stated  on the
  certificate or changes to any information contained in  the  application
  for  the  certificate of registration. Such notification must be made on
  or before the last day of the month in which a change occurs and must be
  made electronically on a form prescribed by the commissioner.
    (g)  Every  vapor  products  dealer  who  holds   a   certificate   of
  registration  under  this  article  shall  be  required to reapply for a
  certificate of registration for the following calendar year on or before
  the twentieth day of September and such reapplication shall  be  subject
  to  the same requirements and conditions, including grounds for refusal,
  as an initial registration under this article, including but not limited
  to the payment of the three hundred  dollar  application  fee  for  each
  retail location.
    (h)  In  addition  to  any  other penalty imposed by this chapter, any
  vapor products dealer who violates the provisions of this  section,  (1)
  for  a  first  violation  is  liable for a civil fine not less than five
  thousand dollars but not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars and such
  certificate of registration may be suspended for a period  of  not  more
  than  six  months;  and  (2) for a second or subsequent violation within
  three years following a prior violation of this section, is liable for a
  civil fine not  less  than  ten  thousand  dollars  but  not  to  exceed
  thirty-five thousand dollars and such certificate of registration may be
  suspended  for  a  period of up to thirty-six months; or (3) for a third
  violation within a period of five years, its vapor products  certificate
  or  certificates  of registration issued to each place of business owned
  or operated by the vapor products dealer in this state, shall be revoked
  for a period of up to five years.




   §  1184.  Administrative  provisions. (a) Except as otherwise provided
  for in this  article,  the  taxes  imposed  by  this  article  shall  be
  administered  and  collected  in  a  like manner as and jointly with the
  taxes imposed by sections eleven hundred five and eleven hundred ten  of
  this chapter. In addition, except as otherwise provided in this article,
  all  of  the  provisions of article twenty-eight of this chapter (except
  sections eleven hundred seven,  eleven  hundred  eight,  eleven  hundred
  nine,  and  eleven hundred forty-eight) relating to or applicable to the
  administration, collection and review  of  the  taxes  imposed  by  such
  sections  eleven hundred five and eleven hundred ten, including, but not
  limited to, the provisions relating to definitions, returns, exemptions,
  penalties, tax secrecy, personal liability for the tax,  and  collection
  of  tax  from  the  customer,  shall  apply to the taxes imposed by this
  article so far as such provisions can be made applicable  to  the  taxes
  imposed  by  this  article  with  such  limitations as set forth in this
  article and such modifications as may be necessary  in  order  to  adapt
  such  language to the taxes so imposed. Such provisions shall apply with
  the same force and effect as if the language  of  those  provisions  had
  been  set  forth  in  full in this article except to the extent that any
  provision is either inconsistent with a provision of this article or  is
  not relevant to the taxes imposed by this article.
    (b) Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision (a) of this section,
  the  exemptions  provided in paragraph ten of subdivision (a) of section
  eleven hundred fifteen of this chapter, and the  provisions  of  section
  eleven  hundred  sixteen,  except those provided in paragraphs one, two,
  three and six of subdivision (a) of such section, shall not apply to the
  taxes imposed by this article.
    (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of this section or  section  eleven
  hundred  forty-six  of this chapter, the commissioner may, in his or her
  discretion, permit the commissioner of health or his or  her  authorized
  representative  to inspect any return related to the tax imposed by this
  article and may furnish to the commissioner of health any such return or
  supply him or her with information concerning an item contained  in  any
  such return, or disclosed by any investigation of a liability under this
  article.




   §  1185.  Criminal  penalties.  The  criminal  penalties  in  sections
  eighteen hundred one through eighteen hundred seven and eighteen hundred
  seventeen of this chapter shall apply to  this  article  with  the  same
  force  and  effect  as  if the language of those provisions had been set
  forth in full in this article except to the extent that any provision is
  either inconsistent with a provision of this article or is not  relevant
  to the taxes imposed by this article.




   §  1186.  Deposit and disposition of revenue. The taxes, interest, and
  penalties imposed by this article  and  collected  or  received  by  the
  commissioner  shall  be  deposited  daily  with  such responsible banks,
  banking  houses  or  trust  companies,  as  may  be  designated  by  the
  comptroller,  to  the credit of the comptroller in trust for the tobacco
  control  and  insurance  initiatives   pool   established   by   section
  ninety-two-dd   of   the  state  finance  law  and  distributed  by  the
  commissioner of health in accordance with section  twenty-eight  hundred
  seven-v  of  the  public health law. Such deposits will be kept separate
  and apart from all other money in the possession of the comptroller. The
  comptroller shall require adequate security from all such  depositories.
  Of  the  total  revenue  collected  or  received under this article, the
  comptroller shall retain such amount as the commissioner  may  determine
  to  be  necessary for refunds under this article. Provided, however that
  the commissioner is authorized and directed to deduct from  the  amounts
  he  or  she  receives  from  the  registration fees under section eleven
  hundred eighty-three of this article, before deposit  into  the  tobacco
  control and insurance initiatives pool, a reasonable amount necessary to
  effectuate  refunds of appropriations of the department to reimburse the
  department for the costs incurred to administer, collect and  distribute
  the taxes imposed by this article.




   § 1190. Definitions.  Terms  used  in this article shall have the same
  meaning as in section nine hundred of the general  business  law  unless
  expressly   provided  otherwise.  For  purposes  of  this  article,  the
  following terms shall have the following meanings:
    (a) "Gross receipts paid by  the  shared  vehicle  driver"  means  all
  consideration  paid  or contracted to be paid by a shared vehicle driver
  for use of a shared vehicle, including optional charges and fees, except
  for separately stated charges for taxes and government-imposed fees  and
  airport facility fees, imposed on the shared vehicle driver.
    (b)  "Peer-to-peer  car  sharing program administrator" shall mean the
  corporation, partnership,  firm,  institution,  sole  proprietorship  or
  other  entity or person that is responsible for operating, facilitating,
  or administering the means, digital or otherwise, by  which  a  business
  platform  facilitates  a  peer-to-peer car sharing program for financial
  consideration.




   § 1191. Imposition  of state-wide peer-to-peer tax. (a) In addition to
  any tax imposed under any other article of this chapter, there is hereby
  imposed on every shared vehicle driver and there shall be paid a tax  of
  three  percent  of  the gross receipts paid by the shared vehicle driver
  for use of a shared vehicle when  the  transfer  of  possession  of  the
  shared vehicle to the shared vehicle driver occurs in this state.
    (b)  Except  to  the  extent  that  the  transfer  of a shared vehicle
  described in subdivision (a) of this section has already been or will be
  subject to  the  tax  imposed  under  such  subdivision  and  except  as
  otherwise  exempted under this article, there is hereby imposed on every
  shared vehicle driver and there shall be paid a  use  tax  for  the  use
  within  this  state  of any shared vehicle by the shared vehicle driver.
  For purposes of this subdivision, the tax shall be at the rate of  three
  percent  of  the  gross  receipts paid or contracted to be paid for such
  shared vehicle.




   § 1192. Imposition  of  metropolitan  commuter transportation district
  tax. (a) In addition to the statewide tax imposed under  section  eleven
  hundred  ninety-one  of  this article and in addition to any tax imposed
  under any other article of this chapter,  there  is  hereby  imposed  on
  every  shared  vehicle  driver  and  there  shall be paid a metropolitan
  commuter transportation district tax  of  three  percent  of  the  gross
  receipts  paid  by  the  shared  vehicle  driver for the use of a shared
  vehicle when the transfer of possession of the  shared  vehicle  to  the
  shared vehicle driver occurs in the metropolitan commuter transportation
  district  as  established  by  section  twelve  hundred sixty-two of the
  public authorities law.
    (b) Except to the  extent  that  the  transfer  of  a  shared  vehicle
  described  in subdivision (a) of this section, or section eleven hundred
  ninety-three of this article, has already been or will be subject to the
  tax imposed under such subdivision or section and  except  as  otherwise
  exempted  under  this  article,  there is hereby imposed on every shared
  vehicle driver and there shall be paid a use tax for the use within  the
  metropolitan  commuter transportation district as established by section
  twelve hundred sixty-two of the public authorities  law  of  any  shared
  vehicle  by the shared vehicle driver. For purposes of this subdivision,
  the tax shall be at the rate of three percent of the gross receipts paid
  or contracted to be paid for such shared vehicle.




   § 1193. Imposition  of regional transportation tax. (a) In addition to
  the statewide tax imposed under section  eleven  hundred  ninety-one  of
  this  article and in addition to any tax imposed under any other article
  of this chapter, there is hereby imposed on every shared vehicle  driver
  and  there  shall be paid a regional transportation tax of three percent
  of the gross receipts paid by the shared vehicle driver for the use of a
  shared vehicle when the transfer of possession of the shared vehicle  to
  the  shared  vehicle driver occurs anywhere in this state outside of the
  metropolitan transportation district as established  by  section  twelve
  hundred sixty-two of the public authorities law.
    (b)  Except  to  the  extent  that  the  transfer  of a shared vehicle
  described in subdivision (a) of this section, or section eleven  hundred
  ninety-two  of  this article, has already been or will be subject to the
  tax imposed under such subdivision or section and  except  as  otherwise
  exempted  under  this  article,  there is hereby imposed on every shared
  vehicle driver and there shall be paid a use tax  for  the  use  in  the
  state  outside  the  metropolitan  commuter  transportation  district as
  established  by  section  twelve  hundred  sixty-two   of   the   public
  authorities  law of any shared vehicle by the shared vehicle driver. For
  purposes of this subdivision, the tax shall be  at  the  rate  of  three
  percent  of  the  gross  receipts paid or contracted to be paid for such
  shared vehicle.




   § 1194. Collection  of  tax.  The  peer-to-peer  car  sharing  program
  administrator shall collect the tax from the shared vehicle driver  when
  collecting the gross receipts to which it applies. The tax shall be paid
  to the peer-to-peer car sharing program administrator as trustee for and
  on account of the state.




   § 1195. Presumption.  For  the purpose of the proper administration of
  this article and to prevent evasion of the tax imposed by this  article,
  it  shall  be  presumed  that  every  transfer of possession of a shared
  vehicle to a shared vehicle driver anywhere in this state is subject  to
  the  tax  under  this  article. This presumption shall prevail until the
  contrary is established.




   § 1196. Administrative  provisions.  (a)  Except as otherwise provided
  for in this  article,  the  taxes  imposed  by  this  article  shall  be
  administered  and  collected  in  a  like manner as and jointly with the
  taxes imposed by sections eleven hundred five and eleven hundred ten  of
  this chapter. In addition, except as otherwise provided in this article,
  all  of  the  provisions of article twenty-eight of this chapter (except
  sections eleven hundred seven,  eleven  hundred  eight,  eleven  hundred
  nine,  and  eleven hundred forty-eight) relating to or applicable to the
  administration, collection and review  of  the  taxes  imposed  by  such
  sections  eleven hundred five and eleven hundred ten, including, but not
  limited to, the provisions relating to definitions, returns, exemptions,
  penalties, tax secrecy, personal liability for the tax,  and  collection
  of  tax  from  the  customer,  shall  apply to the taxes imposed by this
  article so far as such provisions can be made applicable  to  the  taxes
  imposed  by  this  article  with  such  limitations as set forth in this
  article and such modifications as may be necessary  in  order  to  adapt
  such  language to the taxes so imposed. Such provisions shall apply with
  the same force and effect as if the language  of  those  provisions  had
  been  set  forth  in  full in this article except to the extent that any
  provision is either inconsistent with a provision of this article or  is
  not relevant to the taxes imposed by this article.
    (b) The tax imposed by this article is in lieu of and replaces any tax
  as  may  be  imposed under sections eleven hundred sixty, eleven hundred
  sixty-six-a, and eleven hundred sixty-six-b of this chapter.




   § 1197. Deposit  and  disposition  of  revenue.  (a)  All taxes, fees,
  interest and penalties collected or received by the  commissioner  under
  section eleven hundred ninety-one of this article shall be deposited and
  disposed   of   pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  section  one  hundred
  seventy-one-a of this chapter.
    (b) All taxes, fees, interest and penalties collected or  received  by
  the commissioner under section eleven hundred ninety-two of this article
  shall  be  deposited  and  disposed  into  the  corporate transportation
  account of the metropolitan transportation authority special  assistance
  fund  established  by  section  twelve  hundred  seventy-a of the public
  authorities  law,  to  be  applied  as  provided  in  paragraph  (e)  of
  subdivision four of such section.
    (c)  All  taxes, fees, interest and penalties collected or received by
  the commissioner under  section  eleven  hundred  ninety-three  of  this
  article  shall  be deposited and disposed into the public transportation
  systems   operating   assistance   account   established   by    section
  eighty-eight-a of the state finance law.




   §  1201.  Taxes  administered  by  cities  of  one  million  or  more.
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, but subject
  to the applicable limitations and exemptions in part II of this article,
  any city in this state having a  population  of  one  million  or  more,
  acting  through  its  local  legislative  body, is hereby authorized and
  empowered to adopt and amend local laws imposing in any such city any or
  all of the types of taxes set forth in  the  following  subdivisions  of
  this  section, such taxes to be administered and collected by the fiscal
  officers of such city in the manner provided for in subpart  A  of  part
  III of this article:
    (a)  Taxes  on  the  privilege  of doing any business, engaging in any
  trade, calling, occupation or profession; owning, holding  or  occupying
  any  property;  possessing or exercising any franchise or franchises; or
  on the gross receipts from sales to persons  within  such  city;  except
  that no tax may be imposed pursuant to this subdivision on persons as to
  whom  authority  to  tax is granted by article two-b of the general city
  law.  The rate of the taxes authorized in this subdivision shall not  be
  in  excess  of one and seventeen one hundredths times the rate fixed for
  the corresponding taxes by local law fifty-one of the city of  New  York
  for  the  year  nineteen hundred forty-one, and not in excess of two and
  thirty-five one hundredths times the rate fixed  for  the  corresponding
  tax  by  local  law  forty-nine  of  the  city  of New York for the year
  nineteen hundred forty-one, except that as to  persons  engaged  in  the
  business of operating or leasing sleeping and parlor railroad cars or of
  operating railroads other than street surface, rapid transit, subway and
  elevated  railroads,  the  rate  shall  not  be  in  excess of three and
  fifty-two one hundredths percent of gross income and except that  as  to
  persons  engaged  in the business of operating omnibuses with a carrying
  capacity of more than seven persons, whether or  not  such  persons  are
  subject  to  the  supervision of the state department of public service,
  the rate shall not be in excess of  one  and  seventeen  one  hundredths
  percent of gross income or gross operating income, as the case may be.
    Notwithstanding  the  limitations  as  to rate provided above, for the
  years nineteen hundred seventy-three and those following, such city  may
  impose,  by local law, a surtax of forty per centum of the percentage of
  tax in effect pursuant to this subdivision in such  city  for  the  year
  nineteen hundred seventy-two.
    (b)  (i)  Taxes  on  each deed, other instrument or transaction (other
  than a deed or instrument given solely as security or a transaction  the
  sole  purpose  of  which  is to secure an obligation or indebtedness) by
  which any real property or any economic interest therein is conveyed  or
  transferred,  measured  by the consideration or value of the interest or
  property conveyed or transferred, (1) at a rate not to  exceed  one-half
  of   one  percent  of  such  consideration  or  value  with  respect  to
  conveyances made before July first,  nineteen  hundred  seventy-one,  or
  made  in  performance  of a contract therefor executed before such date,
  (2) at a rate not to exceed one percent of such consideration  or  value
  with  respect  to  (A)  all  conveyances  made  on  or after July first,
  nineteen hundred seventy-one and before February first, nineteen hundred
  eighty-two, or made in  performance  of  a  contract  therefor  executed
  during  such  period,  (B)  conveyances  or  transfers  made on or after
  February first, nineteen hundred eighty-two of one, two or  three-family
  houses,  individual  cooperative  apartments  and individual residential
  condominium  units,  or  interests  therein,  and  (C)  conveyances   or
  transfers  made  on or after February first, nineteen hundred eighty-two
  (other than grants, assignments or surrenders of leasehold interests  in
  real  property)  where  the  consideration  or  value  is less than five
  hundred thousand dollars, (3) at a rate not to  exceed  two  percent  of


 such  consideration  or  value  with respect to all other conveyances or
  transfers made on or after February first, nineteen  hundred  eighty-two
  (other  than grants, assignments or surrenders of leasehold interests in
  real  property)  other  than those conveyances or transfers specified in
  subparagraphs four, five and six of this paragraph, (4) at a rate not to
  exceed one and four hundred twenty-five thousandths of  one  percent  of
  such  consideration  or  value where such consideration or value is less
  than five hundred thousand dollars with respect to  all  conveyances  or
  transfers  other  than for conveyances or transfers of one, two or three
  family  houses,  individual  cooperative  apartments,   and   individual
  residential  condominium units, or interests therein (other than grants,
  assignment or surrenders of leasehold interests in real property),  made
  on  or  after  August first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine, (5) at a rate
  not to exceed one  and  four  hundred  twenty-five  thousandths  of  one
  percent of such consideration or value where such consideration or value
  is  more  than five hundred thousand dollars with respect to conveyances
  or transfers of one, two or three family houses, individual  cooperative
  apartments,  and  individual residential condominium units, or interests
  therein (other than  grants,  assignments  or  surrenders  of  leasehold
  interests  in  real  property),  made on or after August first, nineteen
  hundred eighty-nine, and (6) at a rate not to exceed two and six hundred
  twenty-five one thousandths of one  percent  of  such  consideration  or
  value  where  such  consideration  or value is greater than five hundred
  thousand dollars with respect to all conveyances or transfers other than
  for conveyances or  transfers  of  one,  two  or  three  family  houses,
  individual    cooperative   apartments,   and   individual   residential
  condominium units, or interests therein (other than  grants,  assignment
  or surrenders of leasehold interests in real property), made on or after
  August  first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine. Provided, however, that any
  such city may allow deductions, in determining the portion  of  any  tax
  authorized hereby the proceeds of which are payable to the New York city
  transit  authority  as hereinafter provided, for any continuing liens on
  such interest or property where such interest or property is a one,  two
  or  three-family  house,  an  individual  cooperative  apartment  or  an
  individual residential condominium unit or where the  consideration  for
  or  value  of  the  interest or property conveyed or transferred is less
  than five hundred thousand dollars, and may also allow an exemption  not
  in  excess of twenty-five thousand dollars on the consideration or value
  of the interest or property conveyed and provided,  further,  that  such
  taxes  shall  not apply if the contract for any such conveyance was made
  prior to  May  first,  nineteen  hundred  fifty-nine.  Anything  to  the
  contrary  notwithstanding, where the tax authorized hereby is imposed on
  the consideration or value without any deduction for  continuing  liens,
  the portion of the consideration or value ascribable to such liens shall
  not  be  taxed  at  a rate in excess of one percent prior to July first,
  nineteen hundred eighty-two, in excess of two percent on and after  July
  first,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-two  and before August first, nineteen
  hundred eighty-nine, or in excess of two  and  six  hundred  twenty-five
  thousandths  of  one percent on and after August first, nineteen hundred
  eighty-nine, except that where the interest or property is a one, two or
  three-family house, an individual cooperative apartment or an individual
  residential condominium unit or where the consideration for a  value  of
  the  interest  or  property  conveyed  or  transferred is less than five
  hundred thousand dollars the rate on  and  after  July  first,  nineteen
  hundred  eighty-two shall not be in excess of one percent. The amount of
  any pre-existing liens on  such  property  or  interest  which  continue
  thereon  after  the conveyance or transfer shall be deemed to be part of
  the consideration or value for purposes of  measuring  the  tax  without


 regard  to whether or not payment of the liens or of the underlying debt
  is assumed by the grantee or transferee. The tax authorized  hereby  may
  also be imposed (A) prior to July first, nineteen hundred eighty-two, at
  a  rate  not  to  exceed  one  percent,  on  the granting, assignment or
  surrender of a  leasehold  interest  in  real  property,  other  than  a
  leasehold  interest in a one, two or three-family house or an individual
  dwelling unit in a dwelling which is to be occupied or  is  occupied  as
  the  residence  or home of four or more families living independently of
  each other,  where  the  consideration  for  or  value  of  such  grant,
  assignment or surrender is five hundred thousand dollars or more, (B) on
  and  after  July  first,  nineteen  hundred eighty-two and before August
  first, nineteen hundred  eighty-nine,  at  a  rate  not  to  exceed  two
  percent,  on  the  granting,  assignment  or  surrender  of  a leasehold
  interest in real property, except  that  in  the  case  of  a  leasehold
  interest  in  a one, two or three-family house or an individual dwelling
  unit in a dwelling which is  to  be  occupied  or  is  occupied  as  the
  residence  or home of four or more families living independently of each
  other, or where the consideration for or value of such grant, assignment
  or surrender is less than five hundred thousand dollars, the rate  shall
  not  exceed  one  percent  and  (C)  on and after August first, nineteen
  hundred eighty-nine, at a  rate  not  to  exceed  two  and  six  hundred
  twenty-five  thousandths  of one percent, on the granting, assignment or
  surrender of a leasehold interest in real property, except that  in  the
  case  of  a leasehold interest in a one, two or three-family house or an
  individual dwelling unit in a dwelling which is to  be  occupied  or  is
  occupied  as  the  residence  or  home  of  four or more families living
  independently of each other where the consideration for or value of such
  grant, assignment or  surrender  is  less  than  five  hundred  thousand
  dollars,  the  rate  shall  not  exceed one percent, or in the case of a
  leasehold interest in a one, two or three family house or an  individual
  dwelling  unit  in  a dwelling which is to be occupied or is occupied as
  the residence or home of four or more families living  independently  of
  each  other  where  the  consideration  for  or  value  of  such  grant,
  assignment or surrender is greater than five hundred  thousand  dollars,
  the  rate  shall not exceed one and four hundred twenty-five thousandths
  of one percent, or where the consideration for or  value  of  any  other
  grant,  assignment  or  surrender  is  less  than  five hundred thousand
  dollars, the rate shall not exceed  one  and  four  hundred  twenty-five
  thousandths  of  one  percent; provided, however, that for purposes of a
  tax on the granting of a leasehold interest in real property, the amount
  subject to tax shall be only such amount as is not considered  rent  for
  purposes  of  the  tax  authorized  to  be  imposed  on the occupancy of
  commercial premises by chapter two hundred fifty-seven of  the  laws  of
  nineteen hundred sixty-three, as amended, and imposed by a city having a
  population  of  one million or more pursuant thereto. In the case of any
  conveyance or transfer of real property or any economic interest therein
  in complete  or  partial  liquidation  of  a  corporation,  partnership,
  association,  trust  or  other  entity, the tax shall be measured by the
  consideration for such conveyance or transfer or the value of  the  real
  property  or  interest  therein, whichever is greater. Such taxes may be
  imposed on any conveyance or  transfer  of  real  property  or  interest
  therein  where  the  real property is located in such city regardless of
  where transactions, negotiations, transfers of deeds  or  other  actions
  with  regard  to  the transfer or conveyance take place, subject only to
  the restrictions contained in section twelve hundred thirty. The payment
  of, and the filing of a return  relating  to,  any  such  taxes  may  be
  required  as  a  condition precedent (1) to the recording or filing of a
  deed, lease, assignment or surrender of lease or other  instrument,  (2)


 to  the  commencement  of  any action or proceeding in any court of this
  state in which any conveyance, transfer or lease described herein is  in
  issue, directly or indirectly, or (3) to the receipt in evidence of such
  deed, lease, assignment or surrender of lease or other instrument in any
  such court. In each instance where the tax rate imposed pursuant to this
  subdivision  is  two  percent, fifty percent of the total amount of such
  tax, including fifty percent of any interest or penalties thereon, shall
  be set aside in a special account by the commissioner of finance of such
  city, provided, however, that where the consideration for  or  value  of
  property  or interest conveyed or transferred includes the amount of any
  nondeductible mortgage, lien or other encumbrance which  existed  before
  the  conveyance or transfer and remains thereon after such conveyance or
  transfer, (A) prior to  July  first,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-two  the
  entire  amount  of tax imposed at a rate not in excess of one percent on
  the  portion  of  the  consideration  or  value   ascribable   to   such
  nondeductible   mortgage,  lien  or  other  encumbrance,  including  any
  interest or penalties thereon, and fifty  percent  of  the  tax  on  the
  balance  of  the  consideration or value, including fifty percent of any
  interest or penalties thereon,  shall  be  set  aside  in  such  special
  account,  and  (B)  on and after July first, nineteen hundred eighty-two
  and before August first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine, fifty percent  of
  the  amount of tax imposed at a rate in excess of one percent but not in
  excess of two percent on the  portion  of  the  consideration  or  value
  ascribable  to  such  nondeductible mortgage, lien or other encumbrance,
  including fifty percent of any interest or penalties thereon, and  fifty
  percent  of  the  tax  on  the  balance  of  the consideration or value,
  including fifty percent of any interest or penalties thereon,  shall  be
  set  aside  in such special account. On and after August first, nineteen
  hundred eighty-nine,  in  each  instance  where  the  tax  rate  imposed
  pursuant to this subdivision is in excess of two percent, the portion of
  the  tax,  and  any interest or penalty thereon, to be set aside in such
  special account shall be an amount equal to one  percent  of  the  total
  consideration  for  or  value  of the real property or economic interest
  therein  conveyed  or  transferred,  plus  any   interest   or   penalty
  attributable  to  such portion of the tax. There shall also be set aside
  in such special account prior to July first, nineteen hundred eighty-two
  the total amount of taxes imposed on grants, assignments  or  surrenders
  of  leasehold  interests  in  real  property,  including any interest or
  penalties thereon; on and after July first, nineteen hundred  eighty-two
  and  before  August  first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine, there shall be
  set aside in such special account fifty percent of the amount  of  taxes
  imposed  on  grants, assignments or surrenders of leasehold interests in
  real property, other  than  a  leasehold  interest  in  a  one,  two  or
  three-family house or an individual dwelling unit in a dwelling which is
  to  be  occupied or is occupied as the residence or home of four or more
  families living independently of each other, or where the  consideration
  for  or  value  of such grant, assignment or surrender is less than five
  hundred thousand dollars, including fifty percent  of  any  interest  or
  penalties   thereon.   On  and  after  August  first,  nineteen  hundred
  eighty-nine, there shall be set aside in such special account,  in  each
  instance  where  the rate of tax on grants, assignments or surrenders of
  leasehold interests in real property is two percent or more,  an  amount
  equal  to one percent of the consideration for or value of the leasehold
  interest granted, assigned or surrendered, plus any interest or  penalty
  attributable  to  such  portion  of the tax. Notwithstanding anything in
  this paragraph (i) to the contrary, in each instance where the tax  rate
  imposed  pursuant  to paragraph (xi) of this subdivision is in excess of
  one percent, the portion of tax, and any interest or penalty thereon, to


 be set aside in such  special  account  shall  be  an  amount  equal  to
  one-half  of  one percent of the total consideration for or value of the
  real property or economic interest therein conveyed or transferred, plus
  any  interest  or  penalty  attributable to such portion of the tax, and
  there shall be set aside in such special account, in each instance where
  the rate of tax imposed under paragraph  (xi)  of  this  subdivision  on
  grants,  assignments  or  surrenders  of  leasehold  interests  in  real
  property is in excess of one percent, an amount equal to one-half of one
  percent of the consideration for or  value  of  the  leasehold  interest
  granted,   assigned   or  surrendered,  plus  any  interest  or  penalty
  attributable to such portion of the tax. Moneys in such account shall be
  used for payment by such  commissioner  to  the  state  comptroller  for
  deposit  in  the  urban mass transit operating assistance account of the
  mass  transportation  operating  assistance  fund  of  any   amount   of
  insufficiency  certified  by  the  state  comptroller  pursuant  to  the
  provisions of subdivision six of section  eighty-eight-a  of  the  state
  finance  law,  and, on the fifteenth day of each month such commissioner
  shall transmit all funds  in  such  account  on  the  last  day  of  the
  preceding  month,  except  the  amount  required  for the payment of any
  amount of insufficiency certified by  the  state  comptroller  and  such
  amount  as  he  deems  necessary  for  refunds  and  such  other amounts
  necessary to finance the New York city transportation disabled committee
  and the New York city  paratransit  system  as  established  by  section
  fifteen-b  of  the  transportation  law,  provided,  however,  that such
  amounts shall not exceed six percent of the total funds in  the  account
  but  in  no event be less than one hundred seventy-five thousand dollars
  beginning April first, nineteen hundred  eighty-six,  and  further  that
  beginning  November  fifteenth,  nineteen hundred eighty-four and during
  the entire period prior to operation of such system, the total  of  such
  amounts shall not exceed three hundred seventy-five thousand dollars for
  the administrative expenses of such committee and fifty thousand dollars
  for  the  expenses  of  the agency designated pursuant to paragraph b of
  subdivision five of such section, and other amounts necessary to finance
  the operating needs of the private bus companies franchised by the  city
  of  New  York  and  eligible to receive state operating assistance under
  section eighteen-b of the transportation law,  provided,  however,  that
  such  amounts  shall  not  exceed four percent of the total funds in the
  account, to the New York city transit authority for mass transit  within
  the city.
    (ii)  For purposes of this subdivision, an "economic interest" in real
  property  shall  mean  (1)  the  ownership  of  shares  of  stock  in  a
  corporation  which  owns real property, (2) the ownership of an interest
  or interests in a partnership, association or other  entity  which  owns
  real  property,  and  (3)  the  ownership  of  a  beneficial interest or
  interests in a trust which owns real property.
    (iii) For purposes of this subdivision,  the  terms  "transferred"  or
  "transfer,"  when  used  in  relation  to  an  economic interest in real
  property, shall include the transfer or transfers of shares of stock  in
  a  corporation,  interest  or interests in a partnership, association or
  other entity, or beneficial interest or interests in  a  trust,  whether
  made   by  one  or  several  persons,  or  in  one  or  several  related
  transactions, which shares of stock or interest or interests  constitute
  a  controlling  interest  in such corporation, partnership, association,
  trust or other entity.
    (iv) "Controlling interest" for purposes  of  this  subdivision  shall
  mean:    (1)  in the case of a corporation, fifty percent or more of the
  total combined voting power of all classes of stock of such corporation,
  or fifty percent or more of the fair market  value  of  all  classes  of


 stock  of  such  corporation;  and  (2)  in  the  case of a partnership,
  association, trust or  other  entity,  fifty  percent  or  more  of  the
  capital,   profits   or   beneficial   interest   in  such  partnership,
  association, trust or other entity.
    (v) Notwithstanding the definition of "controlling interest" contained
  in  paragraph  (iv)  or  any  provision  to  the  contrary  contained in
  paragraph (iii) of this subdivision, in the  case  of  any  transfer  of
  shares  of stock in a cooperative housing corporation in connection with
  the grant or transfer of a proprietary leasehold, the tax authorized  by
  this subdivision shall apply to (1) the original transfer of such shares
  of stock by the cooperative corporation or cooperative plan sponsor, and
  (2)  any  subsequent  transfer  of  such  shares  of  stock by the owner
  thereof. Notwithstanding any  provisions  of  this  subdivision  to  the
  contrary,  in  the  case  of  a transfer described in clause two of this
  paragraph  which  relates  to  an  individual  residential   unit,   the
  consideration  for  such  transfer  shall not include any portion of the
  unpaid principal of any mortgage on the real property of the cooperative
  housing corporation. In determining the tax on a transfer  described  in
  clause  (1)  of  this  paragraph,  a  credit  shall  be  allowed  for  a
  proportionate part of the amount of any  tax  imposed  pursuant  to  the
  authority  of  this  subdivision  and  paid  upon  the conveyance to the
  cooperative housing corporation of the land and  building  or  buildings
  comprising  the  cooperative  dwelling  or dwellings. Such proportionate
  part shall be the amount determined by multiplying  the  amount  of  tax
  paid  upon  the  conveyance  to the cooperative housing corporation by a
  fraction, the numerator of which shall be the number of shares of  stock
  transferred in a transaction described in clause (1) and the denominator
  of which shall be the total number of outstanding shares of stock of the
  cooperative  housing  corporation  (including  any  stock  held  by  the
  corporation). In no event, however, shall such credit reduce the tax  on
  a transfer described in clause (1) below zero, nor shall any such credit
  be  allowed  for  any tax paid more than twenty-four months prior to the
  date on which occurs the first in a series of  transfers  of  shares  of
  stock in an offering of cooperative housing corporation shares described
  in  clause  (1). For purposes of this subdivision, the term "cooperative
  housing corporation" shall not include a housing company  organized  and
  operating  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of article two, four, five, or
  eleven of the private housing finance law.
    (vi) In the case of a transfer of an economic interest in  any  entity
  that  owns  assets in addition to real property or interest therein, the
  consideration subject to tax shall be deemed equal to  the  fair  market
  value  of the real property or interest therein apportioned based on the
  percentage of the ownership interest in the entity transferred.
    (vii) Any local law enacted pursuant to this subdivision  may  provide
  for such credits as are required to avoid multiple taxation.
    (viii)  Any  city  which  has  imposed  the  tax  authorized  by  this
  subdivision prior to its amendment by a chapter of the laws of  nineteen
  hundred eighty-one may continue to impose such tax without regard to the
  amendments  made  by  such  chapter, or may amend the local law imposing
  such tax to  incorporate  therein  the  provisions  authorized  by  this
  subdivision  as  amended by such chapter of the laws of nineteen hundred
  eighty-one. If such city amends such local law to  include  therein  the
  additional provisions authorized by such chapter of the laws of nineteen
  hundred  eighty-one,  the  provisions  so  added  shall not apply to any
  transfer made pursuant to a written contract entered into prior  to  the
  effective  date  of  such  chapter  of  the  laws  of  nineteen  hundred
  eighty-one.


   (ix)  Notwithstanding  the  definition   of   "controlling   interest"
  contained  in  paragraph  (iv)  or anything to the contrary contained in
  paragraph (iii) of this subdivision, in the case of a corporation (other
  than a cooperative housing corporation), partnership, association, trust
  or  other entity formed for the purpose of cooperative ownership of real
  property, the tax authorized by this subdivision  shall  apply  to  each
  transfer  of:  shares  of  stock  in  such corporation, interest in such
  partnership, association or other entity or beneficial interest in  such
  trust,  in  connection  with  the  grant  or  transfer  of a proprietary
  leasehold. Notwithstanding any provisions of  this  subdivision  to  the
  contrary,  in  the  case of a transfer described in this paragraph which
  relates to an individual  residential  unit  (other  than  the  original
  transfer  of  such  a unit by the cooperative entity or cooperative plan
  sponsor), the consideration for such  transfer  shall  not  include  any
  portion  of the unpaid principal of any mortgage on the real property of
  such corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity.
    (x) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to  the  contrary,  all
  revenues  resulting  from  the  imposition  of  the  tax  authorized  by
  paragraph (ix) of this subdivision shall be credited to and deposited in
  the general fund of the city imposing such tax,  but  no  part  of  such
  revenues  may  be  expended  unless appropriated in the annual budget of
  such city.
    (xi) Notwithstanding anything contained in this subdivision,  the  tax
  imposed  under  paragraphs  (i), (v) and (ix) of this subdivision on any
  deed or other instrument or transaction conveying or  transferring  real
  property  or  an  economic  interest  therein,  that qualifies as a real
  estate investment trust transfer, as defined below, shall be imposed  at
  a  rate  equal  to  fifty  percent of the otherwise applicable rate. For
  purposes of this paragraph (xi), a real estate investment trust transfer
  shall mean (1) any deed or other instrument or transaction conveying  or
  transferring  real  property  or  an economic interest therein to a real
  estate investment trust as  defined  in  section  856  of  the  internal
  revenue  code  (a  "REIT") or to a partnership or corporation in which a
  REIT owns a controlling interest immediately following the  transaction;
  and
    (2)  any  issuance  or  transfer  of  an  interest  in a REIT, or in a
  partnership or corporation in which a REIT owns a  controlling  interest
  immediately  following  the  issuance  or transfer, in connection with a
  transaction  described  in   subparagraph   one   of   this   paragraph.
  Notwithstanding  the foregoing, a transaction described in the preceding
  sentence shall not constitute a real estate  investment  trust  transfer
  unless  (A)  it  occurs  in connection with the initial formation of the
  REIT and the conditions described in subparagraphs  three  and  four  of
  this  paragraph  are  satisfied,  or  (B) in the case of any real estate
  investment  trust  transfer  occurring  on  or  after  July  thirteenth,
  nineteen  hundred  ninety-six  and  before September first, two thousand
  twenty-six, the transaction is described in subparagraph  five  of  this
  paragraph in which case the provisions of such subparagraph shall apply.
    (3)  The  value  of  the  ownership  interests  in  the  REIT, or in a
  partnership  or  corporation  in  which  the  REIT  owns  a  controlling
  interest,  received  by the grantor as consideration for such conveyance
  or transfer must be equal to an amount not less than  forty  percent  of
  the  value  of  the  equity  interest  in  the real property or economic
  interest therein conveyed or transferred by the grantor to  the  grantee
  and  such  ownership interests must be retained by the grantor or owners
  of the grantor for a period of not less than  two  years  following  the
  date of such conveyance or transfer; provided, however, that in the case
  of  the  death of the grantor or an owner of the grantor within such two


 year period, this two year retention requirement shall be deemed  to  be
  satisfied  notwithstanding  any conveyance or transfer of such ownership
  interests held by such individual as a result of such death.  The  value
  of  the  equity  interest  in  such  real  property or economic interest
  therein shall be computed by subtracting from the consideration for  the
  conveyance or transfer of the real property or economic interest therein
  the   unpaid  balance  of  any  loans  secured  by  mortgages  or  other
  encumbrances which are liens on the real property or  economic  interest
  therein  immediately  before the conveyance or transfer. For purposes of
  this computation, in the case  of  a  conveyance  or  transfer  of  real
  property  other than a conveyance or transfer of an economic interest in
  real property, the amount of the unpaid balance of any loans secured  by
  mortgages  or  other encumbrances to be subtracted from consideration is
  determined by multiplying the total unpaid balance of any loans  secured
  by  mortgages  or  other  encumbrances  on  the  real  property  by  the
  percentage of the ownership interest in the real property being conveyed
  or transferred to the grantee. In the case of a transfer of an  economic
  interest  in real property, such amount to be subtracted is equal to the
  sum of the following amounts: (I)  a  reasonable  apportionment  to  the
  interests  in  real  property  owned  by the entity of the amount of any
  loans secured by encumbrances on the ownership interests in  the  entity
  which are being conveyed or transferred and (II) the amount of any loans
  secured  by  mortgages or other encumbrances on the real property of the
  entity multiplied by the percentage interest  in  the  entity  which  is
  being  conveyed  or transferred. Provided, however that, for purposes of
  the computation made pursuant to this subparagraph three, any  mortgages
  or  other encumbrances on the real property or economic interest therein
  which are created in contemplation of the initial formation of the  REIT
  or  in contemplation of the conveyance or transfer of such real property
  or economic interest  therein  to  the  REIT  or  to  a  partnership  or
  corporation  in  which  the REIT owns a controlling interest immediately
  following the conveyance or transfer shall not be considered.
    (4) Seventy-five percent or more of the cash proceeds received by such
  REIT from the sale of ownership interests in such REIT upon its  initial
  formation  must  be  used:  (I) to make payments on loans secured by any
  interest in real property (including an ownership interest in an  entity
  owning  real  property)  which  is  owned directly or indirectly by such
  REIT; (II) to pay for capital  improvements  to  real  property  or  any
  interest therein owned directly or indirectly by such REIT; (III) to pay
  brokerage  fees and commissions, professional fees and payments to or on
  behalf of a tenant as an inducement to enter into a  lease  or  sublease
  incurred  in  connection  with  the  creation of a leasehold or sublease
  pertaining to real property or any interest therein  owned  directly  or
  indirectly  by  such REIT; (IV) to acquire any interest in real property
  (including an ownership interest in any entity  owning  real  property),
  apart  from any acquisition to which a reduced rate of tax is applicable
  pursuant to this paragraph (without regard to this subparagraph); or (V)
  for reserves established for any of the purposes described in clause  I,
  II  or  III of this subparagraph. For purposes of this subparagraph, the
  term real property shall include real property wherever located.
    (5) If a transaction otherwise described in subparagraph two  of  this
  paragraph  occurs other than in connection with the initial formation of
  a REIT, the condition set forth in subparagraph four of  this  paragraph
  shall  be  disregarded  and  such  transaction  shall constitute a "real
  estate  investment  trust  transfer"  if  the  condition  set  forth  in
  subparagraph  three  of  this  paragraph  would  be  satisfied if "fifty
  percent" is substituted for "forty percent" therein.


   For purposes of  determining  the  consideration  for  a  real  estate
  investment  trust  transfer taxable under this paragraph (xi), the value
  of the real property or interest therein shall be equal to the estimated
  market value as determined by the commissioner of finance of the city of
  New  York for real property tax purposes as reflected on the most recent
  notice of assessment issued by such commissioner, or such other value as
  the taxpayer may establish to the  satisfaction  of  such  commissioner.
  This  paragraph  (xi)  shall  only apply to real estate investment trust
  transfers occurring on or after the effective date of this paragraph.
    (xii) Notwithstanding any other  provision  of  this  subdivision,  in
  determining  the  tax  authorized  by this subdivision with respect to a
  deed, instrument or transaction conveying or transferring a one, two  or
  three-family  house,  an  individual  residential  condominium  unit, an
  individual residential cooperative apartment, or  an  interest  therein,
  the  consideration for such conveyance or transfer shall exclude, to the
  extent otherwise included therein, the amount of any mortgage  or  other
  lien  or  encumbrance  on  the  real  property  or interest therein that
  existed before the delivery of the deed  or  the  transfer  and  remains
  thereon  after  the  date of delivery of the deed or the transfer, other
  than any mortgage,  lien  or  encumbrance  placed  on  the  property  or
  interest  in  connection  with, or in anticipation of, the conveyance or
  transfer, or by reason  of  deferred  payments  of  the  purchase  price
  whether  represented by notes or otherwise. Provided, however, that this
  paragraph shall  not  apply  to  a  conveyance  or  transfer  (1)  to  a
  mortgagee,  lienor or encumbrancer, regardless of whether the grantor or
  transferor is or was personally liable for the indebtedness  secured  by
  the  mortgage,  lien  or  encumbrance  or  whether the mortgage, lien or
  encumbrance is canceled of record, or (2) which  qualifies  as  a  "real
  estate  investment  trust transfer" as defined in paragraph (xi) of this
  subdivision.
    (c) Privilege taxes on amusement devices operated by coins, tokens  or
  currency  (either  generally  or  upon selected types or classes of such
  devices), including, but not limited to, juke box,  music,  skill  game,
  digger, pool or billiard tables, booths providing live entertainment and
  moving  picture  and  video devices, at a rate not to exceed twenty-five
  dollars per annum for each such device.
    (d) Taxes on the privilege of selling liquor, wine or beer  at  retail
  for  on or off premises consumption, at a rate or in an amount per annum
  not in excess of twenty-five percent  of  the  amount  of  license  fees
  prescribed  therefor from time to time in the alcoholic beverage control
  law.
    (e) Taxes on the use of passenger motor vehicles of  a  type  commonly
  used  for  non-commercial  purposes  owned by residents of the city at a
  rate per annum for each such vehicle of not in excess of five dollars if
  such vehicle weighs thirty-five hundred pounds or less and not in excess
  of ten dollars per annum if such vehicle weighs  more  than  thirty-five
  hundred  pounds;  and  taxes  on the use of trucks, buses and other such
  commercial motor vehicles used principally in connection with a business
  carried on within the city, except when owned  and  used  in  connection
  with  the  operation of a farm by the owner or tenant thereof, at a rate
  per annum for each such vehicle of not in excess of ten dollars.
    (f) (1) Taxes on the sale of containers made in whole or  in  part  of
  rigid  or  semi-rigid  paperboard,  fibre,  glass, metal, plastic or any
  combination of such materials, including, but not limited  to,  barrels,
  baskets,  bottles,  boxes,  cans, cartons, carrying cases, crates, cups,
  cylinders,  drums,  glasses,  jars,  jugs,  pails,  pots,   rigid   foil
  containers,  trays, tubs, tubes, tumblers, and vessels, intended for use
  in packing or packaging any product intended for sale. Such taxes  shall


 be  levied  upon  the  seller  or supplier of the container who or which
  makes sales thereof to the person who purchases them (whether filled  or
  unfilled)  for  the purpose of using them in connection with and as part
  of  sales  at  retail  or  who  receives  them as containers of products
  intended for sale at retail. Where no tax has been paid by  such  seller
  or  supplier,  the buyer or person who purchases the container to use it
  or its contents in making a sale at  retail  shall  be  liable  for  tax
  thereon  upon  purchasing such container. Notwithstanding the provisions
  of section twelve hundred twenty of this article, sellers and  suppliers
  having  no  business  situs  in the city imposing the tax, who sell such
  containers to retailers within the city may pay the tax so as to prevent
  its levy upon such retailers. Such taxes shall be imposed at  rates  not
  to  exceed  (i)  three cents for each plastic bottle, (ii) two cents for
  each other plastic container, (iii) two cents for each glass  container,
  (iv)  two  cents  for  each  metal  container  except one cent for metal
  containers shown to be made of one metal only. Where a container is made
  of a combination of two  or  more  of  the  materials  with  which  this
  subdivision  deals,  it shall be classified and be taxable as if it were
  made of that of its component materials for which  the  following  table
  provides the highest rate:
        fibre and paperboard      metal      glass        plastic
                 1¢                 2¢         2¢           3¢
    (2)  Any  local  law  enacted pursuant to this subdivision may provide
  that:  (i) metal containers and paperboard  or  fibre  containers  which
  have  been  impregnated, lined or coated with plastic or other materials
  shall be considered to be classified and taxable as metal containers and
  paperboard containers, respectively; (ii) paperboard or fibre containers
  with fastenings, tops and/or bottoms made of other materials dealt  with
  by this subdivision shall be classified and taxed as paperboard or fibre
  containers;  (iii)  paperboard,  metal, or plastic caps that are easily,
  readily, usually, and customarily separated from  the  container  before
  disposal  shall  not  be  considered  part  of  the  container; and (iv)
  notwithstanding any exception made pursuant to subparagraphs  (i),  (ii)
  and  (iii)  of this paragraph, where a preponderantly glass container is
  made of a combination of taxable materials, the complete  separation  of
  which materials is not easily, readily, usually and customarily effected
  after use and before disposal, such container shall be taxed one cent in
  addition to the tax otherwise imposed upon it, but in no event shall the
  aggregate tax on such container exceed three cents.
    (3)  Any  local  law  enacted pursuant to this subdivision may provide
  that containers sold or furnished containing products intended  for  use
  in manufacturing processes and not for final retail sale shall be exempt
  from such taxes.
    (4)  Local  laws  imposing  taxes authorized by this subdivision shall
  provide for the allowance of credits against such taxes as follows:
    (i) one cent for each  taxable  container  if  manufactured  with  the
  following minimum percentages of recycled material:
      (A)  Paperboard  and  fibre  containers: eighty per cent, if made of
    boxboard;  thirty  per  cent  if   made   of   foodboard,   fibre   or
    containerboard.
      (B)  Metal  containers:  thirty  per cent if taxed during the period
    beginning July first, nineteen hundred  seventy-one  and  ending  June
    thirtieth,  nineteen hundred seventy-two; and forty per cent, if taxed
    thereafter.
      (C) Glass containers: twenty per cent if  taxed  during  the  period
    beginning  July  first,  nineteen  hundred seventy-one and ending June
    thirtieth, nineteen hundred seventy-two; and thirty per cent, if taxed
    thereafter.


     (D) Plastic containers: thirty per cent.
    (ii)  one  cent  for each container of a clearly distinct type, class,
  pattern or form taxed during any taxable period provided that sixty  per
  cent or more of all the containers of such distinct type, class, pattern
  or form subject to tax during such period were reused containers.
    (iii)  Provided that the credits for each container during any taxable
  period shall not exceed the amount of taxes due on  such  container  for
  such period.
    (5)   The   fiscal   officer  of  any  such  city  in  charge  of  the
  administration of any tax imposed pursuant to this subdivision,  may  be
  authorized  by  any  local  law enacted pursuant to this subdivision, to
  prescribe by regulation, upon the  joint  recommendation  of  the  chief
  officer  in charge of the department or agency of such city dealing with
  the interests of consumers and  the  chief  officer  in  charge  of  the
  department  or  agency  of  such  city  charged  with  the duty of waste
  collection and disposal:
    (i) additional exemptions from and credits against the tax imposed  by
  such local law; and
    (ii)  an  additional surtax of no more than one cent per container, to
  be imposed upon containers made of any of the taxable  components  dealt
  with by this subdivision or any combination thereof.
    In  granting such exemption or credit or providing for such additional
  surtax, the above mentioned officers shall take into  consideration  the
  following qualities and characteristics of the container in question:
    (A)  the  difficulty  the container's material poses to the process of
  making recycled material.
    (B) the difficulty of its manufacture from recycled materials.
    (C) the difficulty and relative cost of its disposal.
    (D) any obstacle it poses to consumer protection.
    (E) the degree to which the container can or cannot be reused.
    (F) the  slowness,  difficulty,  and  incompleteness  with  which  the
  container  degrades  in  the  natural  environment, either chemically or
  biologically.
  Any such exemption, credit or surtax may be revoked by joint  action  of
  such officers, or by local law.
    (6)  There  shall  be  exempted  from  any tax imposed pursuant to the
  authority of this subdivision, containers used as receptacles for  food,
  food products, beverages, dietary foods and health supplements, sold for
  human  consumption  but  not including (i) candy and confectionery, (ii)
  fruit drinks with contain less than seventy per cent  of  natural  fruit
  juice,  (iii)  soft  drinks,  sodas and beverages such as are ordinarily
  dispensed at soda fountains  or  in  connection  therewith  (other  than
  coffee, tea and cocoa) and (iv) beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages.
    (7)  When  used  in this subdivision the words (i) "recycled material"
  mean component materials which have been derived  from  previously  used
  material  or from new or old scrap material, (ii) "retail sale" or "sale
  at retail" means a sale to any person for any  purpose  other  than  for
  resale  as  such  or  as  a physical component part of tangible personal
  property, (iii) "taxable period" means each calendar month or such other
  periods as the official administering any tax enacted pursuant  to  this
  subdivision  may  provide for by regulation, (iv) "one metal only" means
  metal with such minimum amounts of alloys as the  officer  charged  with
  the administration of any local law enacted pursuant to this subdivision
  shall  provide by regulation, but shall not include metal which has been
  plated or lined with another metal. In formulating such regulations such
  officer shall consult with the chief officer in charge of the department
  or agency of such city dealing with the interests of consumers  and  the
  chief officer in charge of the department or agency of such city charged


 with  the  duty  of waste collection and disposal and shall consider the
  difficulty of using the metal in the making of recycled material and the
  availability of or technical feasibility of manufacturing  other  metals
  for  the  same purpose and use as the metal in question but with a lower
  alloy content.
    (g) A tax not to exceed fifteen dollars per annum per  vehicle  to  be
  paid  by  the  owner  thereof: (1) for every motor vehicle registered or
  required to be registered pursuant to subdivision six  of  section  four
  hundred one of the vehicle and traffic law if such vehicle is owned by
    (i)  one  or  more natural persons, other than a firm, co-partnership,
  limited liability company, trustee or trustees conducting a business  or
  association,  who,  or  one  of  whom:  (A)  at  the  time when he makes
  application for the registration, re-registration or renewal thereof  of
  such  motor  vehicle  is  domiciled  in the city, unless he maintains no
  permanent place of abode in the city, maintains  a  permanent  place  of
  abode  elsewhere,  and  during the period of one year next preceding the
  date upon which such application is made, spent  in  the  aggregate  not
  more than thirty days in the city, or (B) at the time when he makes such
  application,  is  not  domiciled  in the city, but maintains a permanent
  place of abode in the city and, during  the  period  of  one  year  next
  preceding  the  date  upon  which such application is made, spent in the
  aggregate more than one hundred  and  eighty-three  days  in  the  city,
  unless such individual is in the armed forces of the United States; or
    (ii)  a  person,  firm,  co-partnership,  limited  liability  company,
  trustee  or  trustees  conducting  a  business  or  association,  or   a
  corporation  who  or which at the time when such owner makes application
  for registration, re-registration  or  renewal  thereof  of  such  motor
  vehicle,  regularly  keeps,  stores,  garages  or  maintains  such motor
  vehicle in the city; and
    (2) for every motor vehicle owned  by  a  person,  firm,  partnership,
  limited  liability  company,  association  or corporation engaged in the
  business of renting or leasing motor vehicles to be  operated  upon  the
  public  highways  for  carrying  passengers registered or required to be
  registered pursuant to any provision of section four hundred one of  the
  vehicle and traffic law, which vehicle at the time when such owner makes
  application  for  registration,  re-registration  or  renewal thereof is
  regularly kept, stored, garaged or maintained in the city including such
  vehicles which have been rented or  leased  by  the  owner  and  are  in
  possession   of   lessees   when   such  application  for  registration,
  re-registration or renewal is made.
    (3) The payment of such tax shall be a  condition  precendent  to  the
  registration,  re-registration  or  renewal therof of such motor vehicle
  and to the issuance of any certificate of  registration  and  plates  or
  removable  date  tag  specified  in  subdivision  three  of section four
  hundred one and in sections four hundred three and four hundred four  of
  the  vehicle  and  traffic law, and no such certificate of registration,
  plates or tag shall be  issued  unless  such  tax  has  been  paid.  The
  commissioner   of   motor   vehicles  shall  not  issue  a  registration
  certificate for any motor vehicle for which the registrant's address  is
  within  any  such  city,  except  upon  proof, in a form approved by the
  commissioner of motor vehicles, that such tax, if imposed by such  city,
  has been paid, or is not due, with respect to such motor vehicle.
    (h)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of this article or of any other
  law, any local law adopted by a city of one million or more, imposing  a
  tax  authorized by subdivision (g) of this section may provide that such
  tax shall be administered and collected by  the  commissioner  of  motor
  vehicles  or  his  agents.  In  the  event  that  such local law does so
  provide, such tax shall not be  imposed  upon  an  application  for  the


 re-registration  of  a  motor  vehicle, and further, the commissioner of
  motor  vehicles  shall  enter  into  an  agreement  with   the   finance
  administrator  or  other  appropriate fiscal officer of such city, which
  agreement shall govern the administration and collection of any such tax
  and  which  agreement  shall  have  the  force  and  effect of a rule or
  regulation of the commissioner and  shall  be  filed  and  published  in
  accordance   with   any   statutory   requirements   relating   thereto.
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, such agreement shall provide
  for the exclusive method of collection,  custody  and  remittal  of  the
  proceeds of any such tax; for the payment by such city of the reasonable
  expenses incurred by the department of motor vehicles in connection with
  the  collection  and  administration  of  any  such tax; for the finance
  administrator or other appropriate fiscal officer, or a duly  designated
  representative,  upon his request, not more frequently than once in each
  calendar year at a time agreed upon by the state comptroller,  to  audit
  the  accuracy  of  the  payments,  distributions and remittances to such
  finance administrator or other appropriate fiscal officer made  pursuant
  to  this subdivision; and for such other matters as may be necessary and
  proper to effectuate the purposes of such agreement.
    (i) A tax  on  admission  charges  for  admission  to  motion  picture
  exhibitions  or  live  dramatic,  choreographic or musical performances,
  whether at a theatre, opera house, concert hall or  other  place,  at  a
  rate not to exceed three percent. However, such a tax shall not apply to
  any  admission  charge to a motion picture exhibition for admission of a
  person twelve years of age or under.
    (j) (1) A tax on the  transfer  of  a  taxicab  license,  or  interest
  therein,  at  a  rate  not  to exceed eight percent of the consideration
  given for such transfer.
    (2) The tax shall be imposed on the  transferee,  but  any  local  law
  imposing  the  tax  authorized  by this subdivision may provide that the
  transferor shall also be liable for the payment of such tax in the event
  that the amount of tax due is not paid by the transferee.
    (3) Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, no  transfer  of  a
  taxicab license shall be effective until any tax imposed pursuant to the
  authority of this subdivision has been paid.
    (4)  Where  there  is a transfer of the economic interest in a taxicab
  license effected by the sale of shares of stock of a  corporation  which
  holds  the  taxicab  license,  or  by  the  transfer  of  an interest or
  interests in a  partnership  or  association  which  holds  the  taxicab
  license,  any  local  law  enacted  pursuant  to  the  authority of this
  subdivision may provide that such a  transfer  shall  be  treated  as  a
  transfer  of the taxicab license or interest therein, subject to the tax
  authorized by this subdivision.
    (5) Where there is a transfer  of  a  taxicab  or  other  property  in
  conjunction  with the transfer of a taxicab license or interest therein,
  such local law may provide that the tax shall be computed on  the  total
  consideration  for the transfer of the license, or interest therein, the
  taxicab and any other property so transferred less the market  value  of
  such taxicab and such other property.
    (6) When used in this subdivision, the following terms shall mean:
    (i)  "Transfer." Any transfer of interest whether or not such interest
  constitutes title, or possession, or both, exchange or  barter,  rental,
  lease,  or license to use, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by
  any means whatsoever for a consideration, or any agreement therefor.
    (ii) "Taxicab." A motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire in a city
  imposing the tax authorized by this  subdivision,  duly  licensed  as  a
  taxicab  by  such city, and permitted to accept hails from passengers in
  the street.


   (iii) "Taxicab license." A license issued by the  taxi  and  limousine
  commission in such city, or its successor agency, to operate a taxicab.
    (k)  Any  local  law  imposing  a  tax on the gross receipts (or gross
  income or gross operating income) from  sales  of  electricity,  gas  or
  steam,  or  sales  of  delivery  services  for  any of the foregoing, to
  persons within such city enacted pursuant to  subdivision  (a)  of  this
  section may provide for a deduction from gross receipts (or gross income
  or  gross  operating  income)  of  all receipts derived from the sale of
  electricity, gas or steam, or sale of delivery services for any  of  the
  foregoing,  to  non-residential energy users of such electricity, gas or
  steam, or from the sale of delivery services to a public utility service
  operated by such city in accordance with a local law adopted pursuant to
  article fourteen-A of the general muncipal  law  or  from  the  sale  of
  delivery  services  to  the power authority of the state of New York, in
  connection with the sale of electricity, gas or steam to non-residential
  energy users of such electricity, gas or steam, except that no deduction
  shall be allowed for receipts derived  from  sales  of  electricity,  or
  sales  of  delivery  services  for  electricity, to or by an electricity
  redistributor, or sales of delivery services for electricity to a public
  utility service operated by such city in accordance  with  a  local  law
  adopted  pursuant  to article fourteen-A of the general municipal law or
  sales of such delivery services to the power authority of the  state  of
  New  York,  in  connection  with  the sale of electricity by such public
  utility service or  such  authority  to  an  electricity  redistributor,
  unless  such  electricity  redistributor has obtained a certification of
  eligibility pursuant to a local  law  enacted  in  accordance  with  the
  authorization  contained  in  article  two-G of the general city law. No
  such deduction authorized herein shall affect the computation  specified
  in  subdivision  four  of  section  three  contained  in  section one or
  subdivision (a) of section one hundred three contained in section two of
  chapter seven hundred  seventy-two  of  the  laws  of  nineteen  hundred
  sixty-six,  as  amended, with regard to vendors of utility services. For
  purposes of this subdivision, the terms  "non-residential  energy  user"
  and  "electricity redistributor" shall have the same meaning as ascribed
  by article two-G of the general city law.
    (l) In addition to any privilege taxes on amusement devices authorized
  by subdivision (c)  of  this  section,  there  shall  be  authorized  an
  additional  privilege tax on amusement devices operated by coins, tokens
  or currency (either generally or upon selected types or classes of  such
  devices)  including,  but  not  limited to, juke box, music, skill game,
  digger, pool or billiard tables, booths  providing  live  entertainment,
  and  moving  picture  and  video  devices,  at  a rate not to exceed one
  hundred fifty dollars per annum for each such device.
    (m) Any city in this state having a population of one million or more,
  acting through its local legislative body, is hereby authorized to adopt
  and amend local laws which conform the local law of  such  city  to  the
  provisions  of  law set forth in part U3 of a chapter of the laws of two
  thousand three amending the general business law and other laws relating
  to implementing the state fiscal plan for  the  2003-2004  state  fiscal
  year,  as  proposed in legislative bill numbers S. 1406-B and A. 2106-B,
  as amended, with such modifications as may be necessary  to  adapt  such
  provisions  to  such  local  law so that such local law is substantially
  similar to the law of the state.




   §  1201-a. Credits against taxes administered by cities of one million
  or more.  (a) Any utility company subject  to  the  supervision  of  the
  public  service  commission  required  to  grant rebates or discounts on
  bills for energy services or natural gas in accordance with a local  law
  adopted  pursuant  to  article  two-F  of  the general city law shall be
  entitled to a credit for such rebates and discounts, as provided in such
  article of the general city law, against the amount of tax  to  be  paid
  pursuant  to  any  gross  receipts  tax  imposed  by a local law adopted
  pursuant to subdivision (a)  of  section  twelve  hundred  one  of  this
  chapter.  The amounts of such rebates and discounts shall not be treated
  as affecting or reducing the gross receipts  otherwise  subject  to  tax
  under  such  gross receipts tax or reducing the amount of tax imposed by
  or pursuant to any authorization contained in this chapter.
    (b) Empire state film production credit. Any city in this state having
  a  population  of  one  million  or  more,  acting  through  its   local
  legislative  body, is hereby authorized to adopt and amend local laws to
  allow  a  credit  against  the   general   corporation   tax   and   the
  unincorporated business tax imposed pursuant to the authority of chapter
  seven  hundred  seventy-two  of  the  laws of nineteen hundred sixty-six
  which shall be substantially  identical  to  the  credit  allowed  under
  section  twenty-four  of this chapter, except that (A) the percentage of
  qualified production costs used to calculate such credit shall  be  five
  percent,  (B)  whenever  such  section twenty-four references the state,
  such words shall be read as referencing the city, (C) such credit  shall
  be  allowed  only  to  a  taxpayer  which is a qualified film production
  company, and (D) the effective date of such credit shall be July  first,
  two  thousand  six.  Such credit shall be applied in a manner consistent
  with the credit allowed under subdivision twenty of section two  hundred
  ten-B  of  this  chapter except as may be necessary to take into account
  differences between the general corporation tax and  the  unincorporated
  business tax.
    (c)  Empire state commercial production credit. Any city in this state
  having a population of one million or more,  acting  through  its  local
  legislative  body, is hereby authorized to adopt and amend local laws to
  allow  a  credit  against  the   general   corporation   tax   and   the
  unincorporated business tax imposed pursuant to the authority of chapter
  seven  hundred  seventy-two  of  the  laws of nineteen hundred sixty-six
  which shall be substantially identical to the credit allowed  under  the
  provisions  of section twenty-eight of this chapter, except that (A) the
  percentage of qualified production costs used to calculate  such  credit
  shall be five percent, (B) whenever such section twenty-eight references
  the  state,  such  words shall be read as referencing the city, (C) such
  credit shall  be  allowed  only  to  a  taxpayer  that  is  a  qualified
  commercial production company, and (D) the effective date of such credit
  shall  be  as  provided in local laws. Such credit shall be applied in a
  manner consistent with the credit allowed under subdivision twenty-three
  of section two hundred ten-B of this chapter except as may be  necessary
  to take into account differences between the general corporation tax and
  unincorporated business tax.
    (d)  Biotechnology  credit.  1.  Any  city  in  this  state  having  a
  population of one million or more, acting through its local  legislative
  body,  is  hereby  authorized  to  adopt and amend local laws to allow a
  credit against  the  general  corporation  tax  and  the  unincorporated
  business  tax imposed pursuant to the authority of chapter seven hundred
  seventy-two of the laws of nineteen hundred  sixty-six  which  shall  be
  substantially   identical   to   the  credit  described  in  subdivision
  twenty-one of section 11-654 of the administrative code of the  city  of
  New  York,  against  the  business  corporation  tax imposed pursuant to


 chapter sixty of the laws of  two  thousand  fifteen,  except  that  the
  effective  date  of  such credit against the general corporation tax and
  the unincorporated business tax shall be as provided in such local laws.
    2.  The  credit  allowed by paragraph one of this subdivision shall be
  applied in a manner consistent with the credit described in  subdivision
  twenty-one  of  section 11-654 of the administrative code of the city of
  New York except as may be necessary to  take  into  account  differences
  between  such  business corporation tax and such general corporation tax
  and such unincorporated business tax.
    3. The aggregate amount of tax credits allowed under this  subdivision
  in  any  calendar  year  shall  be  up  to  three  million dollars. Such
  aggregate amount of credits shall be allocated  by  the  New  York  city
  department  of  finance  among  eligible  taxpayers on a pro rata basis.
  Taxpayers eligible for such pro rata allocation shall be  determined  by
  the  New  York  city  department  of  finance  no  later  than  February
  twenty-eighth of the succeeding calendar year in which a credit provided
  pursuant to this subdivision is applied.
    4. The New York city department of finance  shall  establish  by  rule
  procedures  for  the  allocation  of  tax  credits allowed by local laws
  adopted  pursuant  to  this  subdivision.  Such  rules   shall   include
  provisions  describing  the  application process, the due dates for such
  applications,  the  standards  that  shall  be  used  to  evaluate   the
  applications,  the  documentation  that will be provided to taxpayers to
  substantiate the amount of tax credits allocated to such taxpayers,  and
  such other provisions as deemed necessary and appropriate.
    5.  Any local law adopted pursuant to this subdivision may provide for
  a credit as authorized by  this  subdivision  for  a  maximum  of  three
  consecutive calendar years, provided, however, that any such credit:
    (A) may not apply to taxable years beginning before January first, two
  thousand  ten  or  beginning  on  or  after  January first, two thousand
  nineteen; and
    (B) may not apply to taxable years beginning before January first, two
  thousand twenty-three or  beginning  on  or  after  January  first,  two
  thousand twenty-six.
    6.  Any city in this state having a population of one million or more,
  acting through its local legislative body, is authorized to provide  the
  credit  set  forth  in  subdivision  twenty-one of section 11-654 of the
  administrative code of the  city  of  New  York,  against  the  business
  corporation  tax  imposed  pursuant  to chapter sixty of the laws of two
  thousand fifteen, for a maximum of  three  consecutive  calendar  years,
  provided,  however,  that  such  credit  may  not apply to taxable years
  beginning before January first, two thousand twenty-three  or  beginning
  on or after January first, two thousand twenty-six.




   §  1201-b.  Additional credits against taxes administered by cities of
  one million or more. Any person, corporation or other entity required or
  permitted to grant rebates or discounts on bills for electricity, gas or
  steam in accordance with a local law adopted pursuant to  article  two-G
  of  the  general  city  law shall be entitled to a refundable credit for
  such  rebates  and  discounts  made,  to  the  extent  such  credit   is
  specifically authorized by such article of the general city law, against
  the  amount of tax of be paid pursuant to any gross receipts tax imposed
  by a local law adopted pursuant to subdivision  (a)  of  section  twelve
  hundred  one of this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of law
  to the contrary, no taxpayer taking a credit as authorized herein  shall
  incur  any  increased  liability  for  any taxes imposed pursuant to the
  authorization contained in chapter seven hundred seventy-two of the laws
  of nineteen hundred sixty-six, as amended, by reason of such credit.




   §  1201-c. Credits against taxes administered by cities of one million
  or more. Any utility company which is subject to the supervision of  the
  public  service commission and is required to grant rebates or discounts
  on bills for energy services in accordance with  article  two-I  of  the
  general  city  law  shall  be  entitled  to a credit for such rebates or
  discounts against the amount of tax to be paid  pursuant  to  any  gross
  receipts  tax imposed by a local law adopted pursuant to subdivision (a)
  of section twelve hundred one of  this  article.  The  amounts  of  such
  rebates  or  discounts shall not be treated as affecting or reducing the
  gross receipts otherwise subject to tax under such gross receipts tax or
  reducing the amount of tax imposed by or pursuant to  any  authorization
  contained in this chapter.




   § 1201-d. Dedication of taxes authorized for cities and counties.  (a)
  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  law  to  the  contrary,  any
  authorization for a city or county to impose  a  tax  pursuant  to  this
  article,  may  condition  such authorization upon the dedication of such
  revenue derived from such tax imposed, to a public  benefit  corporation
  established   as   an   industrial   development   agency   or  an  area
  revitalization agency pursuant to  article  eighteen-A  of  the  general
  municipal  law  or  to  a  public  authority  established  for  economic
  development  or  transportation  purposes   pursuant   to   the   public
  authorities law.
    (b)  In  the  event  that a city or a county imposes a tax pursuant to
  this  article,  in  accordance  with  a  conditional  authorization   as
  described  in subdivision (a) of this section, such city or county shall
  dedicate the revenue from such tax so imposed to the  designated  public
  benefit  corporation  established as an industrial development agency or
  an area revitalization agency pursuant  to  article  eighteen-A  of  the
  general  municipal  law  or  public  authority  established for economic
  development  or  transportation  purposes   pursuant   to   the   public
  authorities law.




   §  1201-e.  Credit. A taxpayer that is subject to a gross receipts tax
  imposed under a local law adopted pursuant to subdivision (a) of section
  twelve hundred one of this article shall be entitled to a credit to  the
  extent  provided  in  sections  twenty-five-y  and  twenty-five-z of the
  general city law with respect to a relocation as therein defined  on  or
  after January first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine.




   §  1202.  Taxes administered by counties not wholly within a city. (a)
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,  any  county
  in  this  state,  except  a  county  wholly  within  a  city,  is hereby
  authorized and empowered, subject to the limitations and  exemptions  in
  part  II  of  this article, to adopt and amend local laws, ordinances or
  resolutions imposing in any such  county  any  of  the  types  of  taxes
  authorized under subdivisions (c), (d) and (e) of section twelve hundred
  one,  at  the  rates provided for therein, such taxes to be administered
  and collected in the manner provided for in subpart A  of  part  III  of
  this article.
    (b) Any county authorized and empowered to impose a tax as provided by
  this  section,  may, before acting hereunder, by resolution of its board
  of supervisors, cause to be submitted to the qualified electors of  said
  county,  in  the  manner  provided  for  the submission of a question to
  electors by the election law and article three  of  the  county  law,  a
  proposition  or  question  as  to whether such a tax shall be imposed by
  said county under the provisions of this section.
    (c) Notwithstanding the provisions of this article or any other law, a
  local law, ordinance or resolution adopted by a county, imposing  a  tax
  of  the  type authorized under subdivision (e) of section twelve hundred
  one of this chapter may provide that such tax shall be administered  and
  collected  by  the  commissioner of motor vehicles or his agents. In the
  event that such local law, ordinance or resolution does so provide, such
  tax shall not be imposed upon an application for the re-registration  of
  a  motor  vehicle, and further, the commissioner of motor vehicles shall
  enter  into  an  agreement  with  the  finance  administrator  or  other
  appropriate  fiscal officer of such county, which agreement shall govern
  the administration and collection of any such tax. Such agreement  shall
  have the force and effect of a rule or regulation of the commissioner of
  motor  vehicles  and shall be filed and published in accordance with any
  statutory  requirements  relating  thereto.  Notwithstanding  any  other
  provision  of law, such agreement shall provide for the exclusive method
  of collection, custody and remittal of the proceeds of any such tax; for
  the payment by such county of the reasonable expenses actually  incurred
  by  the  department  of motor vehicles in connection with the collection
  and administration of any such tax; for the department of motor vehicles
  periodically to provide an accounting to the appropriate  county  fiscal
  officer  summarizing  revenues  collected  and  administrative  expenses
  actually incurred by the department pursuant to such agreement with  the
  county;  and  for  such  other matters as may be necessary and proper to
  effectuate the purposes of such agreement.
    * (d) (i) For the purposes of this subdivision, "entertainment"  means
  all  forms  of  commercial or professional entertainment, including, but
  not limited to, concerts, professional athletic  events,  theatrical  or
  operatic  performances,  and  trade  shows performed or conducted within
  arenas or facilities with a permanent seating capacity in excess of  two
  thousand  five  hundred  persons.  Events  performed  at or sponsored by
  colleges or universities, any  amateur  athletic  competitions  and  all
  events  and  programs  conducted  at  a facility owned or operated by an
  off-track betting corporation or a non-profit racing  association  shall
  be excluded from the provisions of this subdivision.
    (ii)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the
  county of Nassau is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt  and  amend
  local laws, ordinances and resolutions imposing in such county a tax, in
  addition  to  any  other  tax  authorized  and  imposed pursuant to this
  article or other law such as the legislature has or would have the power
  and authority to impose an assessment, to be known as an  "entertainment
  surcharge"  upon every facility or arena as referred to in paragraph (i)


 of  this  subdivision  selling  tickets  for  admission  to  places   of
  entertainment  in  the county, in addition to the admission price of the
  tickets sold, at a rate of one dollar and fifty cents on each  admission
  ticket.  Such  surcharge  shall  be  imposed at facilities and arenas as
  referred to in paragraph (i) of this subdivision.
    (iii) Such tax  may  be  collected  and  administered  by  the  county
  treasurer or other fiscal officers of Nassau county by such means and in
  such  manner  as other taxes which are now collected and administered by
  such officers or as  otherwise  may  be  provided  by  such  local  law,
  ordinance or resolution.
    * NB Repealed December 31, 2025
    (e) Notwithstanding the provisions of this article or any other law, a
  local  law,  ordinance or resolution adopted by a county, imposing a tax
  of the type authorized under subdivision (e) of section  twelve  hundred
  one  of this article may provide that such tax shall be administered and
  collected by the commissioner of motor vehicles or his  or  her  agents;
  provided, however, that the amount of such taxes in the county of Nassau
  on  the  use of all passenger motor vehicles of a type commonly used for
  noncommercial purposes owned by residents of the county shall  be  at  a
  rate  per  annum  for each such vehicle not in excess of fifteen dollars
  regardless of the weight of such vehicle; and the amount of  such  taxes
  on  the  use  of  trucks, buses and other such commercial motor vehicles
  used principally in connection with a business carried  on  within  such
  county, except when owned and used in connection with the operation of a
  farm  by  the  owner or tenant thereof, shall be at a rate per annum for
  each such vehicle of not in excess of forty dollars.
    (f)  The  county  of  Westchester,  in  imposing  taxes  of  the  type
  authorized  under  subdivision (e) of section twelve hundred one of this
  part, may impose taxes on the use of passenger motor vehicles of a  type
  commonly  used  for  non-commercial  purposes  owned by residents of the
  county at a rate per annum for each such vehicle of  not  in  excess  of
  fifteen  dollars  if  such  vehicle weighs thirty-five hundred pounds or
  less and not in excess of thirty  dollars  per  annum  if  such  vehicle
  weighs  more  than  thirty-five  hundred pounds; and taxes on the use of
  trucks, buses and other such commercial motor vehicles used  principally
  in  connection with a business carried on within the county, except when
  owned and used in connection with the operation of a farm by  the  owner
  or  tenant  thereof, at a rate per annum for each such vehicle of not in
  excess of thirty dollars.
    (g) The county of Suffolk, in imposing taxes of  the  type  authorized
  under subdivision (e) of section twelve hundred one of this subpart, may
  impose  taxes  on the use of passenger motor vehicles of a type commonly
  used for non-commercial purposes owned by residents of the county  at  a
  rate per annum for each such vehicle of not in excess of fifteen dollars
  if  such  vehicle  weighs  thirty-five hundred pounds or less and not in
  excess of thirty dollars per annum if  such  vehicle  weighs  more  than
  thirty-five  hundred  pounds;  and taxes on the use of trucks, buses and
  other such commercial motor vehicles used principally in connection with
  a business carried on within the county, except when owned and  used  in
  connection  with the operation of a farm by the owner or tenant thereof,
  at a rate per annum for each such vehicle of not  in  excess  of  thirty
  dollars.




   § 1202-a. Hotel or motel taxes in Onondaga county. (1) Notwithstanding
  any  other  provisions of law to the contrary, the county of Onondaga is
  hereby authorized and empowered to adopt and amend local  laws  imposing
  in  such  county  a  tax,  in  addition  to any other tax authorized and
  imposed pursuant to this article such as the legislature  has  or  would
  have  the  power and authority to impose upon persons occupying hotel or
  motel rooms in such county. The rates of such tax shall be seven percent
  of the per diem rental rate for each room  provided  however,  such  tax
  shall not be applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For
  the  purposes of this section the term "permanent resident" shall mean a
  person occupying any room or rooms in a hotel  or  motel  for  at  least
  thirty consecutive days.
    (2)  Such  tax  may  be  collected  and  administered  by  the finance
  administrator or other fiscal officers of Onondaga county by such  means
  and  in  such  manner  as  other  taxes  which  are  now  collected  and
  administered by such officers in accordance with the county  charter  or
  as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3)  Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid by
  the person liable therefor to the owner  of  the  hotel  or  motel  room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel  or  motel  room  occupied  for  and  on  account of the county of
  Onondaga imposing the tax and that such owner or person entitled  to  be
  paid  the  rent or charge shall be liable for the collection and payment
  of the tax; and that such owner or person entitled to be paid  the  rent
  or  charge  shall  have  the same right in respect to collecting the tax
  from the person occupying the hotel or motel  room,  or  in  respect  to
  nonpayment  of  the tax by the person occupying the hotel or motel room,
  as if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the  same
  time  as  the  rent  or  charge;  provided,  however,  that  the finance
  administrator or other fiscal officers of the county, specified in  such
  local  law,  shall  be  joined  as  a  party in any action or proceeding
  brought to collect the tax by the owner or by the person entitled to  be
  paid the rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  act shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon any
  of the following:
    a. The state of New York,  or  any  public  corporation  (including  a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b. The United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is  immune  from
  taxation;
    c.  Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or  foundation  organized  and  operated  exclusively   for   religious,
  charitable  or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial
  part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise
  attempting  to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in
  this paragraph shall include an organization operated  for  the  primary
  purpose  of  carrying  on a trade or business for profit, whether or not
  all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or  any
  other  reason  whatsoever by a proceeding under article seventy-eight of


 the civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to  the
  supreme  court within thirty days after the giving of the notice of such
  final determination, provided, however, that any such  proceeding  under
  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and rules shall not be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for by  local  law  or  regulation,
  shall  be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a
  surety company  authorized  to  transmit  business  in  this  state  and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency  and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the supreme
  court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding  be  dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding or;
    b.  At  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax  imposed  hereunder  shall  have  been  erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof  duly  made  to  the proper fiscal officer or officers, and such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such determination shall be reviewable by  a  proceeding  under  article
  seventy-eight  of  the  civil practice law and rules, provided, however,
  that such proceeding is instituted within thirty days after  the  giving
  of  the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due was
  not previously made, and that an undertaking is filed  with  the  proper
  fiscal  officer  or  officers in such amount and with such sureties as a
  justice of the supreme court shall approve to the effect  that  if  such
  proceeding  be  dismissed  or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay
  all costs and charges which  may  accrue  in  the  prosecution  of  such
  proceeding.
    (8)  Except  in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  Revenues  resulting from the imposition of tax authorized by this
  act shall be paid into the treasury of the county of Onondaga and  shall
  be  credited to and deposited in the general fund of the county; and may
  thereafter be  allocated  at  the  discretion  of  the  Onondaga  county
  legislature for any county purpose.
    (10)  If  any  provision of this act or the application thereof to any
  person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this  act
  and  the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances
  shall not be affected thereby.




   * §   1202-aa.  Occupancy  tax  in  the  city  of  New  Rochelle.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the city  of
  New  Rochelle,  in  the  county of Westchester, is hereby authorized and
  empowered to adopt and amend local laws imposing in such city a tax,  in
  addition  to  any  other  tax  authorized  and  imposed pursuant to this
  article, such as the  legislature  has  or  would  have  the  power  and
  authority  to  impose  upon  persons  occupying any room for hire in any
  hotel. For the purposes of this section, the term "hotel" shall  mean  a
  building  or  portion  thereof which is regularly utilized and kept open
  for the lodging of guests. The term "hotel" includes an apartment hotel,
  a motel, or a boarding house, whether or not meals are served. The  rate
  of  such  tax shall not exceed three percent of the per diem rental rate
  for each room whether such room is rented on a  daily  or  longer  basis
  period of time.
    (2)  Such  taxes may be collected and administered by the chief fiscal
  officer of the city of New Rochelle by such means and in such manner  as
  other  taxes which are now collected and administered by such officer or
  as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any taxes imposed shall  be  paid
  by  the  person liable therefor to the owner of the room for hire in the
  hotel or other similar place of public accommodation occupied or to  the
  person  entitled  to be paid the rent or charge for the room for hire in
  the hotel or other similar place of public  accommodation  occupied  for
  and  on  account  of  the city of New Rochelle imposing the tax and that
  such owner or person entitled to be paid the rent  or  charge  shall  be
  liable  for  the collection and payment of such tax; and that such owner
  or person entitled to be paid the rent or charge  shall  have  the  same
  right  in  respect  to  collecting the tax from the person occupying the
  room  for  hire  in  the  hotel  or  other  similar  place   of   public
  accommodation,  or  in  respect  to  nonpayment of the tax by the person
  occupying the room for hire in the hotel  or  similar  place  of  public
  accommodation,  as  if  the  taxes were a part of the rent or charge and
  payable at the same time as the rent or charge; provided, however,  that
  the  chief  fiscal  officer  of  the city, specified in such local laws,
  shall be joined as a party  in  any  action  or  proceeding  brought  to
  collect  the  tax  by the owner or by the person entitled to be paid the
  rent or charge.
    (4) Such local laws may provide for the  filing  of  returns  and  the
  payment of the taxes on a monthly basis or on the basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  any of the following:
    a. The state of New York,  or  any  public  corporation  (including  a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b. The United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is  immune  from
  taxation;
    c.  Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or  foundation  organized  and  operated  exclusively   for   religious,
  charitable  or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial
  part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise
  attempting  to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in
  this paragraph shall include an organization operated  for  the  primary
  purpose  of  carrying  on a trade or business for profit, whether or not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph; or
    d.  A permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes of this
  section, the term "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  natural  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least thirty
  consecutive days.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or  any
  other  reason  whatsoever by a proceeding under article seventy-eight of
  the civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to  the
  supreme  court  within  thirty  days  after the giving of notice of such
  final determination, provided, however, that any such  proceeding  under
  such article seventy-eight shall not be instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties  thereon  as  may be provided for by local laws or regulations
  shall be first deposited and there shall be filed an undertaking, issued
  by a surety company authorized to transact business in  this  state  and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency  and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the supreme
  court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding  be  dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  At  the option of the petitioner, such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any taxes imposed  hereunder  shall  have  been  erroneously
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  therefor  duly  made  to the proper fiscal officer or officers, and such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such determination shall be reviewable by  a  proceeding  under  article
  seventy-eight  of  the  civil practice law and rules, provided, however,
  that such proceeding is instituted within thirty days after  the  giving
  of  the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due was
  not previously made, and that an undertaking is filed  with  the  proper
  fiscal  officer  or  officers in such amount and with such sureties as a
  justice of the supreme court shall approve to the effect  that  if  such
  proceeding  be dismissed or the taxes confirmed, the petitioner will pay
  all costs and charges which  may  accrue  in  the  prosecution  of  such
  proceeding.
    (8)  Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  All  revenues  resulting from the imposition of the tax under the
  local laws shall be paid into the treasury of the city of  New  Rochelle
  and  shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the city.
  Such revenues may be used for any lawful purpose.
    (10) Each enactment of such a local law may provide for the imposition
  of a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three  years
  from  the  date of its enactment. Nothing in this section shall prohibit
  the adoption and enactment of local laws, pursuant to the provisions  of
  this  section,  upon  the  expiration  of  any  other  local law adopted
  pursuant to this section.


   (11) If any provision of this section or the  application  thereof  to
  any  person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this
  section and the application  of  such  provision  to  other  persons  or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB There are 7 § 1202-aa's
    * NB Repealed September 1, 2024


   * §   1202-aa.  Occupancy  tax  in  the  city  of  White  Plains.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the city of
  White Plains, in the county of Westchester,  is  hereby  authorized  and
  empowered  to adopt and amend local laws imposing in such city a tax, in
  addition to any other  tax  authorized  and  imposed  pursuant  to  this
  article,  such  as  the  legislature  has  or  would  have the power and
  authority to impose upon persons occupying any  room  for  hire  in  any
  hotel.  For  the purposes of this section, the term "hotel" shall mean a
  building or portion of it which is regularly used and kept open as  such
  for the lodging of guests. The term "hotel" includes an apartment hotel,
  a  motel  or a boarding house, whether or not meals are served. The rate
  of such tax shall not exceed three percent of the per diem  rental  rate
  for each room whether such room is rented on a daily or longer basis.
    (2)  Such  tax  may  be collected and administered by the chief fiscal
  officer of the city of White Plains by such means and in such manner  as
  other  taxes which are now collected and administered by such officer or
  as otherwise may be provided by such local laws.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid  by
  the  person  liable  therefor  to  the owner of the room for hire in the
  hotel or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or  charge  for  the
  room  for  hire  in the hotel occupied for and on account of the city of
  White Plains imposing the tax and that such owner or person entitled  to
  be  paid  the  rent  or  charge  shall  be liable for the collection and
  payment of the tax; and that such owner or person entitled  to  be  paid
  the  rent  or  charge shall have the same right in respect to collecting
  the tax from the person occupying the room for hire in the hotel, or  in
  respect  to  nonpayment  of the tax by the person occupying the room for
  hire in the hotel, as if the tax were a part of the rent or  charge  and
  payable  at the same time as the rent or charge; provided, however, that
  the chief fiscal officer of the city of White Plains, specified in  such
  local  laws,  shall  be  joined  as  a party in any action or proceeding
  brought to collect the tax by the owner or by the person entitled to  be
  paid the rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  any of the following:
    a. The state of New York,  or  any  public  corporation  (including  a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state or Canada), improvement district or other political subdivision of
  the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation;
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not
  all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph; or
    d.  A permanent resident of a hotel. For the purposes of this section,
  the term "permanent resident" shall mean a natural person occupying  any
  room or rooms in a hotel for at least thirty consecutive days.


   (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall  be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any
  other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of
  the  civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to the
  supreme  court  within  thirty  days  after the giving of notice of such
  final determination, provided, however, that any such  proceeding  under
  such article seventy-eight shall not be instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties  thereon  as  may be provided for by local laws or regulations
  shall be first deposited and there shall be filed an undertaking, issued
  by a surety company authorized to transact business in  this  state  and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency  and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the supreme
  court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding  be  dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  At  the option of the petitioner, such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interest and  penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any taxes imposed hereunder  shall  have  been  erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  therefor  duly  made  to the proper fiscal officer or officers, and such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such determination shall be reviewable by  a  proceeding  under  article
  seventy-eight  of  the  civil practice law and rules, provided, however,
  that such proceeding is instituted within thirty days after  the  giving
  of  the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due was
  not previously made, and that an undertaking is filed  with  the  proper
  fiscal  officer  or  officers in such amount and with such sureties as a
  justice of the supreme court shall approve to the effect  that  if  such
  proceeding  be dismissed or the taxes confirmed, the petitioner will pay
  all costs and charges which  may  accrue  in  the  prosecution  of  such
  proceeding.
    (8)  Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  All  revenues  resulting from the imposition of the tax under the
  local laws shall be paid into the treasury of the city of  White  Plains
  and  shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the city.
  Such revenues may be used for any lawful purpose.
    (10) Each enactment of such a local law may provide for the imposition
  of a hotel tax for a period to  expire  on  December  thirty-first,  two
  thousand  twenty-four.  Nothing  in  this  section  shall  prohibit  the
  adoption and enactment of local laws, pursuant to the provisions of this
  section, upon the expiration of any other local law adopted pursuant  to
  this section.
    (11)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB There are 7 § 1202-aa's




   * §   1202-aa.   Hotel   or  motel  taxes  in  Schoharie  county.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the  county
  of Schoharie is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt and amend local
  laws  imposing  in  such  county  a  tax,  in  addition to any other tax
  authorized and imposed pursuant to this article such  as  the  board  of
  supervisors  has  or  would  have the power and authority to impose upon
  persons occupying hotel or motel rooms in such county. For the  purposes
  of  this section, the term "hotel" or "motel" shall mean and include any
  facility providing lodging on an overnight basis and shall include those
  facilities designated and commonly known  as  "bed  and  breakfast"  and
  "tourist" facilities.
    The  rates  of  such tax shall not exceed four percent of the per diem
  rental rate for each room, provided however, that such tax shall not  be
  applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes
  of  this  section  the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall mean a person
  occupying any room or rooms in a hotel or  motel  for  at  least  thirty
  consecutive days.
    (2) Such tax may be collected and administered by the county treasurer
  or  other  fiscal officers of Schoharie county by such means and in such
  manner as other taxes which are now collected and administered  by  such
  officers or as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3)  Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid by
  the person liable therefor to the owner  of  the  hotel  or  motel  room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel  or  motel  room  occupied  for  and  on  account of the county of
  Schoharie imposing the tax and that such owner or person entitled to  be
  paid  the  rent or charge shall be liable for the collection and payment
  of the tax; and that such owner or person entitled to be paid  the  rent
  or  charge  shall  have  the same right in respect to collecting the tax
  from the person occupying the hotel or motel  room,  or  in  respect  to
  nonpayment  of  the tax by the person occupying the hotel or motel room,
  as if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the  same
  time as the rent or charge; provided, however, that the county treasurer
  or  other  fiscal  officers  of the county, specified in such local law,
  shall be joined as a party  in  any  action  or  proceeding  brought  to
  collect  the  tax  by the owner or by the person entitled to be paid the
  rent or charge.
    (4) Such local laws may provide for the  filing  of  returns  and  the
  payment  of  the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5) This section shall not authorize the imposition of such  tax  upon
  any  transaction,  by  or  with  any of the following in accordance with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this article:
    a. The state of New York,  or  any  public  corporation  (including  a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b. The United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is  immune  from
  taxation;
    c.  Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or  foundation  organized  and  operated  exclusively   for   religious,
  charitable  or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial
  part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise
  attempting  to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in
  this paragraph shall include an organization operated  for  the  primary
  purpose  of  carrying  on a trade or business for profit, whether or not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall  be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any
  other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of
  the  civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to the
  supreme court within thirty days after the giving of the notice of  such
  final  determination,  provided, however, that any such proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules shall  not  be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties  thereon  as  may  be  provided for by local law or regulation
  shall be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by  a
  surety  company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the  supreme
  court  shall  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b. At the option of the petitioner such undertaking may be  in  a  sum
  sufficient  to  cover  the taxes, interests and penalties stated in such
  determination plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it  in
  the  prosecution  of the proceeding, in which event the petitioner shall
  not be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a  condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7)  Where  any  tax  imposed  hereunder  shall have been erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof duly made to the proper fiscal officer  or  officers,  and  such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable by a proceeding under article
  seventy-eight of the civil practice law and  rules,  provided,  however,
  that  such  proceeding is instituted within thirty days after the giving
  of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due  was
  not  previously  made,  and that an undertaking is filed with the proper
  fiscal officer or officers in such amount and with such  sureties  as  a
  justice  of  the  supreme court shall approve to the effect that if such
  proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the  petitioner  will  pay
  all  costs  and  charges  which  may  accrue  in the prosecution of such
  proceeding.
    (8) Except in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent  return  with
  intent  to  evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made
  after the expiration of more than three  years  from  the  date  of  the
  filing  of  a  return,  provided, however, that where no return has been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9) All revenues resulting from the imposition of the  tax  under  the
  local laws shall be paid into the treasury of Schoharie county and shall
  be  credited  to  and  deposited  in  the  general  fund  of the county;
  provided, however, that such local laws  shall  provide  that:  (a)  the
  county  shall  be  authorized  to  dedicate a portion of such revenue to
  promote tourism and other forms of business in the county; and  (b)  the
  county  shall  be authorized to retain up to a maximum of ten percent of
  such  revenue  to  defer  the  necessary  expenses  of  the  county   in
  administering such tax.
    (10)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.


   (11) Each enactment of such local law may provide for  the  imposition
  of  a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three years
  from the date of its enactment. Nothing in this section  shall  prohibit
  the  adoption and enactment of local laws, pursuant to the provisions of
  this  section,  upon  the  expiration  of  any  other  local law adopted
  pursuant to this section.
    * NB There are 7 § 1202-aa's




   * §   1202-aa.   Hotel   and  motel  tax  in  Washington  county.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,  the  county
  of  Washington  is  hereby  authorized  and empowered to adopt and amend
  local laws imposing in such county a tax, in addition to any  other  tax
  authorized  and  imposed pursuant to this article as the legislature has
  or would have the power and authority to impose upon  persons  occupying
  hotel  or  motel rooms in such county. For the purposes of this section,
  the term "hotel or motel" shall mean and include any facility  providing
  lodging  on  an  overnight  basis  and  shall  include  those facilities
  designated  and  commonly  known  as   "bed   and   breakfast",   "inn",
  "housekeeping   cottages   with   four  or  more  units",  and  "tourist
  facilities".
    The rates of such tax shall be one-half  of  one  percent,  any  whole
  percent  or  any  combination  of  a  whole  percent and one-half of one
  percent; provided  that  such  rates  shall  not  exceed  four  percent;
  provided,  however, that such tax shall not be applicable to a permanent
  resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes of this section, the term
  "permanent resident" shall mean a person occupying any room or rooms  in
  a hotel or motel for at least thirty consecutive days.
    (2) Such tax may be collected and administered by the county treasurer
  or  other  fiscal officers of the county of Washington by such means and
  in such manner as other taxes which are now collected  and  administered
  by such officers or as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3)  Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid by
  the person liable therefor to the owner  of  the  hotel  or  motel  room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel  or  motel  room  occupied  for  and  on  account of the county of
  Washington imposing the tax and that such owner or person entitled to be
  paid the rent or charge shall be liable for the collection  and  payment
  of  the  tax; and that such owner or person entitled to be paid the rent
  or charge shall have the same right in respect  to  collecting  the  tax
  from  the  person  occupying  the  hotel or motel room, or in respect to
  nonpayment of the tax by the person occupying the hotel or  motel  room,
  as  if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same
  time as the rent or charge; provided, however, that the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of the county, specified  in  such  local  law,
  shall  be  joined  as  a  party  in  any action or proceeding brought to
  collect the tax by the owner or by the person entitled to  be  paid  the
  rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  any transaction, by or with any of  the  following  in  accordance  with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this article:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation;
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in


 this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not
  all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6)  Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable pursuant
  to  this  section  shall  be  reviewable  for   error,   illegality   or
  unconstitutionality or any other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules if application
  therefor  is  made  to  the  supreme  court within thirty days after the
  giving of the notice of such  final  determination,  provided,  however,
  that  any  such  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil
  practice law and rules shall not be instituted unless:
    a. the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for  by  local  law  or  regulation
  shall  be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a
  surety company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state  and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency  and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the supreme
  court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding  be  dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  at  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax imposed pursuant to this  section  shall  have  been
  erroneously,  illegally  or unconstitutionally collected and application
  for the refund thereof  duly  made  to  the  proper  fiscal  officer  or
  officers,  and  such officer or officers shall have made a determination
  denying such  refund,  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable  by  a
  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and
  rules, provided, however, that  such  proceeding  is  instituted  within
  thirty  days after the giving of the notice of such denial, that a final
  determination  of  tax  due  was  not  previously  made,  and  that   an
  undertaking  is filed with the proper fiscal officer or officers in such
  amount and with such sureties as a justice of the  supreme  court  shall
  approve  to  the  effect that if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax
  confirmed, the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which accrue in
  the prosecution of such proceeding.
    (8) Except in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent  return  with
  intent  to  evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made
  after the expiration of more than three  years  from  the  date  of  the
  filing  of  a  return,  provided, however, that where no return has been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9) All revenues resulting from the imposition of the  tax  under  the
  local  laws  shall be paid into the treasury of the county of Washington
  and shall be credited to and  deposited  in  the  general  fund  of  the
  county, thereafter to be allocated for tourism promotion and tourist and
  convention  development;  provided,  however, that such local laws shall
  provide that the county of Washington shall be authorized to  retain  up
  to  a maximum of fifteen percent of such revenues to defer the necessary
  expenses of such county in administering such tax. The revenues  derived
  from such tax, after deducting the amount provided for administering the
  tax, as provided by local law, shall be allocated to promote tourism in,
  preserve  the  heritage  of, and celebrate the agricultural community in
  the county of Washington through the promotion  of  tourist  activities,


 conventions, trade shows, special events, and other directly related and
  supporting activities.
    (10)  Each enactment of such local law may provide for imposition of a
  hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three years  from
  the  date  of  its enactment. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
  adoption and enactment of local laws, pursuant to the provisions of this
  section, upon the expiration of any other local law adopted pursuant  to
  this section.
    (11)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB There are 7 § 1202-aa's




   * §   1202-aa.   Hotel   and  motel  tax  in  Washington  county.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,  the  county
  of  Washington  is  hereby  authorized  and empowered to adopt and amend
  local laws imposing in such county a tax, in addition to any  other  tax
  authorized  and  imposed pursuant to this article as the legislature has
  or would have the power and authority to impose upon  persons  occupying
  hotel  or  motel rooms in such county. For the purposes of this section,
  the term "hotel or motel" shall mean and include any facility  providing
  lodging  on  an  overnight  basis  and  shall  include  those facilities
  designated  and  commonly  known  as   "bed   and   breakfast",   "inn",
  "housekeeping   cottages   with   four  or  more  units",  and  "tourist
  facilities".
    The rates of such tax shall be one-half  of  one  percent,  any  whole
  percent  or  any  combination  of  a  whole  percent and one-half of one
  percent; provided  that  such  rates  shall  not  exceed  four  percent;
  provided,  however, that such tax shall not be applicable to a permanent
  resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes of this section, the term
  "permanent resident" shall mean a person occupying any room or rooms  in
  a hotel or motel for at least thirty consecutive days.
    (2) Such tax may be collected and administered by the county treasurer
  or  other  fiscal officers of the county of Washington by such means and
  in such manner as other taxes which are now collected  and  administered
  by such officers or as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3)  Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid by
  the person liable therefor to the owner  of  the  hotel  or  motel  room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel  or  motel  room  occupied  for  and  on  account of the county of
  Washington imposing the tax and that such owner or person entitled to be
  paid the rent or charge shall be liable for the collection  and  payment
  of  the  tax; and that such owner or person entitled to be paid the rent
  or charge shall have the same right in respect  to  collecting  the  tax
  from  the  person  occupying  the  hotel or motel room, or in respect to
  nonpayment of the tax by the person occupying the hotel or  motel  room,
  as  if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same
  time as the rent or charge; provided, however, that the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of the county, specified  in  such  local  law,
  shall  be  joined  as  a  party  in  any action or proceeding brought to
  collect the tax by the owner or by the person entitled to  be  paid  the
  rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  any transaction, by or with any of  the  following  in  accordance  with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this article:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation;
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in


 this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not
  all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6)  Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable pursuant
  to  this  section  shall  be  reviewable  for   error,   illegality   or
  unconstitutionality or any other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules if application
  therefor  is  made  to  the  supreme  court within thirty days after the
  giving of the notice of such  final  determination,  provided,  however,
  that  any  such  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil
  practice law and rules shall not be instituted unless:
    a. the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for  by  local  law  or  regulation
  shall  be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a
  surety company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state  and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency  and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the supreme
  court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding  be  dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  at  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax imposed pursuant to this  section  shall  have  been
  erroneously,  illegally  or unconstitutionally collected and application
  for the refund thereof  duly  made  to  the  proper  fiscal  officer  or
  officers,  and  such officer or officers shall have made a determination
  denying such  refund,  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable  by  a
  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and
  rules, provided, however, that  such  proceeding  is  instituted  within
  thirty  days after the giving of the notice of such denial, that a final
  determination  of  tax  due  was  not  previously  made,  and  that   an
  undertaking  is filed with the proper fiscal officer or officers in such
  amount and with such sureties as a justice of the  supreme  court  shall
  approve  to  the  effect that if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax
  confirmed, the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which accrue in
  the prosecution of such proceeding.
    (8) Except in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent  return  with
  intent  to  evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made
  after the expiration of more than three  years  from  the  date  of  the
  filing  of  a  return,  provided, however, that where no return has been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9) All revenues resulting from the imposition of the  tax  under  the
  local  laws  shall be paid into the treasury of the county of Washington
  and shall be credited to and  deposited  in  the  general  fund  of  the
  county, thereafter to be allocated for tourism promotion and tourist and
  convention  development;  provided,  however, that such local laws shall
  provide that the county of Washington shall be authorized to  retain  up
  to  a maximum of fifteen percent of such revenues to defer the necessary
  expenses of such county in administering such tax. The revenues  derived
  from such tax, after deducting the amount provided for administering the
  tax, as provided by local law, shall be allocated to promote tourism in,
  preserve  the  heritage  of, and celebrate the agricultural community in
  the county of Washington through the promotion  of  tourist  activities,


 conventions, trade shows, special events, and other directly related and
  supporting activities.
    (10)  Each enactment of such local law may provide for imposition of a
  hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three years  from
  the  date  of  its enactment. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
  adoption and enactment of local laws, pursuant to the provisions of this
  section, upon the expiration of any other local law adopted pursuant  to
  this section.
    (11)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB There are 7 § 1202-aa's






   * §   1202-aa.   Hotel   or   motel   taxes   in  Orange  county.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the  county
  of  Orange  is  hereby authorized and empowered to adopt and amend local
  laws imposing in such county  a  tax,  in  addition  to  any  other  tax
  authorized  and  imposed  pursuant  to  this  article such as the county
  legislature has or would have the power and  authority  to  impose  upon
  persons  occupying hotel or motel rooms in such county. For the purposes
  of this section, the term "hotel" or "motel" shall mean and include  any
  facility providing lodging on an overnight basis and shall include those
  facilities  designated  and  commonly  known  as "bed and breakfast" and
  "tourist" facilities.
    The rates of such tax shall not exceed five percent of  the  per  diem
  rental  rate for each room, provided however, that such tax shall not be
  applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes
  of this section the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least thirty
  consecutive days.
    (2) Such tax may be collected and administered by the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of Orange county by  such  means  and  in  such
  manner  as  other taxes which are now collected and administered by such
  officers or as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid  by
  the  person  liable  therefor  to  the  owner of the hotel or motel room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel or motel room occupied for and on account of the county of  Orange
  imposing  the  tax and that such owner or person entitled to be paid the
  rent or charge shall be liable for the collection  and  payment  of  the
  tax;  and  that  such  owner  or  person entitled to be paid the rent or
  charge shall have the same right in respect to collecting the  tax  from
  the  person  occupying  the  hotel  or  motel  room,  or  in  respect to
  nonpayment of the tax by the person occupying the hotel or  motel  room,
  as  if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same
  time as the rent or charge; provided, however, that the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of the county, specified  in  such  local  law,
  shall  be  joined  as  a  party  in  any action or proceeding brought to
  collect the tax by the owner or by the person entitled to  be  paid  the
  rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  any transaction, by or with any of  the  following  in  accordance  with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this article:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation;
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6)  Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable pursuant
  to  this  section  shall  be  reviewable  for   error,   illegality   or
  unconstitutionally  or any other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules if application
  therefor is made to the supreme  court  within  thirty  days  after  the
  giving  of  the  notice  of such final determination, provided, however,
  that any such  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of  the  civil
  practice law and rules shall not be instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties  thereon  as  may  be  provided for by local law or regulation
  shall be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by  a
  surety  company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the  supreme
  court  shall  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b. At the option of the petitioner such undertaking may be  in  a  sum
  sufficient  to  cover  the taxes, interests and penalties stated in such
  determination plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it  in
  the  prosecution  of the proceeding, in which event the petitioner shall
  not be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a  condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7)  Where  any  tax  imposed pursuant to this section shall have been
  erroneously, illegally or unconstitutionally collected  and  application
  for  the  refund  thereof  duly  made  to  the  proper fiscal officer or
  officers, and such officer or officers shall have made  a  determination
  denying  such  refund,  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable  by a
  proceeding under article seventy-eight of the  civil  practice  law  and
  rules,  provided,  however,  that  such  proceeding is instituted within
  thirty days after the giving of the notice of such denial, that a  final
  determination   of  tax  due  was  not  previously  made,  and  that  an
  undertaking is filed with the proper fiscal officer or officers in  such
  amount  and  with  such sureties as a justice of the supreme court shall
  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed  or  the  tax
  confirmed,  the  petitioner  will  pay  all  costs and charges which may
  accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding.
    (8) Except in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent  return  with
  intent  to  evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made
  after the expiration of more than three  years  from  the  date  of  the
  filing  of  a  return,  provided, however, that where no return has been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9) All revenues resulting from the imposition of the  tax  under  the
  local  laws  shall be paid into the treasury of the county of Orange and
  shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the county.
    (10) If any provision of this section or the  application  thereof  to
  any  person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this
  section and the application  of  such  provision  to  other  persons  or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    (11)  Each  enactment of such local law may provide for the imposition
  of a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three  years
  from  the effective date of its enactment. Nothing in this section shall
  prohibit the adoption and enactment  of  local  laws,  pursuant  to  the
  provisions  of  this section, upon the expiration of any other local law
  adopted pursuant to this section.
    * NB There are 7 § 1202-aa's




   * §  1202-aa.  Hotel  or  motel  taxes  in  the city of Peekskill. (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the city of
  Peekskill is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt  and  amend  local
  laws  imposing  in  such  city  a  tax,  in  addition  to  any other tax
  authorized and imposed pursuant to this article such as the  legislature
  has  or  would  have  the  power  and  authority  to impose upon persons
  occupying hotel or motel rooms in such city. For the  purposes  of  this
  section, the term "hotel" or "motel" shall mean and include any facility
  consisting of rentable units and providing lodging on an overnight basis
  and shall include those facilities designated and commonly known as "bed
  and breakfast" and "tourist" facilities.
    The  rates  of such tax shall not exceed three percent of the per diem
  rental rate for each room, provided however, that such tax shall not  be
  applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes
  of  this  section  the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall mean a person
  occupying any room or rooms in a hotel or  motel  for  at  least  ninety
  consecutive days.
    (2)  Such  tax  may  be collected and administered by the chief fiscal
  officer of the city of Peekskill by such means and  in  such  manner  as
  other  taxes which are now collected and administered by such officer or
  as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid  by
  the  person  liable  therefor  to  the  owner of the hotel or motel room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel or motel room occupied for and on account of the city of Peekskill
  imposing the tax and that such owner or person entitled to be  paid  the
  rent  or  charge  shall  be liable for the collection and payment of the
  tax; and that such owner or person entitled  to  be  paid  the  rent  or
  charge  shall  have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from
  the person  occupying  the  hotel  or  motel  room,  or  in  respect  to
  nonpayment  of  the tax by the person occupying the hotel or motel room,
  as if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the  same
  time  as  the  rent  or charge; provided, however, that the chief fiscal
  officer of the city, specified in such local law, shall be joined  as  a
  party  in  any  action  or  proceeding brought to collect the tax by the
  owner or by the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4) Such local laws may provide for the  filing  of  returns  and  the
  payment  of  the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5) This section shall not authorize the imposition of such  tax  upon
  any  transaction,  by  or  with  any of the following in accordance with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this chapter:
    a. The state of New York,  or  any  public  corporation  (including  a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b. The United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is  immune  from
  taxation;
    c.  Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or  foundation  organized  and  operated  exclusively   for   religious,
  charitable  or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial
  part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise
  attempting  to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in
  this paragraph shall include an organization operated  for  the  primary
  purpose  of  carrying  on a trade or business for profit, whether or not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall  be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any
  other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of
  the  civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to the
  supreme court within thirty days after the giving of the notice of  such
  final  determination,  provided, however, that any such proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules shall  not  be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties  thereon  as  may  be provided for by local law shall be first
  deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a surety  company
  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state  and approved by the
  superintendent of financial services of this state as  to  solvency  and
  responsibility,  in  such amount as a justice of the supreme court shall
  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed  or  the  tax
  confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which may accrue
  in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  At  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax  imposed  hereunder  shall  have  been  erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof  duly  made  to  the proper fiscal officer or officers, and such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such determination shall be reviewable by  a  proceeding  under  article
  seventy-eight  of  the  civil practice law and rules, provided, however,
  that such proceeding is instituted within thirty days after  the  giving
  of  the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due was
  not previously made, and that an undertaking is filed  with  the  proper
  fiscal  officer  or  officers in such amount and with such sureties as a
  justice of the supreme court shall approve to the effect  that  if  such
  proceeding  be  dismissed  or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay
  all costs and charges which  may  accrue  in  the  prosecution  of  such
  proceeding.
    (8)  Except  in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  All  revenues  resulting from the imposition of the tax under the
  local laws shall be paid into the treasury of the city of Peekskill  and
  shall  be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the city; and
  the local law shall provide that the city shall be authorized to  retain
  the  necessary revenue to defer the expense of the city in administering
  such tax and the balance of such revenues shall be allocated to  enhance
  the general economy of the city of Peekskill.
    (10)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB There are 7 § 1202-aa's




   * § 1202-aa. Hotel or motel taxes in Tioga county. (1) Notwithstanding
  any  other  provisions  of  law  to the contrary, the county of Tioga is
  hereby authorized and empowered to adopt and amend local  laws  imposing
  in  such  county  a  tax,  in  addition  to any other tax authorized and
  imposed pursuant to this article such as the legislature  has  or  would
  have  the  power and authority to impose upon persons occupying hotel or
  motel rooms in such county. For the purposes of this section,  the  term
  "hotel" or "motel" shall mean and include any facility providing lodging
  on  an overnight basis and shall include those facilities designated and
  commonly known as "bed and breakfast" and "tourist" facilities.
    The rates of such tax shall not exceed four percent of  the  per  diem
  rental  rate for each room, provided however, that such tax shall not be
  applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes
  of this section the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  person
  occupying  any  room  or rooms in a hotel or motel for at least fourteen
  consecutive days.
    (2) Such tax may be collected and administered by  the  deputy  county
  administrator  of  finance  or  other fiscal officers of Tioga county by
  such means and in such manner as other taxes which are now collected and
  administered by such officers or as otherwise may be  provided  by  such
  local law.
    (3)  Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid by
  the person liable therefor to the owner  of  the  hotel  or  motel  room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel  or  motel room occupied for and on account of the county of Tioga
  imposing the tax and that such owner or person entitled to be  paid  the
  rent  or  charge  shall  be liable for the collection and payment of the
  tax; and that such owner or person entitled  to  be  paid  the  rent  or
  charge  shall  have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from
  the person  occupying  the  hotel  or  motel  room,  or  in  respect  to
  nonpayment  of  the tax by the person occupying the hotel or motel room,
  as if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the  same
  time  as  the  rent or charge; provided, however, that the deputy county
  administrator of  finance  or  other  fiscal  officers  of  the  county,
  specified in such local law, shall be joined as a party in any action or
  proceeding  brought  to  collect  the  tax by the owner or by the person
  entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4) Such local laws may provide for the  filing  of  returns  and  the
  payment  of  the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5) This section shall not authorize the imposition of such  tax  upon
  any  transaction,  by  or  with  any of the following in accordance with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this chapter:
    a. The state of New York,  or  any  public  corporation  (including  a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b. The United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is  immune  from
  taxation;
    c.  Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or  foundation  organized  and  operated  exclusively   for   religious,
  charitable  or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial
  part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise
  attempting  to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in
  this paragraph shall include an organization operated  for  the  primary
  purpose  of  carrying  on a trade or business for profit, whether or not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall  be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any
  other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of
  the  civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to the
  supreme court within thirty days after the giving of the notice of  such
  final  determination,  provided, however, that any such proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules shall  not  be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties  thereon  as  may  be  provided for by local law or regulation
  shall be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by  a
  surety  company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the  supreme
  court  shall  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b. At the option of the petitioner such undertaking may be  in  a  sum
  sufficient  to  cover  the taxes, interests and penalties stated in such
  determination plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it  in
  the  prosecution  of the proceeding, in which event the petitioner shall
  not be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a  condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7)  Where  any  tax  imposed  hereunder  shall have been erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof duly made to the proper fiscal officer  or  officers,  and  such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable by a proceeding under article
  seventy-eight of the civil practice law and  rules,  provided,  however,
  that  such  proceeding is instituted within thirty days after the giving
  of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due  was
  not  previously  made,  and that an undertaking is filed with the proper
  fiscal officer or officers in such amount and with such  sureties  as  a
  justice  of  the  supreme court shall approve to the effect that if such
  proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the  petitioner  will  pay
  all  costs  and  charges  which  may  accrue  in the prosecution of such
  proceeding.
    (8) Except in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent  return  with
  intent  to  evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made
  after the expiration of more than three  years  from  the  date  of  the
  filing  of  a  return,  provided, however, that where no return has been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9) All revenues resulting from the imposition of the  tax  under  the
  local  laws shall be paid into the treasury of Tioga county and shall be
  credited to and deposited in the general fund of the county,  thereafter
  to  be  allocated  at  the  discretion  of the county legislature of the
  county of Tioga for the purposes of tourism  and  economic  development;
  provided,  however,  that  such local laws shall provide that the county
  shall be authorized to retain up to a maximum of five  percent  of  such
  revenue  to  defer the necessary expenses of the county in administering
  such tax. The revenue derived from the tax, after deducting  the  amount
  provided  for  administering  such  tax,  as so authorized by local law,
  shall be allocated to enhance the general economy of Tioga  county,  its
  cities,  towns,  and  villages, through promotion of tourist activities,
  conventions, trade shows, special events, and other directly related and
  supporting activities.


   (10) Each enactment of such a local law may provide for the imposition
  of a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three  years
  from  the  date of its enactment. Nothing in this section shall prohibit
  the adoption and enactment of local laws, pursuant to the provisions  of
  this  section,  upon  the  expiration  of  any  other  local law adopted
  pursuant to this section.
    (11) If any provision of this act or the application  thereof  to  any
  person  or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this act
  and the application of such provision to other persons or  circumstances
  shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB There are 7 § 1202-aa's




   * § 1202-aa. Occupancy tax in the city of Rye. (1) Notwithstanding any
  other  provision  of law to the contrary, the city of Rye, in the county
  of Westchester, is hereby authorized and empowered to  adopt  and  amend
  local  laws  imposing  in  such city a tax, in addition to any other tax
  authorized and imposed pursuant to this article, such as the legislature
  has or would have  the  power  and  authority  to  impose  upon  persons
  occupying  any  room  for  hire  in  any hotel. For the purposes of this
  section, the term "hotel" shall mean a building or portion of  it  which
  is  regularly  used and kept open as such for the lodging of guests. The
  term "hotel" includes an apartment hotel, a motel or a  boarding  house,
  whether  or  not meals are served. The rate of such tax shall not exceed
  three percent of the per diem rental rate for  each  room  whether  such
  room is rented on a daily or longer basis.
    (2)  Such  taxes may be collected and administered by the chief fiscal
  officer of the city of Rye by such means and in  such  manner  as  other
  taxes  which  are  now  collected and administered by such officer or as
  otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any taxes imposed shall  be  paid
  by  the  person liable therefor to the owner of the room for hire in the
  hotel or other similar place of public accommodation occupied or to  the
  person  entitled  to be paid the rent or charge for the room for hire in
  the hotel or other similar place of public  accommodation  occupied  for
  and  on  account of the city of Rye imposing the tax and that such owner
  or person entitled to be paid the rent or charge shall be liable for the
  collection and payment of  the  tax;  and  that  such  owner  or  person
  entitled  to  be  paid  the  rent or charge shall have the same right in
  respect to collecting the tax from the person  occupying  the  room  for
  hire  in the hotel or other similar place of public accommodation, or in
  respect to nonpayment of the tax by the person occupying  the  room  for
  hire  in  the  hotel or similar place of public accommodation, as if the
  taxes were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same time  as
  the  rent or charge; provided, however, that the chief fiscal officer of
  the city, specified in such local laws, shall be joined as  a  party  in
  any  action  or proceeding brought to collect the tax by the owner or by
  the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4) Such local laws may provide for the  filing  of  returns  and  the
  payment of the taxes on a monthly basis or on the basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  any of the following:
    a. The state of New York,  or  any  public  corporation  (including  a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  of  the  dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b. The United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is  immune  from
  taxation; or
    c.  Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or  foundation  organized  and  operated  exclusively   for   religious,
  charitable  or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial
  part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise
  attempting  to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in
  this paragraph shall include an organization operated  for  the  primary
  purpose  of  carrying  on a trade or business for profit, whether or not
  all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.


   d. A permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes of  this
  section,  the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall  mean a natural person
  occupying any room or rooms in a hotel or  motel  for  at  least  thirty
  consecutive days.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall  be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any
  other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of
  the  civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to the
  supreme court within thirty days after the  giving  of  notice  of  such
  final  determination,  provided, however, that any such proceeding under
  such article seventy-eight shall not be instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for by local  laws  or  regulations
  shall be first deposited and there shall be filed an undertaking, issued
  by  a  surety  company authorized to transact business in this state and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the  supreme
  court  shall  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b. At the option of the petitioner, such undertaking may be in  a  sum
  sufficient  to  cover  the taxes, interests and penalties stated in such
  determination plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it  in
  the  prosecution  of the proceeding, in which event the petitioner shall
  not be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a  condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7)  Where  any  taxes  imposed hereunder shall have been erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  therefor duly made to the proper fiscal officer or  officers,  and  such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable by a proceeding under article
  seventy-eight of the civil practice law and  rules,  provided,  however,
  that  such  proceeding is instituted within thirty days after the giving
  of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due  was
  not  previously  made,  and that an undertaking is filed with the proper
  fiscal officer or officers in such amount and with such  sureties  as  a
  justice  of  the  supreme court shall approve to the effect that if such
  proceeding be dismissed or the taxes confirmed, the petitioner will  pay
  all  costs  and  charges  which  may  accrue  in the prosecution of such
  proceeding.
    (8) Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return  with
  intent  to  evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made
  after the expiration of more than three  years  from  the  date  of  the
  filing  of  a  return,  provided, however, that where no return has been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9) All revenues resulting from the imposition of the  tax  under  the
  local  laws shall be paid into the treasury of the city of Rye and shall
  be credited to and deposited in the  general  fund  of  the  city.  Such
  revenues may be used for any lawful purpose.
    (10) Each enactment of such a local law may provide for the imposition
  of  a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three years
  from the date of its enactment. Nothing in this section  shall  prohibit
  the  adoption and enactment of local laws, pursuant to the provisions of
  this section, upon  the  expiration  of  any  other  local  law  adopted
  pursuant to this section.
    (11)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this


 section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB There are 8 § 1202-aa's
    * NB Repealed September 1, 2024




   §  1202-b.  Hotel or motel taxes in Broome county. (1) Notwithstanding
  any other provisions of law to the contrary,  Broome  county  is  hereby
  authorized  and empowered to adopt and amend local laws imposing in such
  county a tax, in addition  to  any  other  tax  authorized  and  imposed
  pursuant  to this article as the legislature has or would have the power
  and authority to impose upon persons occupying hotel or motel  rooms  in
  such county. The rates of such tax shall be five percent of the per diem
  rental  rate  for  each  room  provided  however,  such tax shall not be
  applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes
  of this section the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least thirty
  consecutive days.
    (2) Such  tax  may  be  collected  and  administered  by  the  finance
  administrator or other fiscal officer of Broome county by such means and
  in  such  manner as other taxes which are now collected and administered
  by such officers in accordance with the county charter or  as  otherwise
  may be provided by such local law.
    (3)  Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid by
  the person liable therefor to the owner  of  the  hotel  or  motel  room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel  or  motel  room  occupied  for  and  on  account of Broome county
  imposing the tax and that such owner or person entitled to be  paid  the
  rent  or  charge  shall  be liable for the collection and payment of the
  tax; and that such owner or person entitled  to  be  paid  the  rent  or
  charge  shall  have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from
  the person  occupying  the  hotel  or  motel  room,  or  in  respect  to
  nonpayment  of  the tax by the person occupying the hotel or motel room,
  as if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the  same
  time  as  the  rent  or  charge;  provided,  however,  that  the finance
  administrator or other fiscal officers of the county, specified in  such
  local  law,  shall  be  joined  as  a  party in any action or proceeding
  brought to collect the tax by the owner or by the person entitled to  be
  paid the rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  act shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon the
  following:
    a. The state of New York,  or  any  public  corporation  (including  a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b. The United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is  immune  from
  taxation;
    c.  Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or  foundation  organized  and  operated  exclusively   for   religious,
  charitable  or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial
  part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise
  attempting  to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in
  this paragraph shall include an organization operated  for  the  primary
  purpose  of  carrying  on a trade or business for profit, whether or not
  all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or  any
  other  reason  whatsoever by a proceeding under article seventy-eight of


 the civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to  the
  supreme  court within thirty days after the giving of the notice of such
  final determination, provided, however, that any such  proceeding  under
  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and rules shall not be
  instituted unless:
    a. the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for  by  local  law  or  regulation
  shall  be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a
  surety company  authorized  to  transmit  business  in  this  state  and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency  and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the supreme
  court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding  be  dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  at  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax  imposed  hereunder  shall  have  been  erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof  duly  made  to  the proper fiscal officer or officers, and such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such determination shall be reviewable by  a  proceeding  under  article
  seventy-eight  of  the  civil practice law and rules, provided, however,
  that such proceeding is instituted within thirty days after  the  giving
  of  the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due was
  not previously made, and that an undertaking is filed  with  the  proper
  fiscal  officer  or  officers in such amount and with such sureties as a
  justice of the supreme court shall approve to the effect  that  if  such
  proceeding  be  dismissed  or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay
  all  costs  and  charges  which  accrue  in  the  prosecution  of   such
  proceeding.
    (8)  Except  in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  Three-fifths  of  revenues  resulting  from the imposition of tax
  authorized by this act shall be paid into the treasury of Broome  county
  and  shall  be  credited  to  and  deposited  in the general fund of the
  county; and may thereafter be allocated at the discretion of the  Broome
  county  legislature  for  any  county  purpose.  Two-fifths  of revenues
  resulting from the imposition of tax authorized by this section shall be
  deposited in a special account to  be  known  as  the  "county  economic
  development  initiative  fund"  to  be  created  by the county of Broome
  therefor and to be maintained separate and apart from  any  other  funds
  and accounts of the county. The legislative body of the county of Broome
  shall designate the specific purposes for which these funds may be used.
    (10) Such local law may provide for the imposition of an occupancy tax
  for  a  period  of  time no longer than three years from the date of its
  enactment.
    (11) If any provision of this act or the application  thereof  to  any
  person  or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this act
  and the application of such provision to other persons or  circumstances
  shall not be affected thereby.




   * §   1202-bb.  Occupancy  tax  in  the  Village  of  Rye  Brook.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the  Village
  of  Rye  Brook,  in  the county of Westchester, is hereby authorized and
  empowered to adopt and amend local laws imposing in such village a  tax,
  in  addition  to  any  other tax authorized and imposed pursuant to this
  article, such as the  legislature  has  or  would  have  the  power  and
  authority  to  impose  upon  persons  occupying any room for hire in any
  hotel. For the purposes of this section, the term "hotel" shall  mean  a
  building  or portion of it which is regularly used and kept open as such
  for the lodging of guests. The term "hotel" includes an apartment hotel,
  a motel or a boarding house, whether or not meals are served.  The  rate
  of  such  tax shall not exceed three percent of the per diem rental rate
  for each room whether such room is rented on a daily or longer basis.
    (2) Such taxes may be collected and administered by the  chief  fiscal
  officer  of the Village of Rye Brook by such means and in such manner as
  other taxes which are now collected and administered by such officer  or
  as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3)  Such  local laws may provide that any taxes imposed shall be paid
  by the person liable therefore to the owner of the room for hire in  the
  tourist  home,  inn, club, hotel, motel or other similar place of public
  accommodation occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent  or
  charge  for  the  room  for  hire in the tourist home, inn, club, hotel,
  motel or other similar place of public accommodation occupied for and on
  account of the Village of Rye Brook imposing the tax and that such owner
  or person entitled to be paid the rent or charge shall be liable for the
  collection and payment of  the  tax;  and  that  such  owner  or  person
  entitled  to  be  paid  the  rent or charge shall have the same right in
  respect to collecting the tax from the person  occupying  the  room  for
  hire in the tourist home, inn, club, hotel, motel or other similar place
  of  public  accommodation, or in respect to nonpayment of the tax by the
  person occupying the room for hire  in  the  tourist  home,  inn,  club,
  hotel,  motel  or similar place of public accommodation, as if the taxes
  were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same  time  as  the
  rent  or charge; provided, however, that the chief fiscal officer of the
  village, specified in such local laws, shall be joined as a party in any
  action or proceeding brought to collect the tax by the owner or  by  the
  person entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the taxes on a monthly basis or on the basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5) This section shall not authorize the imposition of such  tax  upon
  any of the following:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation; or
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    d.  A permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes of this
  section, the term "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  natural  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least thirty
  consecutive days.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or  any
  other  reason  whatsoever by a proceeding under article seventy-eight of
  the civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to  the
  supreme  court  within  thirty  days  after the giving of notice of such
  final determination, provided, however, that any such  proceeding  under
  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and rules shall not be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for by local  laws  or  regulations
  shall be first deposited and there shall be filed an undertaking, issued
  by  a  surety  company authorized to transact business in this state and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the  supreme
  court  shall  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b. At the option of the petitioner, such undertaking may be in  a  sum
  sufficient  to  cover  the taxes, interests and penalties stated in such
  determination plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it  in
  the  prosecution  of the proceeding, in which event the petitioner shall
  not be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a  condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7)  Where  any  taxes  imposed hereunder shall have been erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  therefor duly made to the proper fiscal officer or  officers,  and  such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable by a proceeding under article
  seventy-eight of the civil practice law and  rules,  provided,  however,
  that  such  proceeding is instituted within thirty days after the giving
  of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due  was
  not  previously  made,  and that an undertaking is filed with the proper
  fiscal officer or officers in such amount and with such  sureties  as  a
  justice  of  the  supreme court shall approve to the effect that if such
  proceeding be dismissed or the taxes confirmed, the petitioner will  pay
  all  costs  and  charges  which  may  accrue  in the prosecution of such
  proceeding.
    (8) Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return  with
  intent  to  evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made
  after the expiration of more than three  years  from  the  date  of  the
  filing  of  a  return,  provided, however, that where no return has been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9) All revenues resulting from the imposition of the  tax  under  the
  local  laws  shall be paid into the treasury of the Village of Rye Brook
  and shall be credited to and  deposited  in  the  general  fund  of  the
  village. Such revenues may be used for any lawful purpose.
    (10) Each enactment of such a local law may provide for the imposition
  of  a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three years
  from the date of its enactment. Nothing in this section  shall  prohibit
  the  adoption and enactment of local laws, pursuant to the provisions of
  this section, upon  the  expiration  of  any  other  local  law  adopted
  pursuant to this section.


   (11)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB Repealed September 1, 2025




   §   1202-c.   Hotel   or   motel   taxes   in  Jefferson  county.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary  the  county
  of Jefferson is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt and amend local
  laws imposing in such county a tax in addition to any tax authorized and
  imposed  pursuant  to  this article such as the legislature has or would
  have the power and authority to impose on persons occupying hotel  rooms
  and/or  motel rooms in such county. The rates of such tax shall be three
  percent of the per diem rental rate charged to occupants for each  room,
  provided,  however,  such  tax  shall  not  be applicable to a permanent
  resident of a hotel and/or motel. For the purposes of this  section  the
  term  "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a person occupying any room or
  rooms in a hotel and/or motel for at least thirty consecutive days.
    (2) Such tax may be collected and administered by the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of Jefferson county by such means and  in  such
  manner  as  other taxes which are now collected and administered by such
  officers or as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid  by
  the person liable therefor to the owner of the hotel room occupied or to
  the  person  entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the hotel and/or
  motel room occupied for and  on  account  of  the  county  of  Jefferson
  imposing  the  tax and that such owner or person entitled to be paid the
  rent or charge shall be liable for the collection  and  payment  of  the
  tax;  and  that  such  owner  or  person entitled to be paid the rent or
  charge shall have the same right in respect to collecting nonpayment  of
  the  tax by the person occupying the hotel room and/or motel room, as if
  the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the  same  time
  as  the  rent or charge; provided, however, that the county treasurer or
  other fiscal officers of the county specified in such local  law,  shall
  be  joined as a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the
  tax by the owner or by the person  entitled  to  be  paid  the  rent  or
  charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  act shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon the
  following:
    a. The state of New York,  or  any  public  corporation  (including  a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b. The United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is  immune  from
  taxation;
    c. Any corporation, or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or   foundation,  organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable, or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial
  part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise
  attempting  to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in
  this paragraph shall include an organization operated  for  the  primary
  purpose  of  carrying  on a trade or business for profit, whether or not
  all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or  any
  other  reason  whatsoever by a proceeding under article seventy-eight of
  the civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to  the
  supreme  court within thirty days after the giving of the notice of such


 final determination, provided, however, that any such  proceeding  under
  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and rules shall not be
  instituted unless;
    a.  The  amount  of  any tax sought to be provided for by local law or
  regulation, shall be first deposited and there is filed an  undertaking,
  issued by a surety company authorized to transmit business in this state
  and  approved  by the superintendent of financial services of this state
  as to solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a  justice  of  the
  supreme  court  shall  approve  to the effect that if such proceeding be
  dismissed or the tax confirmed the petitioner will  pay  all  costs  and
  charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  At  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interest  or  penalties  as  a  condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7)  Where  any  tax  imposed  hereunder  shall have been erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof duly made to the proper fiscal officer  or  officers,  and  such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable by a proceeding under article
  seventy-eight of the civil practice law and  rules,  provided,  however,
  that  such  proceeding is instituted within thirty days after the giving
  of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due  was
  not  previously  made,  and that an undertaking is filed with the proper
  fiscal officer or officers in such amount and with such  sureties  as  a
  justice  of  the  supreme court shall approve to the effect that if such
  proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the  petitioner  will  pay
  all  costs  and  charges  which  may  accrue  in the prosecution of such
  proceeding.
    (8) Except in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent  return  with
  intent  to  evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made
  after the expiration of more than three  years  from  the  date  of  the
  filing  of  a  return,  provided, however, that where no return has been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9) Revenues resulting from the imposition of the  tax  authorized  by
  this  act shall be paid into the treasury of the county of Jefferson and
  shall be credited to and deposited in a special tourism  and  convention
  fund   and   the   collections   therefrom,   excluding   the   cost  of
  administration,  shall  thereafter  be  allocated  by   the   board   of
  supervisors   of  Jefferson  county  only  for  tourism  and  convention
  development. The funds so allocated shall be used  for  the  purpose  of
  promoting  Jefferson county, its cities, towns and villages, in order to
  increase convention/trade show and tourist business.
    (10) If any provision of this act or the application  thereof  to  any
  person  or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this act
  and the application of such provision to other persons or  circumstances
  shall not be affected thereby.




   * §   1202-cc.   Hotel   or   motel  taxes  in  Franklin  county.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the  county
  of  Franklin is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt and amend local
  laws imposing in such county  a  tax,  in  addition  to  any  other  tax
  authorized  and  imposed  pursuant  to  this  article such as the county
  legislature has or would have the power and  authority  to  impose  upon
  persons  occupying hotel or motel rooms in such county. For the purposes
  of this section, the term "hotel" or "motel" shall mean and include  any
  facility providing lodging on an overnight basis and shall include those
  facilities  designated  and  commonly  known  as "bed and breakfast" and
  "tourist" facilities.
    The rates of such tax shall not exceed five percent of  the  per  diem
  rental  rate for each room, provided however, that such tax shall not be
  applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes
  of this section the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least thirty
  consecutive days.
    (2) Such tax may be collected and administered by the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of Franklin county by such means  and  in  such
  manner  as  other taxes which are now collected and administered by such
  officers or as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid  by
  the  person  liable  therefor  to  the  owner of the hotel or motel room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel or motel room occupied  for  and  on  account  of  the  county  of
  Franklin  imposing  the tax and that such owner or person entitled to be
  paid the rent or charge shall be liable for the collection  and  payment
  of  the  tax; and that such owner or person entitled to be paid the rent
  or charge shall have the same right in respect  to  collecting  the  tax
  from  the  person  occupying  the  hotel or motel room, or in respect to
  nonpayment of the tax by the person occupying the hotel or  motel  room,
  as  if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same
  time as the rent or charge; provided, however, that the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of the county, specified  in  such  local  law,
  shall  be  joined  as  a  party  in  any action or proceeding brought to
  collect the tax by the owner or by the person entitled to  be  paid  the
  rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  any transaction, by or with any of  the  following  in  accordance  with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this article:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation; or
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6)  Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable pursuant
  to  this  section  shall  be  reviewable  for   error,   illegality   or
  unconstitutionality or any other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules if application
  therefor  is  made  to  the  supreme  court within thirty days after the
  giving of the notice of such  final  determination,  provided,  however,
  that  any  such  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil
  practice law and rules shall not be instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for  by  local  law  or  regulation
  shall  be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a
  surety company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state  and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency  and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the supreme
  court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding  be  dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  At  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax imposed pursuant to this  section  shall  have  been
  erroneously,  illegally  or unconstitutionally collected and application
  for the refund thereof  duly  made  to  the  proper  fiscal  officer  or
  officers,  and  such officer or officers shall have made a determination
  denying such  refund,  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable  by  a
  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and
  rules, provided, however, that  such  proceeding  is  instituted  within
  thirty  days after the giving of the notice of such denial, that a final
  determination  of  tax  due  was  not  previously  made,  and  that   an
  undertaking  is filed with the proper fiscal officer or officers in such
  amount and with such sureties as a justice of the  supreme  court  shall
  approve  to  the  effect that if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax
  confirmed, the petitioner will pay  all  costs  and  charges  which  may
  accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding.
    (8)  Except  in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  All  revenues  resulting from the imposition of the tax under the
  local laws shall be paid into the treasury of the county of Franklin and
  shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund  of  the  county,
  thereafter  to  be  allocated  for the promotion of tourism development,
  economic  development,  and  other  directly  related   and   supporting
  activities;  provided,  however, that such local laws shall provide that
  the county of Franklin shall be authorized to retain up to a maximum  of
  ten  percent  of  such  revenues to defer the necessary expenses of such
  county in administering such tax.
    (10) If any provision of this section or the  application  thereof  to
  any  person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this
  section and the application  of  such  provision  to  other  persons  or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.


   (11)  Each  enactment of such local law may provide for the imposition
  of a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three  years
  from  the effective date of its enactment. Nothing in this section shall
  prohibit the adoption and enactment  of  local  laws,  pursuant  to  the
  provisions  of  this section, upon the expiration of any other local law
  adopted pursuant to this section.
    * NB There are 2 § 1202-cc's




   * §   1202-cc.   Hotel   or   motel  taxes  in  Delaware  county.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the  county
  of  Delaware is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt and amend local
  laws imposing in such county  a  tax,  in  addition  to  any  other  tax
  authorized  and  imposed  pursuant  to  this  article such as the county
  legislature has or would have the power and  authority  to  impose  upon
  persons  occupying hotel or motel rooms in such county. For the purposes
  of this section, the term "hotel" or "motel" shall mean and include  any
  facility providing lodging on an overnight basis and shall include those
  facilities  designated  and  commonly  known  as "bed and breakfast" and
  "tourist" facilities.
    The rates of such tax shall not exceed two percent  of  the  per  diem
  rental  rate for each room, provided however, that such tax shall not be
  applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes
  of this section the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least thirty
  consecutive days.
    (2) Such tax may be collected and administered by the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of Delaware county by such means  and  in  such
  manner  as  other taxes which are now collected and administered by such
  officers or as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid  by
  the  person  liable  therefor  to  the  owner of the hotel or motel room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel or motel room occupied  for  and  on  account  of  the  county  of
  Delaware  imposing  the tax and that such owner or person entitled to be
  paid the rent or charge shall be liable for the collection  and  payment
  of  the  tax; and that such owner or person entitled to be paid the rent
  or charge shall have the same right in respect  to  collecting  the  tax
  from  the  person  occupying  the  hotel or motel room, or in respect to
  nonpayment of the tax by the person occupying the hotel or  motel  room,
  as  if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same
  time as the rent or charge; provided, however, that the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of the county, specified  in  such  local  law,
  shall  be  joined  as  a  party  in  any action or proceeding brought to
  collect the tax by the owner or by the person entitled to  be  paid  the
  rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  any transaction, by or with any of  the  following  in  accordance  with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this article:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation;
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6)  Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable pursuant
  to  this  section  shall  be  reviewable  for   error,   illegality   or
  unconstitutionality or any other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules if application
  therefor  is  made  to  the  supreme  court within thirty days after the
  giving of the notice of such  final  determination,  provided,  however,
  that  any  such  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil
  practice law and rules shall not be instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for  by  local  law  or  regulation
  shall  be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a
  surety company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state  and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency  and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the supreme
  court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding  be  dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  At  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax imposed pursuant to this  section  shall  have  been
  erroneously,  illegally  or unconstitutionally collected and application
  for the refund thereof  duly  made  to  the  proper  fiscal  officer  or
  officers,  and  such officer or officers shall have made a determination
  denying such  refund,  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable  by  a
  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and
  rules, provided, however, that  such  proceeding  is  instituted  within
  thirty  days after the giving of the notice of such denial, that a final
  determination  of  tax  due  was  not  previously  made,  and  that   an
  undertaking  is filed with the proper fiscal officer or officers in such
  amount and with such sureties as a justice of the  supreme  court  shall
  approve  to  the  effect that if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax
  confirmed, the petitioner will pay  all  costs  and  charges  which  may
  accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding.
    (8)  Except  in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  All  revenues  resulting from the imposition of the tax under the
  local laws shall be paid into the treasury of the county of Delaware and
  shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the county.
    (10) If any provision of this section or the  application  thereof  to
  any  person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this
  section and the application  of  such  provision  to  other  persons  or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    (11)  Each  enactment of such local law may provide for the imposition
  of a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three  years
  from  the effective date of its enactment. Nothing in this section shall
  prohibit the adoption and enactment  of  local  laws,  pursuant  to  the
  provisions  of  this section, upon the expiration of any other local law
  adopted pursuant to this section.
    * NB There are 2 § 1202-cc's




   §  1202-d.  Hotel or motel taxes in Oneida county. (1) Notwithstanding
  any other provisions of law to the contrary, the  county  of  Oneida  is
  hereby  authorized  and empowered to adopt and amend local laws imposing
  in such county a tax, in  addition  to  any  other  tax  authorized  and
  imposed  pursuant  to this article, such as the legislature has or would
  have the power and authority to impose upon persons occupying  hotel  or
  motel  rooms in such county. The rates of such tax shall be five percent
  of the per diem rental rate for each room provided,  however,  such  tax
  shall  not be applicable to a permanent resident of such hotel or motel.
  For the purposes of this section the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall
  mean  a  person  occupying  any room or rooms in a hotel or motel for at
  least thirty consecutive days, also provided that the county  of  Oneida
  may provide in its local law imposing such hotel and motel occupancy tax
  that  such  tax  shall  not  be  applicable  to  a hotel or motel having
  twenty-five rooms or less.
    (2) Such tax may be collected and administered by the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of Oneida county by  such  means  and  in  such
  manner  as  other taxes which are now collected and administered by such
  officers or as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid  by
  the  person  liable  therefor  to  the  owner of the hotel or motel room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel or motel room occupied for and on account of the county of  Oneida
  imposing  the  tax and that such owner or person entitled to be paid the
  rent or charge shall be liable for the collection  and  payment  of  the
  tax;  and  that  such  owner  or  person entitled to be paid the rent or
  charge shall have the same right in respect to collecting the  tax  from
  the  person  occupying  the  hotel  or  motel  room,  or  in  respect to
  nonpayment of the tax by the person occupying the hotel or  motel  room,
  as  if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same
  time as the rent or charge; provided, however, that the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of the county, specified  in  such  local  law,
  shall  be  joined  as  a  party  in  any action or proceeding brought to
  collect the tax by the owner or by the person entitled to  be  paid  the
  rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  act shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon any
  of the following:
    a. The state of New York,  or  any  public  corporation  (including  a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b. The United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is  immune  from
  taxation;
    c.  Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or  foundation  organized  and  operated  exclusively   for   religious,
  charitable  or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial
  part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise
  attempting  to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in
  this paragraph shall include an organization operated  for  the  primary
  purpose  of  carrying  on a trade or business for profit, whether or not
  all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.


   (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or  any
  other  reason  whatsoever by a proceeding under article seventy-eight of
  the civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to  the
  supreme  court within thirty days after the giving of the notice of such
  final determination, provided, however, that any such  proceeding  under
  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and rules shall not be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for by  local  law  or  regulation,
  shall  be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a
  surety company  authorized  to  transmit  business  in  this  state  and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency  and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the supreme
  court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding  be  dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  At  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax  imposed  hereunder  shall  have  been  erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof  duly  made  to  the proper fiscal officer or officers, and such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such determination shall be reviewable by  a  proceeding  under  article
  seventy-eight  of  the  civil practice law and rules, provided, however,
  that such proceeding is instituted within thirty days after  the  giving
  of  the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due was
  not previously made, and that an undertaking is filed  with  the  proper
  fiscal  officer  or  officers in such amount and with such sureties as a
  justice of the supreme court shall approve to the effect  that  if  such
  proceeding  be  dismissed  or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay
  all costs and charges which  may  accrue  in  the  prosecution  of  such
  proceeding.
    (8)  Except  in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  Revenues  resulting from the imposition of tax authorized by this
  section shall be paid into the treasury of  the  county  of  Oneida  and
  shall be credited to and deposited in the Oneida county trust and agency
  fund; the net collections therefrom shall thereafter be allocated by the
  county  legislature  of  Oneida  and  shall be used for the promotion of
  tourism development, economic development, and  other  directly  related
  and  supporting  activities  by a not-for-profit and/or a public benefit
  corporation under contract with the county.  Promotion  of  tourism  and
  conventions being specifically defined as the retaining of staff for the
  purpose  of  placing and purchasing of advertising promoting the county,
  and engaging in such other efforts as are designed to induce tourist and
  convention attraction to Oneida county.
    (10) Each enactment of a local law may provide for the imposition of a
  hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three years  from
  the  date  of  its enactment. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
  adoption and enactment of local laws, pursuant to the provisions of this


 section, upon the expiration of any other local law adopted pursuant  to
  this section.
    (11)  If  any  provision of this act or the application thereof to any
  person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this  act
  and  the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances
  shall not be affected thereby.




   * §  1202-dd.  Hotel  or  motel  taxes  in  the  city  of  Hudson. (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the city of
  Hudson, Columbia county, is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt and
  amend local laws imposing in such city a tax, in addition to  any  other
  tax  authorized  and  imposed  pursuant  to  this  article  such  as the
  legislature has or would have the power and  authority  to  impose  upon
  persons occupying hotel or motel rooms in such city. For the purposes of
  this  section,  the  term  "hotel" or "motel" shall mean and include any
  facility  or  building  or  portion  thereof  providing  lodging  on  an
  overnight  basis  and  shall  include facilities designated and commonly
  known as "bed and breakfast" and "tourist" facilities. The rates of such
  tax shall not exceed four percent of the per diem rental rate  for  each
  room,  provided  however,  that  such  tax  shall not be applicable to a
  permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes of this section
  the term "permanent resident" shall mean a person occupying any room  or
  rooms in a hotel or motel for at least thirty consecutive days.
    (2)  Such  tax  may  be collected and administered by the chief fiscal
  officer of the city of Hudson by such means and in such manner as  other
  taxes  which  are  now collected and administered by such officers or as
  otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid  by
  the  person  liable  therefor  to  the  owner of the hotel or motel room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel or motel room occupied for and on account of the  city  of  Hudson
  imposing  the  tax and that such owner or person entitled to be paid the
  rent or charge shall be liable for the collection  and  payment  of  the
  tax;  and  that  such  owner  or  person entitled to be paid the rent or
  charge shall have the same right in respect to collecting the  tax  from
  the  person  occupying  the  hotel  or  motel  room,  or  in  respect to
  nonpayment of the tax by the person occupying the hotel or  motel  room,
  as  if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same
  time as the rent or charge; provided, however,  that  the  chief  fiscal
  officer  of  the city, specified in such local law, shall be joined as a
  party in any action or proceeding brought to  collect  the  tax  by  the
  owner or by the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  any transaction, by or with any of  the  following  in  accordance  with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this article:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation;
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not
  all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.


   (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall  be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any
  other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of
  the  civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to the
  supreme  court within thirty days after the giving of the notice of such
  final determination, provided, however, that any such  proceeding  under
  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and rules shall not be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for  by  local  law  or  regulation
  shall  be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a
  surety company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state  and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency  and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the supreme
  court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding  be  dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  At  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interest and  penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax  imposed  hereunder  shall  have  been  erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof  duly  made  to  the proper fiscal officer or officers, and such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such determination shall be reviewable by  a  proceeding  under  article
  seventy-eight  of  the  civil practice law and rules, provided, however,
  that such proceeding is instituted within thirty days after  the  giving
  of  the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due was
  not previously made, and that an undertaking is filed  with  the  proper
  fiscal  officer  or  officers in such amount and with such sureties as a
  justice of the supreme court shall approve to the effect  that  if  such
  proceeding  be  dismissed  or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay
  all costs and charges which  may  accrue  in  the  prosecution  of  such
  proceeding.
    (8)  Except  in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  All  revenues  resulting from the imposition of the tax under the
  local laws shall be paid into the treasury of the  city  of  Hudson  and
  shall  be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the city. The
  city shall be authorized to retain the necessary revenue  to  defer  the
  expense  of  the  city in administering such tax and the balance of such
  revenues shall be allocated to the promotion of tourism in the  city  of
  Hudson or used for other lawful purpose as set out in such local law.
    (10)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    (11) Each enactment of such local law may provide for  the  imposition
  of  a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three years
  from the date of its enactment. Nothing in this section  shall  prohibit
  the  adoption and enactment of local laws, pursuant to the provisions of


 this section, upon  the  expiration  of  any  other  local  law  adopted
  pursuant to this section.
    * NB Repealed December 1, 2025
    * NB There are 6 § 1202-dd's




   * §   1202-dd.   Hotel   or   motel   taxes   in  Fulton  county.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the  county
  of  Fulton  is  hereby authorized and empowered to adopt and amend local
  laws imposing in such county  a  tax,  in  addition  to  any  other  tax
  authorized  and  imposed  pursuant  to  this  article such as the county
  legislature has or would have the power and  authority  to  impose  upon
  persons  occupying hotel or motel rooms in such county. For the purposes
  of this section, the term "hotel" or "motel" shall mean and include  any
  facility providing lodging on an overnight basis and shall include those
  facilities  designated  and  commonly  known  as "bed and breakfast" and
  "tourist" facilities.
    The rates of such tax shall not exceed four percent of  the  per  diem
  rental  rate for each room, provided however, that such tax shall not be
  applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes
  of this section the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least thirty
  consecutive days.
    (2) Such tax may be collected and administered by the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of Fulton county by  such  means  and  in  such
  manner  as  other taxes which are now collected and administered by such
  officers or as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid  by
  the  person  liable  therefor  to  the  owner of the hotel or motel room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel or motel room occupied for and on account of the county of  Fulton
  imposing  the  tax and that such owner or person entitled to be paid the
  rent or charge shall be liable for the collection  and  payment  of  the
  tax;  and  that  such  owner  or  person entitled to be paid the rent or
  charge shall have the same right in respect to collecting the  tax  from
  the  person  occupying  the  hotel  or  motel  room,  or  in  respect to
  nonpayment of the tax by the person occupying the hotel or  motel  room,
  as  if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same
  time as the rent or charge; provided, however, that the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of the county, specified  in  such  local  law,
  shall  be  joined  as  a  party  in  any action or proceeding brought to
  collect the tax by the owner or by the person entitled to  be  paid  the
  rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  any transaction, by or with any of  the  following  in  accordance  with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this article:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation;
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6)  Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable pursuant
  to  this  section  shall  be  reviewable  for   error,   illegality   or
  unconstitutionality or any other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules if application
  therefor  is  made  to  the  supreme  court within thirty days after the
  giving of the notice of such  final  determination,  provided,  however,
  that  any  such  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil
  practice law and rules shall not be instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for  by  local  law  or  regulation
  shall  be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a
  surety company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state  and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency  and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the supreme
  court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding  be  dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  At  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax imposed pursuant to this  section  shall  have  been
  erroneously,  illegally  or unconstitutionally collected and application
  for the refund thereof  duly  made  to  the  proper  fiscal  officer  or
  officers,  and  such officer or officers shall have made a determination
  denying such  refund,  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable  by  a
  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and
  rules, provided, however, that  such  proceeding  is  instituted  within
  thirty  days after the giving of the notice of such denial, that a final
  determination  of  tax  due  was  not  previously  made,  and  that   an
  undertaking  is filed with the proper fiscal officer or officers in such
  amount and with such sureties as a justice of the  supreme  court  shall
  approve  to  the  effect that if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax
  confirmed, the petitioner will pay  all  costs  and  charges  which  may
  accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding.
    (8)  Except  in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  All  revenues  resulting from the imposition of the tax under the
  local laws shall be paid into the treasury of the county of  Fulton  and
  shall  be  credited  to and deposited in the general fund of the county,
  thereafter to be allocated for the  promotion  of  tourism  development,
  economic   development,   and  other  directly  related  and  supporting
  activities.
    (10) If any provision of this section or the  application  thereof  to
  any  person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this
  section and the application  of  such  provision  to  other  persons  or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    (11)  Each  enactment of such local law may provide for the imposition
  of a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three  years
  from  the effective date of its enactment. Nothing in this section shall
  prohibit the adoption and enactment  of  local  laws,  pursuant  to  the


 provisions  of  this section, upon the expiration of any other local law
  adopted pursuant to this section.
    * NB There are 6 § 1202-dd's




   * §   1202-dd.   Hotel   or   motel   taxes   in  Fulton  county.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the  county
  of  Fulton  is  hereby authorized and empowered to adopt and amend local
  laws imposing in such county  a  tax,  in  addition  to  any  other  tax
  authorized  and  imposed  pursuant  to  this  article such as the county
  legislature has or would have the power and  authority  to  impose  upon
  persons  occupying hotel or motel rooms in such county. For the purposes
  of this section, the term "hotel" or "motel" shall mean and include  any
  facility providing lodging on an overnight basis and shall include those
  facilities  designated  and  commonly  known  as "bed and breakfast" and
  "tourist" facilities.
    The rates of such tax shall not exceed four percent of  the  per  diem
  rental  rate for each room, provided however, that such tax shall not be
  applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes
  of this section the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least thirty
  consecutive days.
    (2) Such tax may be collected and administered by the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of Fulton county by  such  means  and  in  such
  manner  as  other taxes which are now collected and administered by such
  officers or as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid  by
  the  person  liable  therefor  to  the  owner of the hotel or motel room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel or motel room occupied for and on account of the county of  Fulton
  imposing  the  tax and that such owner or person entitled to be paid the
  rent or charge shall be liable for the collection  and  payment  of  the
  tax;  and  that  such  owner  or  person entitled to be paid the rent or
  charge shall have the same right in respect to collecting the  tax  from
  the  person  occupying  the  hotel  or  motel  room,  or  in  respect to
  nonpayment of the tax by the person occupying the hotel or  motel  room,
  as  if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same
  time as the rent or charge; provided, however, that the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of the county, specified  in  such  local  law,
  shall  be  joined  as  a  party  in  any action or proceeding brought to
  collect the tax by the owner or by the person entitled to  be  paid  the
  rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  any transaction, by or with any of  the  following  in  accordance  with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this article:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation;
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6)  Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable pursuant
  to  this  section  shall  be  reviewable  for   error,   illegality   or
  unconstitutionality or any other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules if application
  therefor  is  made  to  the  supreme  court within thirty days after the
  giving of the notice of such  final  determination,  provided,  however,
  that  any  such  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil
  practice law and rules shall not be instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for  by  local  law  or  regulation
  shall  be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a
  surety company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state  and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency  and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the supreme
  court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding  be  dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  At  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax imposed pursuant to this  section  shall  have  been
  erroneously,  illegally  or unconstitutionally collected and application
  for the refund thereof  duly  made  to  the  proper  fiscal  officer  or
  officers,  and  such officer or officers shall have made a determination
  denying such  refund,  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable  by  a
  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and
  rules, provided, however, that  such  proceeding  is  instituted  within
  thirty  days after the giving of the notice of such denial, that a final
  determination  of  tax  due  was  not  previously  made,  and  that   an
  undertaking  is filed with the proper fiscal officer or officers in such
  amount and with such sureties as a justice of the  supreme  court  shall
  approve  to  the  effect that if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax
  confirmed, the petitioner will pay  all  costs  and  charges  which  may
  accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding.
    (8)  Except  in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  All  revenues  resulting from the imposition of the tax under the
  local laws shall be paid into the treasury of the county of  Fulton  and
  shall  be  credited  to and deposited in the general fund of the county,
  thereafter to be allocated for the  promotion  of  tourism  development,
  economic   development,   and  other  directly  related  and  supporting
  activities.
    (10) If any provision of this section or the  application  thereof  to
  any  person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this
  section and the application  of  such  provision  to  other  persons  or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    (11)  Each  enactment of such local law may provide for the imposition
  of a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three  years
  from  the effective date of its enactment. Nothing in this section shall
  prohibit the adoption and enactment  of  local  laws,  pursuant  to  the


 provisions  of  this section, upon the expiration of any other local law
  adopted pursuant to this section.
    * NB There are 6 § 1202-dd's




   * §  1202-dd.  Hotel  or  motel  taxes  in  the town of Greenburgh and
  specified villages therein and in the  village  of  Sleepy  Hollow.  (1)
  Notwithstanding  any  other  provisions  of  law  to  the  contrary, the
  following municipalities are hereby authorized and  empowered  to  adopt
  and amend local laws imposing a tax on persons occupying rooms in hotels
  or  motels  in such towns or villages therein, as the legislature has or
  would have the power and authority to impose, in addition to  any  other
  tax authorized and imposed pursuant to this article:
    a.  the  town  of Greenburgh, Westchester county, in those portions of
  such town not located within a village;
    b. the villages of  Tarrytown,  Irvington,  Ardsley,  Elmsford,  Dobbs
  Ferry, Hastings-on-Hudson situate in the town of Greenburgh; and
    c. the village of Sleepy Hollow situate in the town of Mount Pleasant,
  Westchester county.
    (2)  For  the  purposes of this section, the term "hotel" shall mean a
  building or portion of it which is regularly used and kept open as  such
  for the lodging of guests. The term "hotel" includes an apartment hotel,
  a motel or a boarding house, whether or not meals are served.
    (3)  The  rate  of  such tax shall not exceed three percent of the per
  diem rental rate for each room whether such room is rented on a daily or
  longer basis.
    (4) Such tax may be collected and administered by the commissioner  of
  finance  or  other  fiscal  officer  of the town of Greenburgh or of any
  specified village therein or of the village of Sleepy Hollow situate  in
  the  town  of  Mount  Pleasant, as the case may be, by such means and in
  such manner as other taxes which are now collected and  administered  by
  such  officers  in  accordance  with  the  town or village charter or as
  otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (5) Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid  by
  the  person  liable  therefor  to  the  owner of the hotel or motel room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel or motel  room  occupied  for  and  on  account  of  the  town  of
  Greenburgh  or  of  any  specified  village therein or of the village of
  Sleepy Hollow situate in the town of Mount Pleasant  imposing  the  tax,
  and  that  such  owner  or person entitled to be paid the rent or charge
  shall be liable for the collection and payment of the tax; and that such
  owner or person entitled to be paid the rent or charge  shall  have  the
  same  right  in  respect to collecting the tax from the person occupying
  the hotel or motel room, or in respect to nonpayment of the tax  by  the
  person  occupying  the hotel or motel room, as if the tax were a part of
  the rent or charge and payable at the same time as the rent  or  charge;
  provided,  however,  that  the  commissioner  of finance or other fiscal
  officers of such towns or villages, specified in such local  law,  shall
  be  joined as a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the
  tax by the owner or by the person  entitled  to  be  paid  the  rent  or
  charge.
    (6)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (7)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  the following:
    a. The state of New York or any public corporation, including a public
  corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another  state
  or  the  dominion  of  Canada,  improvement  district or other political
  subdivision of the state;
    b. The United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is  immune  from
  taxation; and


   c. Any corporation or association or trust or community chest, fund or
  foundation  organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable
  or educational purposes or for the prevention of cruelty to children  or
  animals,  and no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit
  of  any private shareholder or individual and no substantial part of the
  activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise  attempting
  to  influence  legislation;  provided,  however,  that  nothing  in this
  paragraph shall include an organization operated for the primary purpose
  of carrying on a trade or business for profit, whether or not all of its
  profits are payable to one  or  more  organizations  described  in  this
  paragraph.
    (8) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall  be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any
  other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of
  the  civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to the
  supreme court within thirty days after giving  of  the  notice  of  such
  final  determination,  provided, however, that any such proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules shall  not  be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties  thereon  as  may  be  provided for by local law or regulation
  shall be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by  a
  surety  company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the  supreme
  court  shall  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b. At the option of the petitioner such undertaking may be  in  a  sum
  sufficient  to  cover  taxes,  interest  and  penalties  stated  in such
  determination plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it  in
  the  prosecution  of the proceeding, in which event the petitioner shall
  not be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a  condition
  precedent to the application.
    (9)  Where  any  tax  imposed  hereunder  shall have been erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof duly made to the proper fiscal officer  or  officers,  and  such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable by a proceeding under article
  seventy-eight of the civil practice law and  rules,  provided,  however,
  that  such  proceeding is instituted within thirty days after the giving
  of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due  was
  not  previously  made,  and that an undertaking is filed with the proper
  fiscal officer or officers in such amount and with such  sureties  as  a
  justice  of  the  supreme court shall approve to the effect that if such
  proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the  petitioner  will  pay
  all   costs  and  charges  which  accrue  in  the  prosecution  of  such
  proceeding.
    (10) Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (11)  Revenues resulting from the imposition of tax authorized by this
  section shall be paid into the treasury of the town of Greenburgh or  of
  the specified village therein or of the village of Sleepy Hollow situate
  in the town of Mount Pleasant, and shall be credited to and deposited in
  the  general  fund  of  such  town  or  village;  and  may thereafter be


 allocated at the discretion of the board of legislators of the  town  of
  Greenburgh  or  of  the  specified  village therein or of the village of
  Sleepy Hollow situate in the town of Mount  Pleasant  for  any  town  or
  village purpose.
    (12)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    (13) Each enactment of such a local law may provide for the imposition
  of a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three  years
  from  the  date of its enactment. Nothing in this section shall prohibit
  the adoption and enactment of local laws, pursuant to the provisions  of
  this  section,  upon  the  expiration  of  any  other  local law adopted
  pursuant to this section.
    * NB There are 6 § 1202-dd's
    * NB Repealed September 1, 2025




   * §   1202-dd.   Occupancy   tax  in  the  village  of  Harrison.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the  village
  of  Harrison,  in  the  county  of Westchester, is hereby authorized and
  empowered to adopt and amend local laws imposing in such village a  tax,
  in  addition  to  any  other tax authorized and imposed pursuant to this
  article, such as the  legislature  has  or  would  have  the  power  and
  authority  to  impose  upon  persons  occupying any room for hire in any
  hotel. For the purposes of this section, the term "hotel" shall  mean  a
  building  or portion of it which is regularly used and kept open as such
  for the lodging of guests. The term "hotel" includes an apartment hotel,
  a motel or a boarding house, whether or not meals are served.  The  rate
  of  such  tax shall not exceed three percent of the per diem rental rate
  for each room whether such room is rented on a daily or longer basis.
    (2) Such taxes may be collected and administered by the  chief  fiscal
  officer  of  the village of Harrison by such means and in such manner as
  other taxes which are now collected and administered by such officer  or
  as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3)  Such  local laws may provide that any taxes imposed shall be paid
  by the person liable therefor to the owner of the room for hire  in  the
  tourist  home,  inn, club, hotel, motel or other similar place of public
  accommodation occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent  or
  charge the room for hire in the tourist home, inn, club, hotel, motel or
  other  similar place of public accommodation occupied for and on account
  of the village of Harrison imposing the  tax  and  that  such  owner  or
  person  entitled  to  be paid the rent or charge shall be liable for the
  collection and payment of  the  tax;  and  that  such  owner  or  person
  entitled  to  be  paid  the  rent or charge shall have the same right in
  respect to collecting the tax from the person  occupying  the  room  for
  hire in the tourist home, inn, club, hotel, motel or other similar place
  of  public  accommodation, or in respect to nonpayment of the tax by the
  person occupying the room for hire  in  the  tourist  home,  inn,  club,
  hotel,  motel  or similar place of public accommodation, as if the taxes
  were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same  time  as  the
  rent  or charge; provided, however, that the chief fiscal officer of the
  village, specified in such local laws, shall be joined as a party in any
  action or proceeding brought to collect the tax by the owner or  by  the
  person entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the taxes on a monthly basis or on the basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5) This section shall not authorize the imposition of such  tax  upon
  any of the following:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation; or
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    d.  A permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes of this
  section, the term "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  natural  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least thirty
  consecutive days.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or  any
  other  reason  whatsoever by a proceeding under article seventy-eight of
  the civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to  the
  supreme  court  within  thirty  days  after the giving of notice of such
  final determination, provided, however, that any such  proceeding  under
  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and rules shall not be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for by local  laws  or  regulations
  shall be first deposited and there shall be filed an undertaking, issued
  by  a  surety  company authorized to transact business in this state and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the  supreme
  court  shall  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b. At the option of the petitioner, such undertaking may be in  a  sum
  sufficient  to  cover  the taxes, interests and penalties stated in such
  determination plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it  in
  the  prosecution  of the proceeding, in which event the petitioner shall
  not be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a  condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7)  Where  any  taxes  imposed hereunder shall have been erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  therefor duly made to the proper fiscal officer or  officers,  and  such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable by a proceeding under article
  seventy-eight of the civil practice law and  rules,  provided,  however,
  that  such  proceeding is instituted within thirty days after the giving
  of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due  was
  not  previously  made,  and that an undertaking is filed with the proper
  fiscal officer or officers in such amount and with such  sureties  as  a
  justice  of  the  supreme court shall approve to the effect that if such
  proceeding be dismissed or the taxes confirmed, the petitioner will  pay
  all  costs  and  charges  which  may  accrue  in the prosecution of such
  proceeding.
    (8) Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return  with
  intent  to  evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made
  after the expiration of more than three  years  from  the  date  of  the
  filing  of  a  return,  provided, however, that where no return has been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9) All revenues resulting from the imposition of the  tax  under  the
  local  laws  shall  be paid into the treasury of the village of Harrison
  and shall be credited to and  deposited  in  the  general  fund  of  the
  village. Such revenues may be used for any lawful purpose.
    (10) Each enactment of such a local law may provide for the imposition
  of  a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three years
  from the date of its enactment. Nothing in this section  shall  prohibit
  the  adoption and enactment of local laws, pursuant to the provisions of
  this section, upon  the  expiration  of  any  other  local  law  adopted
  pursuant to this section.


   (11)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB There are 6 § 1202-dd's
    * NB Repealed September 1, 2025




   * §   1202-dd.  Occupancy  tax  in  the  village  of  Mamaroneck.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the  village
  of  Mamaroneck,  in  the county of Westchester, is hereby authorized and
  empowered to adopt and amend local laws imposing in such village a  tax,
  in  addition  to  any  other tax authorized and imposed pursuant to this
  article, such as the  legislature  has  or  would  have  the  power  and
  authority  to  impose  upon  persons  occupying any room for hire in any
  hotel. For the purposes of this section, the term "hotel" shall  mean  a
  building  or portion of it which is regularly used and kept open as such
  for the lodging of guests. The term "hotel" includes an apartment hotel,
  a motel or a boarding house, whether or not meals are served.  The  rate
  of  such  tax shall not exceed three percent of the per diem rental rate
  for each room whether such room is rented on a daily or longer basis.
    (2) Such taxes may be collected and administered by the  chief  fiscal
  officer of the village of Mamaroneck by such means and in such manner as
  other  taxes which are now collected and administered by such officer or
  as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any taxes imposed shall  be  paid
  by  the person liable therefore to the owner of the room for hire in the
  tourist home, inn, club, hotel, motel or other similar place  of  public
  accommodation  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or
  charge for the room for hire in the  tourist  home,  inn,  club,  hotel,
  motel or other similar place of public accommodation occupied for and on
  account  of  the  village  of  Mamaroneck imposing the tax and that such
  owner or person entitled to be paid the rent or charge shall  be  liable
  for the collection and payment of the tax; and that such owner or person
  entitled  to  be  paid  the  rent or charge shall have the same right in
  respect to collecting the tax from the person  occupying  the  room  for
  hire in the tourist home, inn, club, hotel, motel or other similar place
  of  public  accommodation, or in respect to nonpayment of the tax by the
  person occupying the room for hire  in  the  tourist  home,  inn,  club,
  hotel,  motel  or similar place of public accommodation, as if the taxes
  were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same  time  as  the
  rent  or charge; provided, however, that the chief fiscal officer of the
  village, specified in such local laws, shall be joined as a party in any
  action or proceeding brought to collect the tax by the owner or  by  the
  person entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the taxes on a monthly basis or on the basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5) This section shall not authorize the imposition of such  tax  upon
  any of the following:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation; or
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    d.  A permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes of this
  section, the term "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  natural  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least thirty
  consecutive days.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or  any
  other  reason  whatsoever by a proceeding under article seventy-eight of
  the civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to  the
  supreme  court  within  thirty  days  after the giving of notice of such
  final determination, provided, however, that any such  proceeding  under
  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and rules shall not be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for by local  laws  or  regulations
  shall be first deposited and there shall be filed an undertaking, issued
  by  a  surety  company authorized to transact business in this state and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the  supreme
  court  shall  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b. At the option of the petitioner, such undertaking may be in  a  sum
  sufficient  to  cover  the taxes, interests and penalties stated in such
  determination plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it  in
  the  prosecution  of the proceeding, in which event the petitioner shall
  not be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a  condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7)  Where  any  taxes  imposed hereunder shall have been erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  therefor duly made to the proper fiscal officer or  officers,  and  such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable by a proceeding under article
  seventy-eight of the civil practice law and  rules,  provided,  however,
  that  such  proceeding is instituted within thirty days after the giving
  of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due  was
  not  previously  made,  and that an undertaking is filed with the proper
  fiscal officer or officers in such amount and with such  sureties  as  a
  justice  of  the  supreme court shall approve to the effect that if such
  proceeding be dismissed or the taxes confirmed, the petitioner will  pay
  all  costs  and  charges  which  may  accrue  in the prosecution of such
  proceeding.
    (8) Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return  with
  intent  to  evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made
  after the expiration of more than three  years  from  the  date  of  the
  filing  of  a  return,  provided, however, that where no return has been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9) All revenues resulting from the imposition of the  tax  under  the
  local  laws shall be paid into the treasury of the village of Mamaroneck
  and shall be credited to and  deposited  in  the  general  fund  of  the
  village. Such revenues may be used for any lawful purpose.
    (10) Each enactment of such a local law may provide for the imposition
  of  a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three years
  from the date of its enactment. Nothing in this section  shall  prohibit
  the  adoption and enactment of local laws, pursuant to the provisions of
  this section, upon  the  expiration  of  any  other  local  law  adopted
  pursuant to this section.


   (11)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB There are 6 § 1202-dd's
    * NB Repealed December 31, 2025




   * §  1202-dd.  Occupancy  tax  in  the  village  of  Port Chester. (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the  village
  of  Port Chester, in the county of Westchester, is hereby authorized and
  empowered to adopt and amend local laws imposing in such village a  tax,
  in  addition  to  any  other tax authorized and imposed pursuant to this
  article, such as the  legislature  has  or  would  have  the  power  and
  authority  to  impose  upon  persons  occupying any room for hire in any
  hotel. For the purposes of this section, the term "hotel" shall  mean  a
  building  or portion of it which is regularly used and kept open as such
  for the lodging of guests. The term "hotel" includes an apartment hotel,
  a motel or a boarding house, whether or not meals are served.  The  rate
  of  such  tax shall not exceed three percent of the per diem rental rate
  for each room whether such room is rented on a daily or longer basis.
    (2) Such taxes may be collected and administered by the  chief  fiscal
  officer  of the village of Port Chester by such means and in such manner
  as other taxes which are now collected and administered by such  officer
  or as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3)  Such  local laws may provide that any taxes imposed shall be paid
  by the person liable therefor to the owner of the room for hire  in  the
  tourist  home,  inn, club, hotel, motel or other similar place of public
  accommodation occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent  or
  charge  for  the  room  for  hire in the tourist home, inn, club, hotel,
  motel or other similar place of public accommodation occupied for and on
  account of the village of Port Chester imposing the tax  and  that  such
  owner  or  person entitled to be paid the rent or charge shall be liable
  for the collection and payment of the tax; and that such owner or person
  entitled to be paid the rent or charge shall  have  the  same  right  in
  respect  to  collecting  the  tax from the person occupying the room for
  hire in the tourist home, inn, club, hotel, motel or other similar place
  of public accommodation, or in respect to nonpayment of the tax  by  the
  person  occupying  the  room  for  hire  in the tourist home, inn, club,
  hotel, motel or similar place of public accommodation, as if  the  taxes
  were  a  part  of the rent or charge and payable at the same time as the
  rent or charge; provided, however, that the chief fiscal officer of  the
  village, specified in such local laws, shall be joined as a party in any
  action  or  proceeding brought to collect the tax by the owner or by the
  person entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4) Such local laws may provide for the  filing  of  returns  and  the
  payment of the taxes on a monthly basis or on the basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  any of the following:
    a. The state of New York,  or  any  public  corporation  (including  a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b. The United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is  immune  from
  taxation; or
    c.  Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or  foundation  organized  and  operated  exclusively   for   religious,
  charitable  or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial
  part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise
  attempting  to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in
  this paragraph shall include an organization operated  for  the  primary
  purpose  of  carrying  on a trade or business for profit, whether or not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    d.  A permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes of this
  section, the term "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  natural  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least thirty
  consecutive days.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or  any
  other  reason  whatsoever by a proceeding under article seventy-eight of
  the civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to  the
  supreme  court  within  thirty  days  after the giving of notice of such
  final determination, provided, however, that any such  proceeding  under
  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and rules shall not be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for by local  laws  or  regulations
  shall be first deposited and there shall be filed an undertaking, issued
  by  a  surety  company authorized to transact business in this state and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the  supreme
  court  shall  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b. At the option of the petitioner, such undertaking may be in  a  sum
  sufficient  to  cover  the  taxes, interest and penalties stated in such
  determination plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it  in
  the  prosecution  of the proceeding, in which event the petitioner shall
  not be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a  condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7)  Where  any  taxes  imposed hereunder shall have been erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  therefor duly made to the proper fiscal officer or  officers,  and  such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable by a proceeding under article
  seventy-eight of the civil practice law and  rules,  provided,  however,
  that  such  proceeding is instituted within thirty days after the giving
  of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due  was
  not  previously  made,  and that an undertaking is filed with the proper
  fiscal officer or officers in such amount and with such  sureties  as  a
  justice  of  the  supreme court shall approve to the effect that if such
  proceeding be dismissed or the taxes confirmed, the petitioner will  pay
  all  costs  and  charges  which  may  accrue  in the prosecution of such
  proceeding.
    (8) Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return  with
  intent  to  evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made
  after the expiration of more than three  years  from  the  date  of  the
  filing  of  a  return,  provided, however, that where no return has been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9) All revenues resulting from the imposition of the  tax  under  the
  local  laws  shall  be  paid  into  the  treasury of the village of Port
  Chester and shall be credited to and deposited in the  general  fund  of
  such village. Such revenues may be used for any lawful purpose.
    (10) Each enactment of such a local law may provide for the imposition
  of  a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three years
  from the date of its enactment. Nothing in this section  shall  prohibit
  the  adoption and enactment of local laws, pursuant to the provisions of
  this section, upon  the  expiration  of  any  other  local  law  adopted
  pursuant to this section.


   (11)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB There are 6 § 1202-dd's
    * NB Repealed December 31, 2025




   §   1202-e.   Hotel   or   motel  taxes  in  Schenectady  county.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the  county
  of  Schenectady  is  hereby  authorized and empowered to adopt and amend
  local laws imposing in such county a tax, in addition to any  other  tax
  authorized and imposed pursuant to this article, such as the legislature
  has  or  would  have  the  power  and  authority  to impose upon persons
  occupying hotel or motel rooms in such county. The  rates  of  such  tax
  shall  be  five  percent  of  the  per  diem  rental  rate for each room
  provided, however, such tax shall  not  be  applicable  to  a  permanent
  resident  of  such  hotel or motel. For the purposes of this section the
  term "permanent resident" shall mean a  person  occupying  any  room  or
  rooms in a hotel or motel for at least ninety consecutive days.
    (2)  Such  tax  may  be  collected  and  administered  by  the  county
  commissioner of finance or other fiscal officers of  Schenectady  county
  by  such means and in such manner as other taxes which are now collected
  and administered by such officers or as otherwise  may  be  provided  by
  such local law.
    (3)  Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid by
  the person liable therefor to the owner  of  the  hotel  or  motel  room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel  or  motel  room  occupied  for  and  on  account of the county of
  Schenectady imposing the tax and that such owner or person  entitled  to
  be  paid  the  rent  or  charge  shall  be liable for the collection and
  payment of the tax; and that such owner or person entitled  to  be  paid
  the  rent  or  charge shall have the same right in respect to collecting
  the tax from the person occupying the hotel or motel room, or in respect
  to nonpayment of the tax by the person  occupying  the  hotel  or  motel
  room, as if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the
  same  time  as  the  rent  or charge; provided, however, that the county
  commissioner  of  finance  or  other  fiscal  officers  of  the  county,
  specified in such local law, shall be joined as a party in any action or
  proceeding  brought  to  collect  the  tax by the owner or by the person
  entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4) Such local laws may provide for the  filing  of  returns  and  the
  payment  of  the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5) This section shall not authorize the imposition of such  tax  upon
  any of the following:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation;
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not
  all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall  be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any
  other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of


 the  civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to the
  supreme court within thirty days after the giving of the notice of  such
  final  determination,  provided, however, that any such proceeding under
  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and rules shall not be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for  by  local  law  or  regulation
  shall  be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a
  surety company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state  and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency  and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the supreme
  court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding  be  dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding or;
    b.  At  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax  imposed  hereunder  shall  have  been  erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof  duly  made  to  the proper fiscal officer or officers, and such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such determination shall be reviewable by  a  proceeding  under  article
  seventy-eight  of  the  civil practice law and rules, provided, however,
  that such proceeding is instituted within thirty days after  the  giving
  of  the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due was
  not previously made, and that an undertaking is filed  with  the  proper
  fiscal  officer  or  officers in such amount and with such sureties as a
  justice of the supreme court shall approve to the effect  that  if  such
  proceeding  be  dismissed  or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay
  all costs and charges which  may  accrue  in  the  prosecution  of  such
  proceeding.
    (8)  Except  in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  Revenues  resulting from the imposition of tax authorized by this
  section shall be paid into the treasury of the county of Schenectady and
  shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund  of  the  county;
  the net collections therefrom shall thereafter be allocated by the board
  of  representatives  of  Schenectady  county  only  for  direct  tourism
  promotional activities, and for the promotion  and  development  of  the
  performing  and  visual  arts  in  the  county  of  Schenectady,  as the
  cornerstone of the visitor and tourism industry in Schenectady county.
    (10) If any provision of this section or the  application  thereof  to
  any  person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this
  section and the application  of  such  provision  to  other  persons  or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.




   * §  1202-ee.  Hotel  or  motel  taxes  in  the  town of Woodbury. (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the town of
  Woodbury, in the county of Orange, is hereby authorized and empowered to
  adopt and amend local laws imposing in such town a tax, in  addition  to
  any  other  tax  authorized and imposed pursuant to this article such as
  the legislature has or would have the power and authority to impose upon
  persons occupying hotel or motel rooms in such town. For the purposes of
  this section, the term "hotel" or "motel" shall  mean  and  include  any
  facility  consisting  of  rentable  units  and  providing  lodging on an
  overnight basis  and  shall  include  those  facilities  designated  and
  commonly  known  as  "bed  and  breakfast" and "tourist" facilities. The
  rates of such tax shall not exceed five percent of the per  diem  rental
  rate  for  each  room,  provided  however,  that  such  tax shall not be
  applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes
  of this section the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least ninety
  consecutive days.
    (2) Such tax may be collected and administered  by  the  chief  fiscal
  officer  of  the  town  of  Woodbury by such means and in such manner as
  other taxes which are now collected and administered by such officer  or
  as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3)  Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid by
  the person liable therefor to the owner  of  the  hotel  or  motel  room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel  or motel room occupied for and on account of the town of Woodbury
  imposing the tax and that such owner or person entitled to be  paid  the
  rent  or  charge  shall  be liable for the collection and payment of the
  tax; and that such owner or person entitled  to  be  paid  the  rent  or
  charge  shall  have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from
  the person  occupying  the  hotel  or  motel  room,  or  in  respect  to
  nonpayment  of  the tax by the person occupying the hotel or motel room,
  as if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the  same
  time  as  the  rent  or charge; provided, however, that the chief fiscal
  officer of the town, specified in such local law, shall be joined  as  a
  party  in  any  action  or  proceeding brought to collect the tax by the
  owner or by the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4) Such local laws may provide for the  filing  of  returns  and  the
  payment  of  the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5) This section shall not authorize the imposition of such  tax  upon
  any  transaction,  by  or  with  any of the following in accordance with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this chapter:
    a. The state of New York,  or  any  public  corporation  (including  a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b. The United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is  immune  from
  taxation;
    c.  Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or  foundation  organized  and  operated  exclusively   for   religious,
  charitable  or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial
  part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise
  attempting  to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in
  this paragraph shall include an organization operated  for  the  primary
  purpose  of  carrying  on a trade or business for profit, whether or not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall  be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any
  other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of
  the  civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to the
  supreme court within thirty days after the giving of the notice of  such
  final  determination,  provided, however, that any such proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules shall  not  be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties  thereon  as  may  be provided for by local law shall be first
  deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a surety  company
  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state  and approved by the
  superintendent  of  insurance  of  this  state  as   to   solvency   and
  responsibility,  in  such amount as a justice of the supreme court shall
  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed  or  the  tax
  confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which may accrue
  in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  At  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax  imposed  hereunder  shall  have  been  erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof  duly  made  to  the proper fiscal officer or officers, and such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such determination shall be reviewable by  a  proceeding  under  article
  seventy-eight  of  the  civil practice law and rules, provided, however,
  that such proceeding is instituted within thirty days after  the  giving
  of  the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due was
  not previously made, and that an undertaking is filed  with  the  proper
  fiscal  officer  or  officers in such amount and with such sureties as a
  justice of the supreme court shall approve to the effect  that  if  such
  proceeding  be  dismissed  or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay
  all costs and charges which  may  accrue  in  the  prosecution  of  such
  proceeding.
    (8)  Except  in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  All  revenues  resulting from the imposition of the tax under the
  local laws shall be paid into the treasury of the town of  Woodbury  and
  shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the town. Such
  revenues may be used for any lawful purpose.
    (10)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB Repealed December 31, 2025




   * §  1202-eee.  Hotel  or  motel taxes in the village of Woodbury. (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the village
  of Woodbury, in the county of Orange, is hereby authorized and empowered
  to adopt and amend local  laws  imposing  in  such  village  a  tax,  in
  addition  to  any  other  tax  authorized  and  imposed pursuant to this
  article such as  the  legislature  has  or  would  have  the  power  and
  authority  to impose upon persons occupying hotel or motel rooms in such
  village. For the purposes of this section, the term "hotel"  or  "motel"
  shall  mean  and  include  any facility consisting of rentable units and
  providing  lodging  on  an  overnight  basis  and  shall  include  those
  facilities  designated  and  commonly  known  as "bed and breakfast" and
  "tourist" facilities. The rates  of  such  tax  shall  not  exceed  five
  percent  of  the  per  diem rental rate for each room, provided however,
  that such tax shall not be applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel
  or motel. For the purposes of this section the term "permanent resident"
  shall mean a person occupying any room or rooms in a hotel or motel  for
  at least ninety consecutive days.
    (2)  Such  tax  may  be collected and administered by the chief fiscal
  officer of the village of Woodbury by such means and in such  manner  as
  other  taxes which are now collected and administered by such officer or
  as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid  by
  the  person  liable  therefor  to  the  owner of the hotel or motel room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel or motel room occupied for  and  on  account  of  the  village  of
  Woodbury  imposing  the tax and that such owner or person entitled to be
  paid the rent or charge shall be liable for the collection  and  payment
  of  the  tax; and that such owner or person entitled to be paid the rent
  or charge shall have the same right in respect  to  collecting  the  tax
  from  the  person  occupying  the  hotel or motel room, or in respect to
  nonpayment of the tax by the person occupying the hotel or  motel  room,
  as  if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same
  time as the rent or charge; provided, however,  that  the  chief  fiscal
  officer  of the village, specified in such local law, shall be joined as
  a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the  tax  by  the
  owner or by the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  any transaction, by or with any of  the  following  in  accordance  with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this article:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation;
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall  be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any
  other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of
  the  civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to the
  supreme court within thirty days after the giving of the notice of  such
  final  determination,  provided, however, that any such proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules shall  not  be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties  thereon  as  may  be provided for by local law shall be first
  deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a surety  company
  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state  and approved by the
  superintendent  of  insurance  of  this  state  as   to   solvency   and
  responsibility,  in  such amount as a justice of the supreme court shall
  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed  or  the  tax
  confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which may accrue
  in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  At  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax  imposed  hereunder  shall  have  been  erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof  duly  made  to  the proper fiscal officer or officers, and such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such determination shall be reviewable by  a  proceeding  under  article
  seventy-eight  of  the  civil practice law and rules, provided, however,
  that such proceeding is instituted within thirty days after  the  giving
  of  the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due was
  not previously made, and that an undertaking is filed  with  the  proper
  fiscal  officer  or  officers in such amount and with such sureties as a
  justice of the supreme court shall approve to the effect  that  if  such
  proceeding  be  dismissed  or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay
  all costs and charges which  may  accrue  in  the  prosecution  of  such
  proceeding.
    (8)  Except  in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  All  revenues  resulting from the imposition of the tax under the
  local laws shall be paid into the treasury of the  village  of  Woodbury
  and  shall  be  credited  to  and  deposited  in the general fund of the
  village. Such revenues may be used for any lawful purpose.
    (10) If any provision of this section or the  application  thereof  to
  any  person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this
  section and the application  of  such  provision  to  other  persons  or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB Repealed August 23, 2025




   § 1202-f. Hotel or motel taxes in Tompkins county. (1) Notwithstanding
  any  other  provisions of law to the contrary, the county of Tompkins is
  hereby authorized and empowered to adopt and amend local  laws  imposing
  in  such  county  a  tax,  in  addition  to any other tax authorized and
  imposed pursuant to this article such as the legislature  has  or  would
  have  the  power and authority to impose upon persons occupying hotel or
  motel rooms in such county. For the purposes of this section,  the  term
  "hotel" or "motel" shall mean and include any facility providing lodging
  on  an overnight basis and shall include those facilities designated and
  commonly known as "bed and breakfast" and "tourist" facilities.
    The rates of such tax shall not exceed five percent of  the  per  diem
  rental  rate for each room, provided however, that such tax shall not be
  applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes
  of this section the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least thirty
  consecutive days.
    (2) Such tax may be collected and administered by  the  deputy  county
  administrator  of finance or other fiscal officers of Tompkins county by
  such means and in such manner as other taxes which are now collected and
  administered by such officers or as otherwise may be  provided  by  such
  local law.
    (3)  Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid by
  the person liable therefor to the owner  of  the  hotel  or  motel  room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel  or  motel  room  occupied  for  and  on  account of the county of
  Tompkins imposing the tax and that such owner or person entitled  to  be
  paid  the  rent or charge shall be liable for the collection and payment
  of the tax; and that such owner or person entitled to be paid  the  rent
  or  charge  shall  have  the same right in respect to collecting the tax
  from the person occupying the hotel or motel  room,  or  in  respect  to
  nonpayment  of  the tax by the person occupying the hotel or motel room,
  as if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the  same
  time  as  the  rent or charge; provided, however, that the deputy county
  administrator of  finance  or  other  fiscal  officers  of  the  county,
  specified in such local law, shall be joined as a party in any action or
  proceeding  brought  to  collect  the  tax by the owner or by the person
  entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4) Such local laws may provide for the  filing  of  returns  and  the
  payment  of  the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5) This section shall not authorize the imposition of such  tax  upon
  any  transaction,  by  or  with  any of the following in accordance with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this chapter:
    a. The state of New York,  or  any  public  corporation  (including  a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b. The United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is  immune  from
  taxation;
    c.  Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or  foundation  organized  and  operated  exclusively   for   religious,
  charitable  or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial
  part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise
  attempting   to  influence  legislation;  provided,  however,  that  the
  provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to an organization operated
  for the primary purpose of carrying on a trade or business  for  profit,


 whether  or  not  all  of  its  profits  are  payable  to  one  or  more
  organizations described in this paragraph. Nothing in  this  subdivision
  shall  prohibit  any  organization exempt from taxation pursuant to this
  paragraph  from  collecting  the  taxes imposed pursuant to this section
  from individuals who are doing business with  such  exempt  organization
  and who are not exempt from taxation pursuant to this subdivision.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall  be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any
  other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of
  the  civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to the
  supreme court within thirty days after the giving of the notice of  such
  final  determination,  provided, however, that any such proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules shall  not  be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties  thereon  as  may  be  provided for by local law or regulation
  shall be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by  a
  surety  company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the  supreme
  court  shall  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b. At the option of the petitioner such undertaking may be  in  a  sum
  sufficient  to  cover  the taxes, interests and penalties stated in such
  determination plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it  in
  the  prosecution  of the proceeding, in which event the petitioner shall
  not be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a  condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7)  Where  any  tax  imposed  hereunder  shall have been erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof duly made to the proper fiscal officer  or  officers,  and  such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable by a proceeding under article
  seventy-eight of the civil practice law and  rules,  provided,  however,
  that  such  proceeding is instituted within thirty days after the giving
  of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due  was
  not  previously  made,  and that an undertaking is filed with the proper
  fiscal officer or officers in such amount and with such  sureties  as  a
  justice  of  the  supreme court shall approve to the effect that if such
  proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the  petitioner  will  pay
  all  costs  and  charges  which  may  accrue  in the prosecution of such
  proceeding.
    (8) Except in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent  return  with
  intent  to  evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made
  after the expiration of more than three  years  from  the  date  of  the
  filing  of  a  return,  provided, however, that where no return has been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9) All revenues resulting from the imposition of the  tax  under  the
  local  laws shall be paid into the treasury of Tompkins county and shall
  be credited to  and  deposited  in  the  general  fund  of  the  county,
  thereafter  to  be  allocated  for  tourist  and convention development;
  provided, however, that such local laws shall provide  that  the  county
  shall  be  authorized  to  retain up to a maximum of ten percent of such
  revenue to defer the necessary expenses of the county  in  administering
  such  tax.  The revenue derived from the tax, after deducting the amount
  provided for administering such tax, as  so  authorized  by  local  law,
  shall  be  allocated  to enhance the general economy of Tompkins county,


 its  cities,  towns,  and  villages,  through   promotion   of   tourist
  activities, conventions, trade shows, special events, and other directly
  related and supporting activities.
    (10)  If  any  provision of this act or the application thereof to any
  person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this  act
  and  the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances
  shall not be affected thereby.




   * §   1202-ff.   Hotel   or   motel  taxes  in  Chenango  county.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the  county
  of  Chenango is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt and amend local
  laws imposing in such county  a  tax,  in  addition  to  any  other  tax
  authorized  and  imposed  pursuant  to  this  article such as the county
  legislature has or would have the power and  authority  to  impose  upon
  persons  occupying hotel or motel rooms in such county. For the purposes
  of this section, the term "hotel" or "motel" shall mean and include  any
  facility providing lodging on an overnight basis and shall include those
  facilities  designated  and  commonly  known  as "bed and breakfast" and
  "tourist" facilities.
    The rates of such tax shall not exceed four percent of  the  per  diem
  rental  rate for each room, provided however, that such tax shall not be
  applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes
  of this section the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least thirty
  consecutive days.
    (2) Such tax may be collected and administered by the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of Chenango county by such means  and  in  such
  manner  as  other taxes which are now collected and administered by such
  officers or as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid  by
  the  person  liable  therefor  to  the  owner of the hotel or motel room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel or motel room occupied  for  and  on  account  of  the  county  of
  Chenango  imposing  the tax and that such owner or person entitled to be
  paid the rent or charge shall be liable for the collection  and  payment
  of  the  tax; and that such owner or person entitled to be paid the rent
  or charge shall have the same right in respect  to  collecting  the  tax
  from  the  person  occupying  the  hotel or motel room, or in respect to
  nonpayment of the tax by the person occupying the hotel or  motel  room,
  as  if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same
  time as the rent or charge; provided, however, that the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of the county, specified  in  such  local  law,
  shall  be  joined  as  a  party  in  any action or proceeding brought to
  collect the tax by the owner or by the person entitled to  be  paid  the
  rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  any transaction, by or with any of  the  following  in  accordance  with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this article:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation;
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6)  Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable pursuant
  to  this  section  shall  be  reviewable  for   error,   illegality   or
  unconstitutionality or any other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules if application
  therefor  is  made  to  the  supreme  court within thirty days after the
  giving of the notice of such  final  determination,  provided,  however,
  that  any  such  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil
  practice law and rules shall not be instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for  by  local  law  or  regulation
  shall  be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a
  surety company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state  and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency  and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the supreme
  court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding  be  dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  At  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax imposed pursuant to this  section  shall  have  been
  erroneously,  illegally  or unconstitutionally collected and application
  for the refund thereof  duly  made  to  the  proper  fiscal  officer  or
  officers,  and  such officer or officers shall have made a determination
  denying such  refund,  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable  by  a
  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and
  rules, provided, however, that  such  proceeding  is  instituted  within
  thirty  days after the giving of the notice of such denial, that a final
  determination  of  tax  due  was  not  previously  made,  and  that   an
  undertaking  is filed with the proper fiscal officer or officers in such
  amount and with such sureties as a justice of the  supreme  court  shall
  approve  to  the  effect that if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax
  confirmed, the petitioner will pay  all  costs  and  charges  which  may
  accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding.
    (8)  Except  in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  All  revenues  resulting from the imposition of the tax under the
  local laws shall be paid into the treasury of the county of Chenango and
  shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund  of  the  county,
  thereafter  to  be  allocated  for the promotion of tourism development,
  economic  development,  and  other  directly  related   and   supporting
  activities.
    (10)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    (11) Each enactment of such local law may provide for  the  imposition
  of  a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three years
  from the effective date of its enactment. Nothing in this section  shall
  prohibit  the  adoption  and  enactment  of  local laws, pursuant to the


 provisions of this section, upon the expiration of any other  local  law
  adopted pursuant to this section.
    * NB There are 2 § 1202-ff's




   * §   1202-ff.   Occupancy  tax  in  the  city  of  Port  Jervis.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the city  of
  Port Jervis, in the county of Orange, is hereby authorized and empowered
  to  adopt  and amend local laws imposing in such city a tax, in addition
  to any other tax authorized and imposed pursuant to this  article,  such
  as  the  legislature has or would have the power and authority to impose
  upon persons occupying any room for hire in any hotel. For the  purposes
  of this section, the term "hotel" shall mean a building or portion of it
  which is regularly used and kept open as such for the lodging of guests.
  The  term  "hotel"  includes  an  apartment hotel, a motel or a boarding
  house, whether or not meals are served. The rate of such tax  shall  not
  exceed  three  percent of the per diem rental rate for each room whether
  such room is rented on a daily or longer basis.
    (2) Such taxes may be collected and administered by the  chief  fiscal
  officer  of  the city of Port Jervis by such means and in such manner as
  other taxes which are now collected and administered by such officer  or
  as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3)  Such  local laws may provide that any taxes imposed shall be paid
  by the person liable therefor to the owner of the room for hire  in  the
  tourist  home,  inn, club, hotel, motel or other similar place of public
  accommodation occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent  or
  charge  the  room for hire in the tourist home, inn, club, hotel, motel,
  or other similar place of  public  accommodation  occupied  for  and  on
  account  of the city of Port Jervis imposing the tax and that such owner
  or person entitled to be paid the rent or charge shall be liable for the
  collection and payment of  the  tax;  and  that  such  owner  or  person
  entitled  to  be  paid  the  rent or charge shall have the same right in
  respect to collecting the tax from the person  occupying  the  room  for
  hire in the tourist home, inn, club, hotel, motel or other similar place
  of  public  accommodation, or in respect to nonpayment of the tax by the
  person occupying the room for hire  in  the  tourist  home,  inn,  club,
  hotel,  motel, or similar place of public accommodation, as if the taxes
  were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same  time  as  the
  rent  or  charge; provided however, that the chief fiscal officer of the
  city, specified in such local laws, shall be joined as a  party  in  any
  action  or  proceeding brought to collect the tax by the owner or by the
  person entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4) Such local laws may provide for the  filing  of  returns  and  the
  payment  of  the taxes on a monthly basis or on a basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5) This section shall not authorize the imposition of such  tax  upon
  any of the following:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b. The United States of America, insofar as it is immune for taxation;
  or
    c.  Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or  foundation  organized  and  operated  exclusively   for   religious,
  charitable  or  education  purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial
  part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise
  attempting  to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in
  this paragraph shall include an organization operated  for  the  primary
  purpose  of  carrying  on a trade or business for profit, whether or not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    d.  A permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes of this
  section, the term "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  natural  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least thirty
  consecutive days.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or  any
  other  reason  whatsoever by a proceeding under article seventy-eight of
  the civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to  the
  supreme  court  within  thirty  days  after the giving of notice of such
  final determination, provided, however, that any such  proceeding  under
  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and rules shall not be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for by local  laws  or  regulations
  shall be first deposited and there shall be filed an undertaking, issued
  by  a  surety  company authorized to transact business in this state and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the  supreme
  court  shall  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b. At the option of the petitioner, such undertaking may be in  a  sum
  sufficient  to  cover  the taxes, interests and penalties stated in such
  determination plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it  in
  the  prosecution  of the proceeding, in which event the petitioner shall
  not be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a  condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7)  Where  any  taxes  imposed hereunder shall have been erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  therefor duly made to the proper fiscal officer or  officers,  and  such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable by a proceeding under article
  seventy-eight of the civil practice law and  rules,  provided,  however,
  that  such  proceeding is instituted within thirty days after the giving
  of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due  was
  not  previously  made,  and that an undertaking is filed with the proper
  fiscal officer or officers in such amount and with such  sureties  as  a
  justice  of  the  supreme court shall approve to the effect that if such
  proceeding be dismissed or the taxes confirmed, the petitioner will  pay
  all  costs  and  charges  which  may  accrue  in the prosecution of such
  proceeding.
    (8) Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return  with
  intent  to  evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made
  after the expiration of more than three  years  from  the  date  of  the
  filing  of  a  return,  provided, however, that where no return has been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9) All revenues resulting from the imposition of the  tax  under  the
  local  laws  shall  be paid into the treasury of the city of Port Jervis
  and shall be credited to and deposited in the hospitality  tax  fund  of
  such  city.  Such  revenues  may be used for infrastructure development,
  construction, rehabilitation and promotion of designation tourism as  so
  determined by the common council of the city of Port Jervis.
    (10) Each enactment of such a local law may provide for the imposition
  of  a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three years
  from the date of its enactment. Nothing in this section  shall  prohibit
  the  adoption and enactment of local laws, pursuant to the provisions of


 this section, upon  the  expiration  of  any  other  local  law  adopted
  pursuant to this section.
    (11)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB There are 2 § 1202-ff's
    * NB Repealed September 1, 2025




   * §   1202-g.   Hotel   or   motel   taxes  in  Cortland  county.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the  county
  of  Cortland is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt and amend local
  laws imposing in such county  a  tax,  in  addition  to  any  other  tax
  authorized  and imposed pursuant to this article such as the legislature
  has or would have  the  power  and  authority  to  impose  upon  persons
  occupying  hotel or motel rooms in such county. For the purposes of this
  section, the term "hotel" or "motel" shall mean and include any facility
  providing  lodging  on  an  overnight  basis  and  shall  include  those
  facilities  designated  and  commonly  known  as "bed and breakfast" and
  "tourist" facilities.
    The rates of such tax shall not exceed five percent of  the  per  diem
  rental  rate for each room, provided however, that such tax shall not be
  applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes
  of this section the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least thirty
  consecutive days.
    (2) Such tax may be collected and administered by the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of Cortland county by such means  and  in  such
  manner  as  other taxes which are now collected and administered by such
  officers or as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid  by
  the  person  liable  therefor  to  the  owner of the hotel or motel room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel or motel room occupied  for  and  on  account  of  the  county  of
  Cortland  imposing  the tax and that such owner or person entitled to be
  paid the rent or charge shall be liable for the collection  and  payment
  of  the  tax; and that such owner or person entitled to be paid the rent
  or charge shall have the same right in respect  to  collecting  the  tax
  from  the  person  occupying  the  hotel or motel room, or in respect to
  nonpayment of the tax by the person occupying the hotel or  motel  room,
  as  if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same
  time as the rent or charge; provided, however, that the county treasurer
  or other fiscal officers of the county, specified  in  such  local  law,
  shall  be  joined  as  a  party  in  any action or proceeding brought to
  collect the tax by the owner or by the person entitled to  be  paid  the
  rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  any transaction, by or with any of  the  following  in  accordance  with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this chapter:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation;
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall  be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any
  other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of
  the  civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to the
  supreme court within thirty days after the giving of the notice of  such
  final  determination,  provided, however, that any such proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules shall  not  be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties  thereon  as  may  be  provided for by local law or regulation
  shall be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by  a
  surety  company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the  supreme
  court  shall  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b. At the option of the petitioner such undertaking may be  in  a  sum
  sufficient  to  cover  the taxes, interests and penalties stated in such
  determination plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it  in
  the  prosecution  of the proceeding, in which event the petitioner shall
  not be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a  condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7)  Where  any  tax  imposed  hereunder  shall have been erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof duly made to the proper fiscal officer  or  officers,  and  such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable by a proceeding under article
  seventy-eight of the civil practice law and  rules,  provided,  however,
  that  such  proceeding is instituted within thirty days after the giving
  of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due  was
  not  previously  made,  and that an undertaking is filed with the proper
  fiscal officer or officers in such amount and with such  sureties  as  a
  justice  of  the  supreme court shall approve to the effect that if such
  proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the  petitioner  will  pay
  all  costs  and  charges  which  may  accrue  in the prosecution of such
  proceeding.
    (8) Except in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent  return  with
  intent  to  evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made
  after the expiration of more than three  years  from  the  date  of  the
  filing  of  a  return,  provided, however, that where no return has been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9) All revenues resulting from the imposition of the  tax  under  the
  local  laws shall be paid into the treasury of Cortland county and shall
  be credited to  and  deposited  in  the  general  fund  of  the  county,
  thereafter  to  be  allocated  for  tourist  and convention development;
  provided, however, that such local laws shall provide  that  the  county
  shall  be  authorized  to  retain up to a maximum of ten percent of such
  revenue to defer the necessary expenses of the county  in  administering
  such  tax.  The revenue derived from the tax, after deducting the amount
  provided for administering such tax, as  so  authorized  by  local  law,
  shall  be  allocated  to enhance the general economy of Cortland county,
  its  cities,  towns,  and  villages,  through   promotion   of   tourist
  activities, conventions, trade shows, special events, and other directly
  related and supporting activities.


   (10)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB There are 4 § 1202-g's




   * § 1202-g. Tourist home, inn, hotel or motel taxes in Saratoga county
  and  the  city  of  Saratoga  Springs.  (1)  Notwithstanding  any  other
  provisions of law to the contrary, the  county  of  Saratoga  is  hereby
  authorized  and empowered to adopt and amend local laws imposing in such
  county a tax, in addition  to  any  other  tax  authorized  and  imposed
  pursuant  to this article, such as the legislature has or would have the
  power and authority to impose upon persons occupying tourist home,  inn,
  hotel  or motel rooms in such county. The rates of such tax shall be one
  percent of the per diem rental rate for  each  room  provided,  however,
  such tax shall not be applicable to a permanent resident of such tourist
  home, inn, hotel or motel or to rooms in a tourist home having less than
  four  rentable  units.  For  the  purposes  of  this  section  the  term
  "permanent resident" shall mean a person occupying any room or rooms  in
  a  tourist  home,  inn,  hotel  or motel for at least ninety consecutive
  days.
    (1-a) Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the
  city  of  Saratoga  Springs,  in  the  county  of  Saratoga,  is  hereby
  authorized  and empowered to adopt and amend local laws imposing in such
  city a tax, in addition to any other tax authorized and imposed pursuant
  to this article, such as the legislature has or would have the power and
  authority to impose upon persons occupying tourist home, inn,  hotel  or
  motel  rooms in such city. The rates of such tax shall be one percent of
  the per diem rental rate for each room provided, however, such tax shall
  not be applicable to a permanent resident of  such  tourist  home,  inn,
  hotel  or  motel or to rooms in such lodging facilities having less than
  four rentable units.
    (1-b) Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the
  city  of  Saratoga  Springs,  in  the  county  of  Saratoga,  is  hereby
  authorized  and empowered to adopt and amend local laws imposing in such
  city a tax, in addition to any other tax authorized and imposed pursuant
  to this article, such as the legislature has or would have the power and
  authority to impose upon persons occupying tourist home, inn,  hotel  or
  motel  rooms  in  such  city. The rates of such additional tax shall not
  exceed two percent of the per diem rental rate for each  room  provided,
  however,  such  tax  shall  not be applicable to a permanent resident of
  such tourist home, inn, hotel or motel  or  to  rooms  in  such  lodging
  facilities having less than four rentable units.
    (1-c) Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the
  city  of  Saratoga  Springs,  in  the  county  of  Saratoga,  is  hereby
  authorized and empowered to adopt and amend local laws imposing in  such
  city a tax, in addition to any other tax authorized and imposed pursuant
  to this article, such as the legislature has or would have the power and
  authority  to  impose upon persons occupying tourist home, inn, hotel or
  motel rooms in such city. The rates of such  additional  tax  shall  not
  exceed  two  percent of the per diem rental rate for each room provided,
  however, such tax shall not be applicable to  a  permanent  resident  of
  such  tourist  home,  inn,  hotel  or  motel or to rooms in such lodging
  facilities having less than four rentable units.
    (2) Such taxes  may  be  collected  and  administered  by  the  county
  treasurer  or other fiscal officers of Saratoga county by such means and
  in such manner as other taxes which are now collected  and  administered
  by such officers or as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3)  Such  local laws may provide that any taxes imposed shall be paid
  by the person liable therefor to the owner of  the  tourist  home,  inn,
  hotel  or  motel  room occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the
  rent or charge for the tourist home, inn, hotel or motel  room  occupied
  for  and  on  account of the county of Saratoga and the city of Saratoga
  Springs imposing the taxes and that such owner or person entitled to  be


 paid  the  rent or charge shall be liable for the collection and payment
  of the taxes; and that such owner or person entitled to be paid the rent
  or charge shall have the same right in respect to collecting  the  taxes
  from the person occupying the tourist home, inn, hotel or motel room, or
  in  respect  to  nonpayment  of  the  taxes  by the person occupying the
  tourist home, inn, hotel or motel room, as if the taxes were a  part  of
  the  rent  or charge and payable at the same time as the rent or charge;
  provided, however, that the county treasurer or other fiscal officers of
  the county and fiscal officer of the city, specified in such local laws,
  shall be joined as a party  in  any  action  or  proceeding  brought  to
  collect  the taxes by the owner or by the person entitled to be paid the
  rent or charge.
    (4) Such local laws may provide for the  filing  of  returns  and  the
  payment of the taxes on a monthly basis or on the basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5) This section shall not authorize the imposition of such taxes upon
  any of the following:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation;
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not
  all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6)  Any  final  determination  of  the  amount  of  any taxes payable
  hereunder   shall   be   reviewable    for    error,    illegality    or
  unconstitutionality or any other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules if application
  therefor  is  made  to  the  supreme  court within thirty days after the
  giving of the notice of such  final  determination,  provided,  however,
  that  any  such  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil
  practice law and rules shall not be instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any taxes sought to be reviewed, with  such  interest
  and  penalties  thereon  as  may  be  provided  for  by  local  laws  or
  regulations shall be first deposited and there is filed an  undertaking,
  issued by a surety company authorized to transmit business in this state
  and  approved  by the superintendent of financial services of this state
  as to solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a  justice  of  the
  supreme  court  shall  approve  to the effect that if such proceeding be
  dismissed or the taxes confirmed the petitioner will pay all  costs  and
  charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding or;
    b.  At  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.


   (7) Where any taxes imposed hereunder  shall  have  been  erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof  duly  made  to  the proper fiscal officer or officers, and such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable by a proceeding under article
  seventy-eight of the civil practice law and  rules,  provided,  however,
  that  such  proceeding is instituted within thirty days after the giving
  of the notice of such denial, that a final determination  of  taxes  due
  was  not  previously  made,  and  that  an undertaking is filed with the
  proper fiscal officer or officers in such amount and with such  sureties
  as  a  justice  of the supreme court shall approve to the effect that if
  such proceeding be dismissed or the taxes confirmed, the petitioner will
  pay all costs and charges which may accrue in the  prosecution  of  such
  proceeding.
    (8)  Except  in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the taxes, no assessment of additional  taxes  shall  be
  made  after the expiration of more than three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the taxes may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  Revenues  resulting from the imposition of tax authorized by this
  section shall be paid into the treasury of the county  of  Saratoga  and
  shall  be  credited  to and deposited in the general fund of the county;
  the net collections therefrom shall thereafter be allocated by the board
  of supervisors of Saratoga county fifty percent  for  the  promotion  of
  tourism  and  conventions  and  fifty  percent  to  the  Saratoga County
  Prosperity Partnership, Inc. for the  promotion  of  tourism  and  other
  economic  development-related  purposes  provided, however, that the net
  collections pursuant to subdivision one-a of this section shall be  paid
  to the general fund of the city of Saratoga Springs, the net collections
  pursuant  to subdivision one-b of this section shall be paid to the city
  of Saratoga Springs convention and tourism bureau for use  in  marketing
  the  city of Saratoga Springs as a destination for conventions and group
  tours and the net collections pursuant  to  subdivision  one-c  of  this
  section  shall  be placed in an interest bearing capital reserve account
  to fund the expansion and renovation of the City Center until such  time
  as the expansion and renovation has been completed, and thereafter shall
  be  placed  in  a  special account which may be drawn upon to offset any
  operating deficit maintained by the City Center.  A  committee  of  nine
  persons  to  advise the board on expenditures made by the county for the
  promotion of tourism and conventions shall be appointed by such board of
  supervisors, four of whom shall  be  members  of  such  body  who  shall
  include  the chair of the board of supervisors, the chair of the board's
  economic development committee, the chair of the board's law and finance
  committee, and one member of the board of supervisors who also serves as
  a director of the Saratoga County Prosperity Partnership, Inc. and  five
  additional  members who shall include a representative from the Saratoga
  county chamber  of  commerce,  a  representative  from  the  chamber  of
  southern  Saratoga county, a representative from the Saratoga convention
  and tourism bureau, a representative  from  the  Saratoga  Springs  city
  center authority and the Saratoga county treasurer.
    (10)  Such local laws as may be enacted pursuant to this section shall
  remain in full force and effect only so long as the board of supervisors
  of Saratoga county shall continue to expend for industrial  and  tourist
  promotion  at least fifty thousand dollars per annum of funds other than
  those revenues collected pursuant to this section  and  the  local  laws
  passed hereunder.
    (11)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this


 section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB There are 4 § 1202-g's




   * §   1202-g.   Hotel   or   motel   taxes   in  Steuben  county.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary,  the  county
  of  Steuben  is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt and amend local
  laws imposing in such county  a  tax,  in  addition  to  any  other  tax
  authorized and imposed pursuant to this article, such as the legislature
  has  or  would  have  the  power  and  authority  to impose upon persons
  occupying hotel or motel rooms in such county. For the purposes of  this
  section, the term "hotel" or "motel" shall mean and include any facility
  providing  lodging  on  an  overnight  basis  and  shall  include  those
  facilities designated and commonly known  as  "bed  and  breakfast"  and
  "tourist" facilities.
    The  rates  of  such tax shall not exceed four percent of the per diem
  rental rate for each room provided, however, that such tax shall not  be
  applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes
  of  this  section,  the  term  "permanent  resident" shall mean a person
  occupying any room or rooms in a hotel or  motel  for  at  least  thirty
  consecutive days.
    (2)  Such  tax may be collected and administered by the Steuben county
  legislature, or other fiscal officers of Steuben county  by  such  means
  and  in  such  manner  as  other  taxes  which  are  now  collected  and
  administered by such officers or as otherwise may be  provided  by  such
  local law.
    (3)  Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid by
  the person liable therefor to the owner  of  the  hotel  or  motel  room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel or motel room occupied for and on account of the county of Steuben
  imposing  the  tax and that such owner or person entitled to be paid the
  rent or charge shall be liable for the collection  and  payment  of  the
  tax;  and  that  such  owner  or  person entitled to be paid the rent or
  charge shall have the same right in respect to collecting the  tax  from
  the  person  occupying  the  hotel  or  motel  room,  or  in  respect to
  nonpayment of the tax by the person occupying the hotel or  motel  room,
  as  if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same
  time as the rent or charge; provided, however, that the  Steuben  county
  treasurer,  specified  in  such local law, shall be joined as a party in
  any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax by the owner  or  by
  the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  any transaction, by or with any of  the  following  in  accordance  with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this chapter:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation;
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall  be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any
  other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of
  the  civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to the
  supreme court within thirty days after the giving of the notice of  such
  final  determination,  provided, however, that any such proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules shall  not  be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties  thereon  as  may  be  provided for by local law or regulation
  shall be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by  a
  surety company authorized to transact business in the state and approved
  by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to solvency
  and  responsibility,  in  such  amount as a justice of the supreme court
  shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed or  the
  tax  confirmed  the  petitioner will pay all costs and charges which may
  accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b. At the option of the petitioner such undertaking may be  in  a  sum
  sufficient  to  cover the taxes, interests, and penalties stated in such
  determination plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it  in
  the  prosecution  of the proceeding, in which event the petitioner shall
  not be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a  condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7)  Where  any  tax  imposed  hereunder  shall have been erroneously,
  illegally, or  unconstitutionally  collected  and  application  for  the
  refund  thereof  duly made to the proper fiscal officer or officers, and
  such officer or officers shall have made a  determination  denying  such
  refund,  such  determination  shall  be reviewable by a proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice  law  and  rules,  provided,
  however, that such proceeding is instituted within thirty days after the
  giving  of  the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax
  due was not previously made, and that an undertaking is filed  with  the
  proper  fiscal officer or officers in such amount and with such sureties
  as a justice of the supreme court shall approve to the  effect  that  if
  such  proceeding  be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will
  pay all costs and charges which may accrue in the  prosecution  of  such
  proceeding.
    (8)  Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  All  revenues  resulting from the imposition of the tax under the
  local laws shall be paid into the treasury of the county of Steuben  and
  shall  be  credited  to and deposited in the general fund of the county,
  thereafter to be allocated for tourist and convention development in the
  county of Steuben and the surrounding tourist region; provided, however,
  that such local laws shall provide that the county shall  be  authorized
  to  retain  up to a maximum of five percent of such revenue to defer the
  necessary expenses of the county in administering such tax. The  revenue
  derived   from   the  tax,  after  deducting  the  amount  provided  for
  administering such  tax,  as  so  authorized  by  local  law,  shall  be
  allocated  to  enhance the general economy of the county of Steuben, its
  cities, towns and villages, and  the  general  economy  of  the  tourist
  region  in which Steuben county is located, through promotion of tourist
  activities, conventions, track shows, special events, and other directly


 related and supporting activities; provided, however, that a maximum  of
  seventy-five  percent  of  the  revenue  derived  from  the  tax  may be
  allocated by the Steuben county legislature for  regional  promotion  of
  tourism.
    (10)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB There are 4 § 1202-g's




   * §  1202-g.  Hotel  or  motel taxes in the county of Westchester. (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the  county
  of  Westchester  is  hereby  authorized and empowered to adopt and amend
  local laws imposing in such county a tax, in addition to any  other  tax
  authorized  and imposed pursuant to this article, as the legislature has
  or would have the power and authority to impose upon  persons  occupying
  rooms  in  hotels  or  motels  in  such county. For the purposes of this
  section, the term "hotel" shall mean a building or portion of  it  which
  is  regularly  used and kept open as such for the lodging of guests. The
  term "hotel" includes an apartment hotel, a motel or a  boarding  house,
  whether  or  not meals are served. The rate of such tax shall not exceed
  three percent of the per diem rental rate for  each  room  whether  such
  room is rented on a daily or longer basis.
    (2)  Such tax may be collected and administered by the commissioner of
  finance or other fiscal officer of the county  of  Westchester  by  such
  means  and  in  such  manner  as other taxes which are now collected and
  administered by such officers in accordance with the county  charter  or
  as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3)  Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid by
  the person liable therefor to the owner  of  the  hotel  or  motel  room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel  or  motel  room  occupied  for  and  on  account of the county of
  Westchester imposing the tax, and that such owner or person entitled  to
  be  paid  the  rent  or  charge  shall  be liable for the collection and
  payment of the tax; and that such owner or person entitled  to  be  paid
  the  rent  or  charge shall have the same right in respect to collecting
  the tax from the person occupying the hotel or motel room, or in respect
  to nonpayment of the tax by the person  occupying  the  hotel  or  motel
  room, as if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the
  same   time   as  the  rent  or  charge;  provided,  however,  that  the
  commissioner  of  finance  or  other  fiscal  officers  of  the  county,
  specified in such local law, shall be joined as a party in any action or
  proceeding  brought  to  collect  the  tax by the owner or by the person
  entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4) Such local laws may provide for the  filing  of  returns  and  the
  payment  of  the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5) This section shall not authorize the imposition of such  tax  upon
  the following:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation, including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state or the dominion of Canada, improvement district or other political
  subdivision of the state;
    b. The United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is  immune  from
  taxation;
    c.  Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or  foundation  organized  and  operated  exclusively   for   religious,
  charitable  or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial
  part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise
  attempting  to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in
  this paragraph shall include an organization operated  for  the  primary
  purpose  of  carrying  on a trade or business for profit, whether or not
  all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph; and
    d. A permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes of  this
  section,  the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall  mean a natural person


 occupying any room or rooms in a hotel or  motel  for  at  least  thirty
  consecutive days.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall  be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any
  other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of
  the  civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to the
  supreme court within thirty days after giving  of  the  notice  of  such
  final  determination,  provided, however, that any such proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules shall  not  be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties  thereon  as  may  be  provided for by local law or regulation
  shall be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by  a
  surety  company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the  supreme
  court  shall  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b. At the option of the petitioner such undertaking may be  in  a  sum
  sufficient  to  cover  the  taxes, interest and penalties stated in such
  determination plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it  in
  the  prosecution  of the proceeding, in which event the petitioner shall
  not be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a  condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7)  Where  any  tax  imposed  hereunder  shall have been erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof duly made to the proper fiscal officer  or  officers,  and  such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable by a proceeding under article
  seventy-eight of the civil practice law and  rules,  provided,  however,
  that  such  proceeding is instituted within thirty days after the giving
  of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due  was
  not  previously  made,  and that an undertaking is filed with the proper
  fiscal officer or officers in such amount and with such  sureties  as  a
  justice  of  the  supreme court shall approve to the effect that if such
  proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the  petitioner  will  pay
  all   costs  and  charges  which  accrue  in  the  prosecution  of  such
  proceeding.
    (8) Except in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent  return  with
  intent  to  evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made
  after the expiration of more than three  years  from  the  date  of  the
  filing  of  a  return,  provided, however, that where no return has been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9) Revenues resulting from the imposition of tax authorized  by  this
  section shall be paid into the treasury of the county of Westchester and
  shall  be  credited  to and deposited in the general fund of the county;
  and may thereafter be allocated  at  the  discretion  of  the  board  of
  legislators of the county of Westchester for any county purpose.
    (10)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB There are 4 § 1202-g's




   * §   1202-gg.   Occupancy   tax   in   the   city  of  Cortland.  (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the city  of
  Cortland,  in the county of Cortland, is hereby authorized and empowered
  to adopt and amend local laws imposing in such city a tax,  in  addition
  to  any  other tax authorized and imposed pursuant to this article, such
  as the legislature has or would have the power and authority  to  impose
  upon  persons occupying any room for hire in any hotel. For the purposes
  of this section, the term "hotel" shall mean a building or portion of it
  which is regularly used and kept open as such for the lodging of guests.
  The term "hotel" includes an apartment hotel,  a  motel  or  a  boarding
  house,  whether  or not meals are served. The rate of such tax shall not
  exceed three percent of the per diem rental rate for each  room  whether
  such room is rented on a daily or longer basis.
    (2)  Such  taxes may be collected and administered by the chief fiscal
  officer of the city of Cortland by such means  and  in  such  manner  as
  other  taxes which are now collected and administered by such officer or
  as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any taxes imposed shall  be  paid
  by  the  person liable therefor to the owner of the room for hire in the
  tourist home, inn, club, hotel, motel or other similar place  of  public
  accommodation  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or
  charge the room for hire in the tourist home, inn, club,  hotel,  motel,
  or  other  similar  place  of  public  accommodation occupied for and on
  account of the city of Cortland imposing the tax and that such owner  or
  person  entitled  to  be paid the rent or charge shall be liable for the
  collection and payment of  the  tax;  and  that  such  owner  or  person
  entitled  to  be  paid  the  rent or charge shall have the same right in
  respect to collecting the tax from the person  occupying  the  room  for
  hire in the tourist home, inn, club, hotel, motel or other similar place
  of  public  accommodation, or in respect to nonpayment of the tax by the
  person occupying the room for hire  in  the  tourist  home,  inn,  club,
  hotel,  motel, or similar place of public accommodation, as if the taxes
  were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same  time  as  the
  rent  or  charge; provided however, that the chief fiscal officer of the
  city, specified in such local laws, shall be joined as a  party  in  any
  action  or  proceeding brought to collect the tax by the owner or by the
  person entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4) Such local laws may provide for the  filing  of  returns  and  the
  payment  of  the taxes on a monthly basis or on a basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5) This section shall not authorize the imposition of such  tax  upon
  any of the following:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b. The United States of America, insofar as it is immune for taxation;
  or
    c.  Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or  foundation  organized  and  operated  exclusively   for   religious,
  charitable  or  education  purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial
  part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise
  attempting  to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in
  this paragraph shall include an organization operated  for  the  primary
  purpose  of  carrying  on a trade or business for profit, whether or not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    d.  A permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes of this
  section, the term "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  natural  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least thirty
  consecutive days.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or  any
  other  reason  whatsoever by a proceeding under article seventy-eight of
  the civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to  the
  supreme  court  within  thirty  days  after the giving of notice of such
  final determination, provided, however, that any such  proceeding  under
  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and rules shall not be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for by local  laws  or  regulations
  shall be first deposited and there shall be filed an undertaking, issued
  by  a  surety  company authorized to transact business in this state and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the  supreme
  court  shall  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b. At the option of the petitioner, such undertaking may be in  a  sum
  sufficient  to  cover  the taxes, interests and penalties stated in such
  determination plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it  in
  the  prosecution  of the proceeding, in which event the petitioner shall
  not be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a  condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7)  Where  any  taxes  imposed hereunder shall have been erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  therefor duly made to the proper fiscal officer or  officers,  and  such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable by a proceeding under article
  seventy-eight of the civil practice law and  rules,  provided,  however,
  that  such  proceeding is instituted within thirty days after the giving
  of the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due  was
  not  previously  made,  and that an undertaking is filed with the proper
  fiscal officer or officers in such amount and with such  sureties  as  a
  justice  of  the  supreme court shall approve to the effect that if such
  proceeding be dismissed or the taxes confirmed, the petitioner will  pay
  all  costs  and  charges  which  may  accrue  in the prosecution of such
  proceeding.
    (8) Except in the case of a willfully false or fraudulent return  with
  intent  to  evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall be made
  after the expiration of more than three  years  from  the  date  of  the
  filing  of  a  return,  provided, however, that where no return has been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9) All revenues resulting from the imposition of the  tax  under  the
  local  laws  shall be paid into the treasury of the city of Cortland and
  shall be credited to and deposited in the hospitality tax fund  of  such
  city.   Such  revenues  may  be  used  for  infrastructure  development,
  construction, rehabilitation and promotion of designation tourism as  so
  determined by the city of Cortland Common Council.
    (10) Each enactment of such a local law may provide for the imposition
  of  a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three years
  from the date of its enactment. Nothing in this section  shall  prohibit
  the  adoption and enactment of local laws, pursuant to the provisions of


 this section, upon  the  expiration  of  any  other  local  law  adopted
  pursuant to this section.
    (11)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB There are 5 § 1202-gg's
    * NB Repealed September 1, 2023




   * §  1202-gg.  Hotel  or  motel  taxes  in  the  city  of  Ithaca. (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the city of
  Ithaca, Tompkins county, is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt and
  amend local laws imposing in such city a tax, in addition to  any  other
  tax  authorized  and  imposed  pursuant  to  this  article  such  as the
  legislature has or would have the power and  authority  to  impose  upon
  persons occupying hotel or motel rooms in such city. For the purposes of
  this  section,  the  term  "hotel" or "motel" shall mean and include any
  facility providing lodging on an overnight basis and shall include those
  facilities designated and commonly known  as  "bed  and  breakfast"  and
  "tourist" facilities.
    The  rates  of  such tax shall not exceed five percent of the per diem
  rental rate for each room, provided however, that such tax shall not  be
  applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes
  of  this  section  the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall mean a person
  occupying any room or rooms in a hotel or  motel  for  at  least  thirty
  consecutive days.
    (2)  Such  tax  may  be collected and administered by the chief fiscal
  officer of the city of Ithaca by such means and in such manner as  other
  taxes  which  are  now  collected and administered by such officer or as
  otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3) Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid  by
  the  person  liable  therefor  to  the  owner of the hotel or motel room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel or motel room occupied for and on account of the  city  of  Ithaca
  imposing  the  tax and that such owner or person entitled to be paid the
  rent or charge shall be liable for the collection  and  payment  of  the
  tax;  and  that  such  owner  or  person entitled to be paid the rent or
  charge shall have the same right in respect to collecting the  tax  from
  the  person  occupying  the  hotel  or  motel  room,  or  in  respect to
  nonpayment of the tax by the person occupying the hotel or  motel  room,
  as  if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the same
  time as the rent or charge; provided, however,  that  the  chief  fiscal
  officer  of  the city, specified in such local law, shall be joined as a
  party in any action or proceeding brought to  collect  the  tax  by  the
  owner or by the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4)  Such  local  laws  may  provide for the filing of returns and the
  payment of the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any  longer  or
  shorter period of time.
    (5)  This  section shall not authorize the imposition of such tax upon
  any transaction, by or with any of  the  following  in  accordance  with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this article:
    a.  The  state  of  New  York,  or any public corporation (including a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b.  The  United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is immune from
  taxation;
    c. Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest,  fund
  or   foundation   organized  and  operated  exclusively  for  religious,
  charitable or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty  to
  children  or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures to
  the benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no  substantial
  part  of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or otherwise
  attempting to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing  in
  this  paragraph  shall  include an organization operated for the primary
  purpose of carrying on a trade or business for profit,  whether  or  not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6)  Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable pursuant
  to  this  section  shall  be  reviewable  for   error,   illegality   or
  unconstitutionality or any other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules if application
  therefor  is  made  to  the  supreme  court within thirty days after the
  giving of the notice of such  final  determination,  provided,  however,
  that  any  such  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil
  practice law and rules shall not be instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties thereon as may be provided for  by  local  law  or  regulation
  shall  be first deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a
  surety company  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state  and
  approved by the superintendent of financial services of this state as to
  solvency  and responsibility, in such amount as a justice of the supreme
  court shall approve to the effect that if such proceeding  be  dismissed
  or the tax confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which
  may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  At  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax imposed pursuant to this  section  shall  have  been
  erroneously,  illegally  or unconstitutionally collected and application
  for the refund thereof  duly  made  to  the  proper  fiscal  officer  or
  officers,  and  such officer or officers shall have made a determination
  denying such  refund,  such  determination  shall  be  reviewable  by  a
  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil practice law and
  rules, provided, however, that  such  proceeding  is  instituted  within
  thirty  days after the giving of the notice of such denial, that a final
  determination  of  tax  due  was  not  previously  made,  and  that   an
  undertaking  is filed with the proper fiscal officer or officers in such
  amount and with such sureties as a justice of the  supreme  court  shall
  approve  to  the  effect that if such proceeding be dismissed or the tax
  confirmed, the petitioner will pay  all  costs  and  charges  which  may
  accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding.
    (8)  Except  in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  All  revenues  resulting from the imposition of the tax under the
  local laws shall be paid into the treasury of the  city  of  Ithaca  and
  shall  be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the city. The
  city shall be authorized to retain the necessary revenue, in  an  amount
  not to exceed four percent of the total revenue, to defer the expense of
  the  city  in  administering  such  tax and the balance of such revenues
  shall be allocated to the construction, promotion, maintenance,  capital
  improvements,  and  operations  of  a  conference  center in the city of
  Ithaca and other directly related and supporting  activities,  including
  all  financial costs and obligations incurred by the city related to the
  creation of such conference center.
    (10) If any provision of this section or the  application  thereof  to
  any  person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this


 section and the application  of  such  provision  to  other  persons  or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    (11)  Each  enactment of such local law may provide for the imposition
  of a hotel or motel tax for a period of time no longer than three  years
  from  the effective date of its enactment. Nothing in this section shall
  prohibit the adoption and enactment  of  local  laws,  pursuant  to  the
  provisions  of  this section, upon the expiration of any other local law
  adopted pursuant to this section.
    * NB There are 5 § 1202-gg's




   * §  1202-gg.  Hotel  or  motel  taxes  in  the  town of Newburgh. (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the town of
  Newburgh, in the county of Orange, is hereby authorized and empowered to
  adopt and amend local laws imposing in such town a tax, in  addition  to
  any  other  tax  authorized and imposed pursuant to this article such as
  the legislature has or would have the power and authority to impose upon
  persons occupying hotel or motel rooms in such town. For the purposes of
  this section, the term "hotel" or "motel" shall  mean  and  include  any
  facility  consisting  of  rentable  units  and  providing  lodging on an
  overnight basis  and  shall  include  those  facilities  designated  and
  commonly  known  as  "bed  and  breakfast" and "tourist" facilities. The
  rates of such tax shall not exceed five percent of the per  diem  rental
  rate  for  each  room,  provided  however,  that  such  tax shall not be
  applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel or motel. For the purposes
  of this section the  term  "permanent  resident"  shall  mean  a  person
  occupying  any  room  or  rooms  in a hotel or motel for at least ninety
  consecutive days.
    (2) Such tax may be collected and administered  by  the  chief  fiscal
  officer  of  the  town  of  Newburgh by such means and in such manner as
  other taxes which are now collected and administered by such officer  or
  as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3)  Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid by
  the person liable therefor to the owner  of  the  hotel  or  motel  room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel  or motel room occupied for and on account of the town of Newburgh
  imposing the tax and that such owner or person entitled to be  paid  the
  rent  or  charge  shall  be liable for the collection and payment of the
  tax; and that such owner or person entitled  to  be  paid  the  rent  or
  charge  shall  have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from
  the person  occupying  the  hotel  or  motel  room,  or  in  respect  to
  nonpayment  of  the tax by the person occupying the hotel or motel room,
  as if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the  same
  time  as  the  rent  or charge; provided, however, that the chief fiscal
  officer of the town, specified in such local law, shall be joined  as  a
  party  in  any  action  or  proceeding brought to collect the tax by the
  owner or by the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4) Such local laws may provide for the  filing  of  returns  and  the
  payment  of  the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5) This section shall not authorize the imposition of such  tax  upon
  any  transaction,  by  or  with  any of the following in accordance with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this article:
    a. The state of New York,  or  any  public  corporation  (including  a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b. The United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is  immune  from
  taxation;
    c.  Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or  foundation  organized  and  operated  exclusively   for   religious,
  charitable  or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial
  part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise
  attempting  to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in
  this paragraph shall include an organization operated  for  the  primary
  purpose  of  carrying  on a trade or business for profit, whether or not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall  be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any
  other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of
  the  civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to the
  supreme court within thirty days after the giving of the notice of  such
  final  determination,  provided, however, that any such proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules shall  not  be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties  thereon  as  may  be provided for by local law shall be first
  deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a surety  company
  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state  and approved by the
  superintendent of financial services of this state as  to  solvency  and
  responsibility,  in  such amount as a justice of the supreme court shall
  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed  or  the  tax
  confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which may accrue
  in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  At  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax  imposed  hereunder  shall  have  been  erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof  duly  made  to  the proper fiscal officer or officers, and such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such determination shall be reviewable by  a  proceeding  under  article
  seventy-eight  of  the  civil practice law and rules, provided, however,
  that such proceeding is instituted within thirty days after  the  giving
  of  the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due was
  not previously made, and that an undertaking is filed  with  the  proper
  fiscal  officer  or  officers in such amount and with such sureties as a
  justice of the supreme court shall approve to the effect  that  if  such
  proceeding  be  dismissed  or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay
  all costs and charges which  may  accrue  in  the  prosecution  of  such
  proceeding.
    (8)  Except  in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  All  revenues  resulting from the imposition of the tax under the
  local laws shall be paid into the treasury of the town of  Newburgh  and
  shall be credited to and deposited in the general fund of the town. Such
  revenues may be used for any lawful purpose.
    (10)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB There are 5 § 1202-gg's
    * NB Repealed December 23, 2025




   * §  1202-hh.  Hotel or motel taxes in the village of Cold Spring. (1)
  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, the village
  of Cold Spring, in the  county  of  Putnam,  is  hereby  authorized  and
  empowered  to adopt and amend local laws imposing in such village a tax,
  in addition to any other tax authorized and  imposed  pursuant  to  this
  article  such  as  the  legislature  has  or  would  have  the power and
  authority to impose upon persons occupying hotel or motel rooms in  such
  village.  For  the purposes of this section, the term "hotel" or "motel"
  shall mean and include any facility consisting  of  rentable  units  and
  providing  lodging  on  an  overnight  basis  and  shall  include  those
  facilities designated and commonly known  as  "bed  and  breakfast"  and
  "tourist"  facilities.  The  rates  of  such  tax  shall not exceed five
  percent of the per diem rental rate for  each  room,  provided  however,
  that such tax shall not be applicable to a permanent resident of a hotel
  or motel. For the purposes of this section the term "permanent resident"
  shall  mean a person occupying any room or rooms in a hotel or motel for
  at least ninety consecutive days.
    (2) Such tax may be collected and administered  by  the  chief  fiscal
  officer  of  the village of Cold Spring by such means and in such manner
  as other taxes which are now collected and administered by such  officer
  or as otherwise may be provided by such local law.
    (3)  Such local laws may provide that any tax imposed shall be paid by
  the person liable therefor to the owner  of  the  hotel  or  motel  room
  occupied or to the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge for the
  hotel  or  motel room occupied for and on account of the village of Cold
  Spring imposing the tax and that such owner or  person  entitled  to  be
  paid  the  rent or charge shall be liable for the collection and payment
  of the tax; and that such owner or person entitled to be paid  the  rent
  or  charge  shall  have  the same right in respect to collecting the tax
  from the person occupying the hotel or motel  room,  or  in  respect  to
  nonpayment  of  the tax by the person occupying the hotel or motel room,
  as if the tax were a part of the rent or charge and payable at the  same
  time  as  the  rent  or charge; provided, however, that the chief fiscal
  officer of the village, specified in such local law, shall be joined  as
  a  party  in  any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax by the
  owner or by the person entitled to be paid the rent or charge.
    (4) Such local laws may provide for the  filing  of  returns  and  the
  payment  of  the tax on a monthly basis or on the basis of any longer or
  shorter period of time.
    (5) This section shall not authorize the imposition of such  tax  upon
  any  transaction,  by  or  with  any of the following in accordance with
  section twelve hundred thirty of this article:
    a. The state of New York,  or  any  public  corporation  (including  a
  public corporation created pursuant to agreement or compact with another
  state  or  the  Dominion  of  Canada),  improvement  district  or  other
  political subdivision of the state;
    b. The United  States  of  America,  insofar  as  it  is  immune  from
  taxation;
    c.  Any corporation or association, or trust, or community chest, fund
  or  foundation  organized  and  operated  exclusively   for   religious,
  charitable  or educational purposes, or for the prevention of cruelty to
  children or animals, and no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit of any private shareholder or individual and no substantial
  part of the activities of which is carrying on propaganda, or  otherwise
  attempting  to influence legislation; provided, however, that nothing in
  this paragraph shall include an organization operated  for  the  primary
  purpose  of  carrying  on a trade or business for profit, whether or not


 all of its profits are payable to one or more organizations described in
  this paragraph.
    (6) Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable hereunder
  shall  be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any
  other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of
  the  civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to the
  supreme court within thirty days after the giving of the notice of  such
  final  determination,  provided, however, that any such proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules shall  not  be
  instituted unless:
    a. The amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and
  penalties  thereon  as  may  be provided for by local law shall be first
  deposited and there is filed an undertaking, issued by a surety  company
  authorized  to  transact  business  in  this  state  and approved by the
  superintendent  of  insurance  of  this  state  as   to   solvency   and
  responsibility,  in  such amount as a justice of the supreme court shall
  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed  or  the  tax
  confirmed the petitioner will pay all costs and charges which may accrue
  in the prosecution of such proceeding; or
    b.  At  the  option of the petitioner such undertaking may be in a sum
  sufficient to cover the taxes, interests and penalties  stated  in  such
  determination  plus the costs and charges which may accrue against it in
  the prosecution of the proceeding, in which event the  petitioner  shall
  not  be required to pay such taxes, interest or penalties as a condition
  precedent to the application.
    (7) Where any tax  imposed  hereunder  shall  have  been  erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof  duly  made  to  the proper fiscal officer or officers, and such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such determination shall be reviewable by  a  proceeding  under  article
  seventy-eight  of  the  civil practice law and rules, provided, however,
  that such proceeding is instituted within thirty days after  the  giving
  of  the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due was
  not previously made, and that an undertaking is filed  with  the  proper
  fiscal  officer  or  officers in such amount and with such sureties as a
  justice of the supreme court shall approve to the effect  that  if  such
  proceeding  be  dismissed  or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay
  all costs and charges which  may  accrue  in  the  prosecution  of  such
  proceeding.
    (8)  Except  in the case of a wilfully false or fraudulent return with
  intent to evade the tax, no assessment of additional tax shall  be  made
  after  the  expiration  of  more  than  three years from the date of the
  filing of a return, provided, however, that where  no  return  has  been
  filed as provided by law the tax may be assessed at any time.
    (9)  All  revenues  resulting from the imposition of the tax under the
  local laws shall be paid into the treasury of the village of Cold Spring
  and shall be credited to and  deposited  in  the  general  fund  of  the
  village. Such revenues may be used for any lawful purpose.
    (10)  If  any  provision of this section or the application thereof to
  any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of  this
  section  and  the  application  of  such  provision  to other persons or
  circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
    * NB Repealed July 21, 2025
    * NB There are 4 § 1202-hh's