* §  1439-l. Judicial review. 1. Any final determination of the amount
  of any tax payable under section fourteen hundred thirty-nine-c of  this
  article shall be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality
  or   any   other   reason  whatsoever  by  a  proceeding  under  article
  seventy-eight of  the  civil  practice  law  and  rules  if  application
  therefor  is  made  to  the  supreme  court within four months after the
  giving of the notice of such  final  determination,  provided,  however,
  that  any  such  proceeding  under  article  seventy-eight  of the civil
  practice law and rules shall not be instituted unless (a) the amount  of
  any  tax sought to be reviewed, with such interest and penalties thereon
  as may be provided for by local law shall be first deposited  and  there
  is  filed  an  undertaking,  issued  by  a  surety company authorized to
  transact business in this state and approved by the state superintendent
  of financial services as to solvency and responsibility, in such  amount
  as  a  justice  of the supreme court shall approve to the effect that if
  such proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed  the  petitioner  will
  pay  all  costs  and charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such
  proceeding or (b) at the option of the petitioner, such undertaking  may
  be in a sum sufficient to cover the taxes, interest and penalties stated
  in  such  determination,  plus  the  costs  and charges which may accrue
  against it in the prosecution of the  proceeding,  in  which  event  the
  petitioner  shall  not  be  required  to  pay  such  taxes,  interest or
  penalties as a condition precedent to the application.
    2. Where any  tax  imposed  hereunder  shall  have  been  erroneously,
  illegally  or  unconstitutionally  assessed or collected and application
  for the refund or revision  thereof  duly  made  to  the  proper  fiscal
  officer  or  officers,  and  such  officer or officers shall have made a
  determination denying such refund or revision, such determination  shall
  be  reviewable  by a proceeding under article seventy-eight of the civil
  practice law and rules; provided, however, that (a) such  proceeding  is
  instituted  within  four  months  after the giving of the notice of such
  denial, (b) a final determination of tax due was  not  previously  made,
  and  (c)  an  undertaking  is  filed  with  the proper fiscal officer or
  officers in such amount and with such  sureties  as  a  justice  of  the
  supreme  court  shall  approve  to the effect that if such proceeding be
  dismissed or the tax confirmed, the petitioner will pay  all  costs  and
  charges which may accrue in the prosecution of such proceeding.
    * NB Repealed December 31, 2027
    * NB There are 3 § 1439-l's









   * §  1439-m.  Apportionment.  A  local  law  adopted  by  the  town of
  Fishkill, pursuant to this  article,  shall  provide  for  a  method  of
  apportionment  for  determining  the amount of tax due whenever the real
  property or interest therein is situated within and without the town.
    * NB Repealed December 31, 2027
    * NB There are 3 § 1439-m's




   * §  1439-n.  Miscellaneous.  A  local  law  adopted  by  the  town of
  Fishkill, pursuant to this article, may contain such other provisions as
  the town deems necessary  for  the  proper  administration  of  the  tax
  imposed  pursuant  to  this article, including provisions concerning the
  determination of tax, the imposition of interest  on  underpayments  and
  overpayments  and  the  imposition  of  civil penalties. Such provisions
  shall be identical to the corresponding provisions of  the  real  estate
  transfer  tax  imposed  by article thirty-one of this chapter, so far as
  such provisions can be made applicable to the tax  imposed  pursuant  to
  this article.
    * NB Repealed December 31, 2027
    * NB There are 3 § 1439-n's




   * §  1439-o. Returns to be secret. 1. Except in accordance with proper
  judicial order or as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for
  the treasurer or  any  officer  or  employee  of  the  county  or  town,
  including  any  person  engaged  or  retained on an independent contract
  basis, to divulge or make known in any manner the particulars set  forth
  or  disclosed  in any return required under a local law enacted pursuant
  to this article. However, that nothing in this  section  shall  prohibit
  the  recording officer from making a notation on an instrument effecting
  a conveyance indicating the amount of tax paid. No  recorded  instrument
  effecting a conveyance shall be considered a return for purposes of this
  section.
    2.  The officers charged with the custody of such returns shall not be
  required to produce any of them or evidence  of  anything  contained  in
  them  in  any action or proceeding in any court, except on behalf of the
  county or town in any action or proceeding involving the collection of a
  tax due under a local law enacted pursuant to this article to which such
  county or town is a party, or a claimant, or on behalf of any  party  to
  any  action  or  proceeding  under the provisions of a local law enacted
  pursuant to this article when the returns or  facts  shown  thereby  are
  directly  involved  in such action or proceeding, in any of which events
  the court may require the production of, and may admit in  evidence,  so
  much  of said returns or of the facts shown thereby, as are pertinent to
  the action or proceeding and no more.
    3. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit  the  delivery  to  a
  grantor  or  grantee of an instrument effecting a conveyance or the duly
  authorized representative of a grantor or grantee of a certified copy of
  any return filed in connection with such instrument or to  prohibit  the
  publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification
  of  particular  returns  and the items thereof, or the inspection by the
  legal representatives of such county  or  town  of  the  return  of  any
  taxpayer  who  shall  bring  action to set aside or review the tax based
  thereon.
    4. Any officer or employee  of  such  county  or  town  who  willfully
  violates  the  provisions of this section shall be dismissed from office
  and be incapable of holding any public office in this state for a period
  of five years thereafter.
    * NB Repealed December 31, 2027
    * NB There are 3 § 1439-o's




   * §  1439-p. Foreclosure proceedings. Where the conveyance consists of
  a transfer of property made as a result of an order of the  court  in  a
  foreclosure  proceeding  ordering the sale of such property, the referee
  or sheriff effectuating such  transfer  shall  not  be  liable  for  any
  interest  or  penalties  that are authorized pursuant to this article or
  article thirty-seven of this chapter.
    * NB There are 3 § 1439-p's
    * NB Repealed December 31, 2027