§ 1. Short title. This chapter shall be known as the "Tax Law."




   §  2.  Definitions. 1. Unless otherwise expressly stated or unless the
  context or  subject  matter  otherwise  requires,  "tax  department"  or
  "department",  as used in this chapter, means the department of taxation
  and finance, "commissioner"  means  the  commissioner  of  taxation  and
  finance  or  his  delegate, and "tax commission" or "commission", in all
  matters pertaining to the administration of the division of tax appeals,
  means the tax appeals tribunal  and  in  all  other  matters  means  the
  commissioner of taxation and finance.
    2. "Comptroller" as used in this chapter means the state comptroller.
    3.  "County  treasurer"  includes  any  officer  performing the duties
  devolving upon such office under whatever name.
    4. "Infant" or "minor" as used in this chapter means a person who  has
  not attained the age of eighteen years.
    5.  The  term  "limited  liability  company"  means a domestic limited
  liability company or a foreign limited liability company, as defined  in
  section  one hundred two of the limited liability company law, a limited
  liability investment company formed pursuant  to  section  five  hundred
  seven  of  the  banking law, or a limited liability trust company formed
  pursuant to section one hundred two-a of the banking law.
    6. "Partnership and partner," unless the context  requires  otherwise,
  shall  include, but shall not be limited to, a limited liability company
  and a member thereof, respectively.
    7. "REIT" means a real estate investment trust as defined  in  section
  eight hundred fifty-six of the internal revenue code.
    8.  "RIC"  means  a regulated investment company as defined in section
  eight hundred fifty-one of the internal revenue code.
    9. "Captive REIT" means a REIT that is  not  regularly  traded  on  an
  established  securities  market,  and  (  more than fifty percent of the
  voting stock of which is owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by
  a single entity treated as an association taxable as a corporation under
  the Internal Revenue Code that is not exempt from federal income tax and
  is not a REIT. Any voting stock in a REIT that is held in  a  segregated
  asset  account  of a life insurance corporation (as described in section
  817 of the internal revenue code) shall not be taken  into  account  for
  purposes  of  determining  whether a REIT is a captive REIT. None of the
  following entities shall be  considered  an  association  taxable  as  a
  corporation for purposes of this subdivision:
    (a)  any  listed Australian property trust (meaning an Australian unit
  trust registered as a "managed investment scheme" under  the  Australian
  Corporations  Act  in  which the principal class of units is listed on a
  recognized stock exchange in Australia and is  regularly  traded  on  an
  established  securities  market),  or  an  entity  organized as a trust,
  provided that a listed  Australian  property  trust  owns  or  controls,
  directly or indirectly, seventy-five percent or more of the voting power
  or value of the beneficial interests or shares of such trust; or
    (b)  any  qualified  foreign  entity,  meaning  a  corporation, trust,
  association or partnership organized outside  the  laws  of  the  United
  States and which satisfies the following criteria:
    (i) at least seventy-five percent of the entity's total asset value at
  the  close  of its taxable year is represented by real estate assets (as
  defined at subparagraph (B)  of  paragraph  (5)  of  subsection  (c)  of
  section  eight  hundred  fifty-six of the internal revenue code, thereby
  including shares or certificates of  beneficial  interest  in  any  real
  estate  investment  trust), cash and cash equivalents, and United States
  Government securities;
    (ii) the entity is not subject to tax on amounts  distributed  to  its
  beneficial owners, or is exempt from entity-level taxation;


   (iii)  the  entity  distributes  at  least  eight-five  percent of its
  taxable  income  (as  computed  in  the  jurisdiction  in  which  it  is
  organized)  to  the  holders of its shares or certificates of beneficial
  interest on an annual basis;
    (iv)  not  more  than ten percent of the voting power or value in such
  entity is held directly or indirectly  or  constructively  by  a  single
  entity  or  individual,  or  the  shares or beneficial interests of such
  entity are regularly traded on an established securities market; and
    (v) the entity is organized in a country which has a tax  treaty  with
  the United States.
    10.  "Captive  RIC" means a RIC (a) that is not regularly traded on an
  established securities market, and (b) more than fifty  percent  of  the
  voting stock of which is owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by
  a  single  corporation that is not exempt from federal income tax and is
  not a RIC. Any voting stock in a RIC that is held in a segregated  asset
  account  of a life insurance corporation (as described in section 817 of
  the internal revenue code) shall not be taken into account for  purposes
  of determining whether a RIC is a captive RIC.
    11.  The  term  "combinable captive insurance company" means an entity
  that is treated as an association taxable as  a  corporation  under  the
  internal revenue code (a) more than fifty percent of the voting stock of
  which is owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by a single entity
  that  is  treated  as  an association taxable as a corporation under the
  internal revenue code and not exempt from federal income tax;  (b)  that
  is  licensed as a captive insurance company under the laws of this state
  or another jurisdiction; (c) whose business includes providing, directly
  and indirectly, insurance or  reinsurance  covering  the  risks  of  its
  parent  and/or members of its affiliated group; and (d) fifty percent or
  less of whose gross receipts for the taxable year  consist  of  premiums
  from  arrangements  that  constitute  insurance  for  federal income tax
  purposes. For purposes of this subdivision, "affiliated group"  has  the
  same  meaning  as  that  term  is  given in section 1504 of the internal
  revenue code, except that the term "common parent corporation"  in  that
  section  is deemed to mean any person, as defined in section 7701 of the
  internal revenue code and references to "at  least  eighty  percent"  in
  section  1504  of  the  internal  revenue  code are to be read as "fifty
  percent or more;" section 1504 of the internal revenue  code  is  to  be
  read  without regard to the exclusions provided for in subsection (b) of
  that section; "premiums" has the same meaning as that term is  given  in
  paragraph  one of subdivision (c) of section fifteen hundred ten of this
  chapter, except that it includes consideration for annuity contracts and
  excludes any part of the consideration  for  insurance,  reinsurance  or
  annuity  contracts  that do not provide bona fide insurance, reinsurance
  or annuity benefits; and "gross receipts" includes the amounts  included
  in  gross  receipts  for purposes of section 501(c) (15) of the internal
  revenue code, except that those amounts also  include  all  premiums  as
  defined in this subdivision.




   §  3.  Exemption  from  certain  taxes granted to certain corporations
  engaged  in  the  operation  of  vessels  in   foreign   commerce.   All
  corporations  incorporated  under  the  laws  of  the state of New York,
  exclusively engaged in the operation of vessels in foreign commerce, are
  exempted from all taxation in this state, for state and local  purposes,
  upon their capital stock, franchises and earnings.




   §  4.  Exemption  from  certain  excise and sales taxes granted to the
  United Nations. Excise and sales taxes imposed by  the  state  upon  the
  sale  of  tangible personal property shall not be exacted or required to
  be paid by the United Nations upon and  with  respect  to  any  sale  of
  tangible  personal  property  hereafter  made,  provided the property is
  acquired for the official use of the United Nations; and the  provisions
  of any law now in force or hereafter enacted imposing any such tax shall
  not  apply to sales of tangible personal property to the United Nations.
  The  state  tax  commission  shall  make  such  reasonable   rules   and
  regulations  as  may  be  necessary to give full force and effect to the
  provisions of this section.




   §  5. Obtaining and furnishing taxpayer identification information. 1.
  Definitions. For purposes of this section,  the  following  terms  shall
  mean:
    (a)  "License"  shall  include the whole or part of any covered agency
  permit, certificate, approval, registration, charter or similar form  of
  permission  to engage in a profession, trade, business or occupation and
  any notification required to be  made  to  any  covered  agency  that  a
  profession,  trade,  business  or  occupation  is being engaged in or is
  expected to be commenced. However,  such  term  shall  not  include  any
  original  charter or certificate of incorporation granted by any covered
  agency.
    (b) "Person" shall mean an individual, partnership, limited  liability
  company, society, association, joint stock company, corporation, estate,
  receiver,  trustee,  assignee,  referee, or any other person acting in a
  fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by  a  court  or
  otherwise, or any combination of the foregoing. However, such term shall
  not  include  any  public corporation, corporation formed other than for
  profit or unincorporated not-for-profit entity, except such  term  shall
  include  an  education corporation of the type dealt with in section two
  hundred twenty-one  of  the  education  law,  an  education  corporation
  subject  to  article  one  hundred  one  of  the  education  law  and  a
  cooperative corporation.
    * (c) "State agency" shall mean the state of New York, any department,
  board, bureau, commission, division, office, council or agency  thereof,
  a public authority or a public benefit corporation.
    * NB Effective until enactment by New Jersey
    * (c) "Covered agency" shall mean the state of New York, any county of
  the  state  of  New  York,  any  department,  board, bureau, commission,
  division, office, council or agency of the state or any such  county,  a
  public  authority,  a  public benefit corporation, the port authority of
  New York and New Jersey or the waterfront commission of New York harbor.
  When a county is wholly included within a city, then the  term  "county"
  shall be read to include the city.
    * NB Effective upon enactment by New Jersey
    2.  Requiring information. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
  every covered agency shall, as  part  of  the  procedure  for  granting,
  renewing, amending, supplementing or restating the license of any person
  or  at  the  time  the covered agency contracts to purchase or purchases
  goods or services or leases real or personal property from  any  person,
  require  that  each  such  person  provide  to  the  covered agency such
  person's federal social security  account  number  or  federal  employer
  identification  number,  or  both such numbers when such person has both
  such numbers, or, where  such  person  does  not  have  such  number  or
  numbers, the reason or reasons why such person does not have such number
  or  numbers.  Such  numbers or reasons shall be obtained by such covered
  agency as part of the administration of the taxes  administered  by  the
  commissioner  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  the identification of
  persons affected by such taxes.
    3. Furnishing information to  commissioner.  (a)  Notwithstanding  any
  other  provision  of  law,  a  covered agency shall, upon request of the
  commissioner, furnish to the commissioner the following information with
  respect to each person covered by subdivision two of this section:
    (1) business name or the name under which the applicant for a  license
  or licensee will be licensed or is licensed;
    (2)  business  address  or whatever type of address the covered agency
  requires the applicant for a license or the licensee to furnish  to  it;
  and


   (3)  federal  social  security  account  number  or  federal  employer
  identification number, or both such numbers where such person  has  both
  such  numbers,  or  the reason or reasons, furnished by such person, why
  such person does not have such number or numbers.
    (b) The reports required under paragraph (a) of this subdivision shall
  be  submitted  on  a compatible magnetic tape file or in some other form
  which is mutually acceptable to the covered agency and the commissioner.
    4. Report not open to public inspection. Notwithstanding  article  six
  of  the public officers law or any other provision of law, the report to
  be furnished by the covered  agency  to  the  commissioner  pursuant  to
  subdivision  three  of  this section shall not be open to the public for
  inspection.




   § 5-a. Certification of registration to collect sales and compensating
  use  taxes by certain contractors, affiliates and subcontractors. 1. For
  purposes of this section, the following terms shall have  the  specified
  meanings:
    (a)   "Affiliate"   means  a  person  which  directly,  indirectly  or
  constructively
    (1) controls another person;
    (2) is controlled by another person; or
    (3) is, along with another person,  under  the  control  of  a  common
  parent.
    "Control"  means  possession  of  the  power  to  direct, or cause the
  direction of, the management and policies of another person.
    (b) "Commodities" means commodities as defined in  article  eleven  of
  the state finance law.
    (c)  (1)  "Contract"  means  an  agreement  between a contractor and a
  covered agency for the purchase  by  the  covered  agency,  pursuant  to
  article  eleven  of  the  state  finance law, of commodities or services
  having a value in excess of one hundred thousand dollars.
    The term "contract" shall also  include  a  centralized  contract,  as
  defined  in  article  eleven  of  the state finance law, with a value in
  excess of one hundred thousand dollars.
    (2) The term "contract" shall not include:
    (A) a purchase by a covered agency of commodities or services  with  a
  value  in  excess  of  one  hundred thousand dollars based upon a formal
  mini-bid solicitation pursuant to a centralized contract;
    (B) a grant or an intergovernmental agreement; or
    (C) a purchase of commodities or services from a  "preferred  source,"
  as such term is defined in article eleven of the state finance law.
    (3)  Multiple purchases of commodities or services by a covered agency
  from the same contractor  during  a  state  fiscal  year  shall  not  be
  aggregated  for  purposes  of  determining  whether the greater than one
  hundred thousand dollar threshold described in this subdivision has been
  met.
    (d) "Contractor" means a person awarded a contract.
    (e) "Covered agency" means a "state agency" for  purposes  of  article
  eleven  of  the  state finance law, the legislature, the judiciary, or a
  public authority or public benefit corporation at  least  one  of  whose
  members is appointed by the governor.
    (f) "Department" means the department of taxation and finance.
    (g)  "Person"  means  an  individual,  partnership,  limited liability
  company, society, association,  joint  stock  company,  or  corporation;
  provided,   however,  that  a  "person"  shall  not  include  a  "public
  corporation" or an "education corporation," as such terms are defined in
  section sixty-six of the  general  construction  law,  a  not-for-profit
  corporation  whose  contracts are subject to approval in accordance with
  article eleven-B of the  state  finance  law,  a  board  of  cooperative
  educational  services created pursuant to article forty of the education
  law, or a soil and  water  conservation  district  created  pursuant  to
  section five of the soil and water conservation districts law.
    (h) "Sales and compensating use taxes" means state and local sales and
  compensating  use  taxes imposed by article twenty-eight and pursuant to
  the  authority  of  article  twenty-nine  of  this  chapter,  which  are
  administered by the commissioner.
    (i)  "Sales  tax  quarter" means a quarterly period ending on the last
  day of February, May, August or November.
    (j) "Services" means services as defined  in  article  eleven  of  the
  state finance law.


   (k)  "Subcontractor" means a person engaged by a contractor or another
  subcontractor to perform a portion of the contractor's obligations under
  a contract.
    (l) "State" means the state of New York.
    (m)  "Taxable  services" means services, the receipts from the sale of
  which are taxable by article twenty-eight or article twenty-nine of this
  chapter.
    (n) The terms "receipts," "sale,"  "tangible  personal  property"  and
  "vendor"  have  the  meanings  given  in  article  twenty-eight  of this
  chapter.
    2. (a) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, before  a
  contract   may   take  effect,  the  contractor  must  comply  with  the
  requirements of subparagraphs one and two of this paragraph.
    (1)  The  contractor  must  file  a  written  certification  with  the
  department, made under penalty of perjury, stating that:
    (A)  if  the contractor made sales delivered by any means to locations
  within the state of  tangible  personal  property  or  taxable  services
  having  a  value  in excess of three hundred thousand dollars during the
  immediately  preceding  consecutive  four  sales   tax   quarters,   the
  contractor  is  registered  for  sales and compensating use tax purposes
  with the department under sections eleven hundred thirty-four and twelve
  hundred fifty-three of this chapter. If  the  contractor  did  not  make
  sales  delivered  by any means to locations within the state of tangible
  personal property or taxable services having a value in excess of  three
  hundred  thousand  dollars during such four sales tax quarters, then the
  contractor shall so certify;
    (B) if any affiliate of the contractor made  sales  delivered  by  any
  means  to  locations  within  the state of tangible personal property or
  taxable services having a value in  excess  of  three  hundred  thousand
  dollars  during  the  immediately  preceding  consecutive four sales tax
  quarters, to the best of the contractor's knowledge, each such affiliate
  is registered for sales and  compensating  use  tax  purposes  with  the
  department  under sections eleven hundred thirty-four and twelve hundred
  fifty-three of this  chapter.  If  the  contractor  does  not  have  any
  affiliates,  or  does not have any affiliates which made sales delivered
  by any means to locations within the state of tangible personal property
  or taxable services having a value in excess of three  hundred  thousand
  dollars  during  such four sales tax quarters, then the contractor shall
  so certify; and
    (C) if  any  subcontractor  made  sales  delivered  by  any  means  to
  locations  within  the  state  of  tangible personal property or taxable
  services having a value in excess  of  three  hundred  thousand  dollars
  during the immediately preceding consecutive four sales tax quarters, to
  the  best  of  the  contractor's  knowledge,  each such subcontractor is
  registered  for  sales  and  compensating  use  tax  purposes  with  the
  department  under sections eleven hundred thirty-four and twelve hundred
  fifty-three of this  chapter.  If  the  contractor  does  not  have  any
  subcontractors,   or  there  are  no  subcontractors  which  made  sales
  delivered by any  means  to  locations  within  the  state  of  tangible
  personal  property or taxable services having a value in excess of three
  hundred thousand dollars during such four sales tax quarters,  then  the
  contractor shall so certify.
    (D) The certification required by this subparagraph shall include such
  additional  information as the department deems necessary for the proper
  administration of this section.
    (E) The certification required by this subparagraph need only be filed
  with the department once and, once filed, shall be deemed to satisfy the
  requirements  of  this  subparagraph  for  purposes  of  any  subsequent


 contract  to which the contractor is a party; provided, however, that if
  the contractor, or an affiliate or subcontractor, is  not  certified  as
  registered  with  the  department  for  sales  and  compensating use tax
  purposes   on   the   contractor's   original  certification,  and  such
  contractor, affiliate or subcontractor  makes  sales  delivered  by  any
  means  to  locations  within  the state of tangible personal property or
  taxable services having a value in  excess  of  three  hundred  thousand
  dollars  during any consecutive four sales tax quarters which follow the
  sales tax quarter in which the contractor's original  certification  was
  made,  then  the  contractor  shall,  as  soon  as  possible  after such
  occurrence, file an amended written certification with  the  department,
  made   under  penalty  of  perjury,  indicating  that  such  contractor,
  affiliate or  subcontractor,  as  applicable,  is  registered  with  the
  department for sales and compensating use tax purposes.
    (2)  The  contractor  shall  also provide the procuring covered agency
  with a written certification, made under  penalty  of  perjury,  stating
  that:
    (A)  the  contractor  has  filed  the certification prescribed by this
  section with the department, and that such certification is correct  and
  complete, or
    (B)   such  certification  is  not  required  to  be  filed  with  the
  department, and explaining the reasons for such determination.
    (C) the certification required by this subparagraph shall be  included
  in  the procurement record (as such term is defined in article eleven of
  the  state  finance  law),  or  similar  documentation  if   the   state
  comptroller is not required by law to approve the contract.
    (D)  any  question  as to the accuracy of the contractor certification
  described in clause (B) of this subparagraph shall be  resolved  by  the
  contracting  covered  agency,  in  consultation,  as necessary, with the
  state comptroller and the department.
    (b) A contractor, affiliate of the contractor, or subcontractor  which
  registers  for  sales  and  compensating use tax purposes under sections
  eleven hundred  thirty-four  and  twelve  hundred  fifty-three  of  this
  chapter in order to comply with the provisions of this subdivision shall
  be  a  vendor  and shall comply with and be subject to the provisions of
  articles twenty-eight and twenty-nine of this chapter.
    (c) The certification requirements prescribed by this  subdivision  in
  order  for  a  contract to take effect shall be in addition to any other
  requirements prescribed by law relating to the formation of contracts to
  which a covered agency is a party.
    3. (a) If a contract has taken effect, and the terms of such  contract
  provide  that  it  may  be  renewed  upon  expiration  of  an initial or
  subsequent term, then the contractor shall, no later than the day  prior
  to  the commencement date of the applicable renewal term, certify to the
  contracting covered agency in writing, and  under  penalty  of  perjury,
  that:
    (1)  the  contractor  has  filed  the certification prescribed by this
  section with the department, and that such certification is correct  and
  complete, or
    (2)  that  such  certification  is  not  required to be filed with the
  department, and explains the reasons for such determination.
    (3) Any question as to the accuracy of  the  contractor  certification
  described in subparagraph two of this paragraph shall be resolved by the
  contracting  covered  agency,  in  consultation,  as necessary, with the
  state comptroller and the department.
    (b) The certification required by paragraph (a)  of  this  subdivision
  shall  be made a part of the procurement record (as such term is defined


 in article eleven of the state finance law), or similar documentation if
  the state comptroller is not required by law to approve the contract.
    (c)  If  the  contractor  fails  to make the certification required by
  paragraph (a) of this  subdivision,  or  if,  during  the  term  of  the
  contract,  the  department  or  the  covered  agency discovers that such
  certification is false, then such failure or false  certification  shall
  be  a material breach of the contract, and the contract shall be subject
  to termination if the covered agency determines that such action  is  in
  the best interests of the state.
    (d)  A contractor, affiliate of the contractor, or subcontractor which
  registers for sales and compensating use  tax  purposes  under  sections
  eleven  hundred  thirty-four  and  twelve  hundred  fifty-three  of this
  chapter in order to comply with the provisions of paragraph (a) of  this
  subdivision  shall  be  a vendor and shall comply with and be subject to
  the provisions of articles twenty-eight and twenty-nine of this chapter.
    4. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a contract if the
  procuring covered agency and the state comptroller, or  other  approving
  authority  if  the  state  comptroller  is  not  required to approve the
  contract, find in writing that the contract is necessary to  address  an
  "emergency,"  within  the meaning of article eleven of the state finance
  law, or to ensure the public health, safety  or  welfare.  Such  written
  finding shall explain the reasons supporting such determination.




   § 6. Filing of warrants in the department of state. Wherever under the
  provisions  of  this  chapter  a  warrant is required to be filed in the
  department of state in order to create a lien on personal property  such
  requirement shall be satisfied if there is filed a record of the fact of
  the  issuance  of  such warrant, including the name of the person on the
  basis of whose tax liability the  warrant  is  issued,  the  last  known
  address  of such person, and the amount of such tax liability, including
  penalties and interest. No fee shall be required to  be  paid  for  such
  filing  of  such  warrant  or  such  record.  The  term  "filed" in such
  provisions shall mean presentation  to  the  department  of  state,  for
  filing, of such warrant or such record.




   §   7.   Inapplicability   of   certain   money  judgment  enforcement
  procedures.--Notwithstanding any provision in article fifty-two  of  the
  civil  practice  law  and  rules  or  any  other provision of law to the
  contrary, the procedures in such article for the  enforcement  of  money
  judgments shall not apply to the tax commission, any officer or employee
  of  the  department  of  taxation and finance, or the comptroller or any
  officer or employee of  the  department  of  audit  and  control,  as  a
  garnishee,  with  respect  to  any  amount  of  money  to be refunded or
  credited to a taxpayer pursuant to  any  tax  administered  by  the  tax
  commission,  which  is  imposed  by  this  chapter  or  by a law enacted
  pursuant to the authority of  this  chapter  or  article  two-E  of  the
  general city law.




   § 8. Exemption from taxes granted to REMICs. An entity that is treated
  for  federal  income  tax  purposes as a real estate mortgage investment
  conduit, hereinafter referred to as a REMIC, as such term is defined  in
  section  860D  of  the  internal  revenue code, shall be exempt from all
  taxation imposed or authorized under  this  chapter,  upon  its  capital
  stock,  franchises  or  income.  A  REMIC  shall  not  be  treated  as a
  corporation, partnership or trust for  purposes  of  this  chapter.  The
  assets  of  a  REMIC  shall  not  be  included in the calculation of any
  franchise tax liability under this  chapter.  This  provision  does  not
  exempt  the  holders  of  regular  or  residual interests, as defined in
  section 860G of the internal revenue code, in a REMIC  from  tax  on  or
  measured  by  such regular or residual interests, or on income from such
  interests.




   §   9.  Electronic  funds  transfer  by  certain  taxpayers  remitting
  withholding taxes. (a) Definitions. For the purposes of this section:
    (1) The term "commissioner" means the  commissioner  of  taxation  and
  finance.
    (2)  The  term  "educational  organization" means a higher educational
  institution which
    (A) is authorized by the New York state board  of  regents  to  confer
  degrees, or
    (B)  offers a range of registered undergraduate and graduate curricula
  in the liberal arts and sciences, degrees in two  or  more  professional
  fields and doctoral programs in at least three academic fields, or
    (C)  is  authorized  by  the  New York state board of regents to offer
  undergraduate curricula below the  baccalaureate  level  which  normally
  lead to the associate degree,
  as  such  higher  educational institutions are described in subdivisions
  (k), (l) and (m) of section 50.1 of eight  New  York  codes,  rules  and
  regulations.
    (3)  The term "electronic funds transfer" means any transfer of funds,
  other than a transaction originated by check, draft,  or  similar  paper
  instrument,   which   is   initiated  through  an  electronic  terminal,
  telephonic instrument or computer or  magnetic  tape  so  as  to  order,
  instruct  or  authorize  a  financial  institution to debit or credit an
  account.
    (4) The term "health care provider" means any  organization  described
  in  article  twenty-eight  or thirty-six of the public health law, or in
  article thirty-one of the mental hygiene law.
    (5) The term "payment of tax" means the amount of tax that is actually
  remitted upon the filing of a withholding tax  return,  or  is  actually
  remitted  for  the  purposes  of  obtaining  an extension to file such a
  return.
    (6) The term  "reconciliation  of  withholding"  means  the  quarterly
  combined  withholding,  wage reporting and unemployment insurance return
  required to be filed for the last calendar  quarter  of  each  year,  as
  prescribed  by  paragraph  four of subsection (a) of section six hundred
  seventy-four of this chapter.
    (b) General rules.  (1)  Subject  to  the  requirements  contained  in
  subdivisions (c) and (d) of this section, the commissioner shall require
  by  regulation  that  any  payment  of  tax  made  by  a taxpayer who is
  required, for either of the semi-annual periods ending June thirtieth or
  December  thirty-first,  to  deduct  and  withhold   an   aggregate   of
  thirty-five  thousand  dollars  or more of withholding taxes pursuant to
  part V of  article  twenty-two  of  this  chapter,  or  pursuant  to  an
  equivalent  provision  enacted  under  the  authority of article thirty,
  thirty-A or thirty-B of this chapter, or article two-E  of  the  general
  city  law,  shall  be  made, on or before the date prescribed by law, by
  electronic funds transfer to a bank,  banking  house  or  trust  company
  designated  by  the  commissioner. The commissioner shall designate only
  such banks, banking houses  or  trust  companies  as  are  or  shall  be
  designated  by  the  comptroller as depositories pursuant to section one
  hundred seventy-one-a of this chapter, as added by chapter sixty-nine of
  the  laws  of  nineteen  hundred  seventy-eight.   Notwithstanding   any
  provision of law to the contrary, any such payment shall be deemed to be
  made on the date the payment is received by the designated depository of
  the  department;  provided,  however, that at the election of a taxpayer
  subject to the provisions of this subdivision, mailing by  the  taxpayer
  of  the  applicable withholding tax return and a certified check for the
  amount of the tax liability on or before the second business  day  prior
  to the applicable due date otherwise prescribed by law shall fulfill the


 requirements of this section and shall be deemed to be timely payment of
  such tax liability and timely filing of such return.
    (2)  (A)  On  or  before the thirtieth calendar day following the date
  regulations  implementing  the  provisions  of   this   section   become
  effective,  the  commissioner shall, by certified mail, notify taxpayers
  required to participate in the  electronic  funds  transfer  program  of
  their responsibilities under such program. The notice shall also specify
  that the first payment of tax by electronic funds transfer shall be made
  on  an  applicable  due  date occurring on or after thirty calendar days
  following receipt by the taxpayer of the notice; provided, however, that
  the taxpayer may select an optional applicable  due  date  occurring  no
  later  than sixty calendar days following receipt by the taxpayer of the
  notice.
    (B) (i) By September first, two thousand two, the commissioner  shall,
  by certified mail, notify taxpayers newly required to participate in the
  electronic  funds  transfer  program during the July first, two thousand
  two through June thirtieth, two  thousand  three  program  period.  Such
  notice  shall  contain  language advising the taxpayer of the enrollment
  procedure and of the consequences of failure to enroll in such  program,
  as  well as of the taxpayer's obligation to enroll in the program within
  forty-five calendar days of  the  mailing  of  the  notice  unless  such
  taxpayer  challenges  such  determination  of  required participation by
  requesting a hearing within forty-five calendar days of the  mailing  of
  such notice. In addition, such notice shall specify that such a taxpayer
  shall  make  its first payment of tax by electronic funds transfer by an
  applicable due date in January, two thousand three.
    (ii) By June first, two thousand three and  by  each  succeeding  June
  first, the commissioner shall, by certified mail, notify taxpayers newly
  required  to  participate in the electronic funds transfer program. Such
  notice shall contain language advising the taxpayer  of  the  enrollment
  procedure  and of the consequences of failure to enroll in such program,
  as well as of the taxpayer's right to challenge  such  determination  of
  required  participation  provided  a  hearing is requested within twenty
  calendar days of the mailing of such notice. In  addition,  such  notice
  shall  specify  that such a taxpayer shall make its first payment of tax
  by electronic funds transfer by an applicable due date occurring  on  or
  after  thirty  calendar  days  following  receipt by the taxpayer of the
  notice but no later than sixty calendar days following  receipt  by  the
  taxpayer of the notice.
    (iii)  If  a  taxpayer  does  not  enroll  within forty-five or twenty
  calendar days (as the case may be) of the mailing of the notice provided
  for in clause (i) or (ii) of this subparagraph  or  where  a  taxpayer's
  challenge  to  mandatory participation is not sustained and the taxpayer
  has not enrolled within ten calendar days of notification  thereof,  the
  commissioner  shall  mail  another  notice,  in addition to making other
  reasonable attempts, to inform the taxpayer of the  civil  penalty  that
  has  been  assessed  pursuant to subdivision (h) of this section, of the
  opportunity for abatement of such penalty, and of the  future  penalties
  that may result from continued failure to enroll.
    (3)  Subject  to the provisions of subdivision (f) of this section, an
  electronic funds transfer shall serve as a substitute for the filing  of
  a withholding tax return.
    (c)   Special   rules  with  respect  to  health  care  providers  and
  educational organizations.
    (1) The provisions of subdivision (b) of this section shall not  apply
  to health care providers.
    (2)  All  of the provisions of this section shall apply to educational
  organizations; provided, however, that any payment of tax which is  made


 by  an  educational  organization  shall  be  made  by  electronic funds
  transfer on  or  before  the  third  business  day  following  the  date
  otherwise prescribed by law; and, provided further, that at the election
  of  a taxpayer subject to the provisions of this subdivision, mailing by
  the taxpayer of the applicable withholding tax return  and  a  certified
  check  for  the  amount  of  the  tax  liability  on or before the first
  business day following the applicable due date otherwise  prescribed  by
  law  shall  fulfill the requirements of this section and shall be deemed
  to be timely payment of such tax liability and  timely  filing  of  such
  return.
    (d)  Exemptions.  A  taxpayer  shall  be  exempt from the requirements
  contained in subdivision (b) of this section if such taxpayer proves  to
  the  satisfaction  of  the  commissioner  that  aggregate  tax withheld,
  pursuant to the most recent reconciliation of withholding, is less  than
  one hundred thousand dollars.
    (e)  Voluntary  participation.  A taxpayer may file a request with the
  commissioner to  pay  any  tax  administered  by  such  commissioner  by
  electronic  funds  transfer  in  accordance  with the provisions of this
  section. Such request shall be in such form as  the  commissioner  shall
  require  and shall be granted under such conditions as the commissioner,
  by regulation, deems necessary.
    * (f) Return substitution. An  electronic  funds  transfer  shall  not
  serve  as a substitute for the filing of a withholding tax return if the
  commissioner determines that  such  substitution  will  not  ensure  the
  proper receipt and crediting of a payment of tax.
    * NB Expired December 31, 1992
    (g)  Confidentiality.  The department shall assure the confidentiality
  of information supplied  by  taxpayers  in  effecting  electronic  funds
  transfers  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of section six hundred
  ninety-seven of this chapter or  other  applicable  provisions  of  this
  chapter.  The provisions of article six of the public officers law shall
  not apply to any such information supplied by taxpayers subject  to  the
  requirements of this section.
    (h)  Civil  penalty  for  failure to enroll. If a taxpayer required to
  participate in the electronic funds transfer program prescribed by  this
  section  fails to enroll in such program in accordance with the terms of
  subparagraph (B) of paragraph two of subdivision (b)  of  this  section,
  such  taxpayer  shall  pay  a  penalty  equal  to five thousand dollars;
  provided, however, that if such taxpayer enrolls in the  program  within
  twenty calendar days after notification of assessment of such penalty is
  sent  by  the department by certified mail for program periods beginning
  on or after July first, two thousand two, then  such  penalty  shall  be
  abated.  If  such  taxpayer  continues  to fail to enroll in the program
  after such twenty  calendar  day  period,  the  taxpayer  shall  pay  an
  additional  penalty  of  five  hundred dollars if the failure is for not
  more than one month with an additional five  hundred  dollars  for  each
  additional   month   or  fraction  thereof  during  which  such  failure
  continues. The penalty provided by  this  section  shall  be  paid  upon
  notice  and demand and shall be assessed, collected and paid in the same
  manner as  the  withholding  taxes  referred  to  in  paragraph  one  of
  subdivision  (b) of this section; and any reference in the provisions of
  part VI of article twenty-two  of  this  chapter,  which  apply  to  the
  administration  of and procedures with respect to the provisions of this
  section, shall be deemed also to refer to the penalty provided  by  this
  section.
    (i)   Regulations.   The  commissioner  shall  promulgate  regulations
  necessary to implement this section, which  regulations  shall  include,
  but shall not be limited to, the following:


   (1)  the  different  methods  of  effecting  electronic funds transfer
  messages available to taxpayers. Such methods shall include at least two
  methods in which the transfer can be effected without any charge to  the
  taxpayer  for  the  electronic  funds  transfer  itself, and one of such
  methods shall not require the taxpayer to disclose financial institution
  account information to the department;
    (2)  the contents of an electronic funds transfer message necessary to
  ensure the proper receipt and crediting of a tax payment;
    (3) the means by which taxpayers will be provided acknowledgements  of
  payments by electronic funds transfer; and
    (4)  delineation of what shall constitute reasonable cause and absence
  of willful neglect for purposes of compliance  with  the  provisions  of
  this  section, including the inability of a taxpayer, for reasons beyond
  the taxpayer's control,  to  utilize  any  system  of  electronic  funds
  transfer required pursuant to this section.




   §  10.  Electronic funds transfer by certain taxpayers remitting sales
  and compensating use taxes, prepaid sales and compensating use taxes  on
  motor  fuel and diesel motor fuel, and motor fuel and petroleum business
  taxes. (a) Definitions. For purposes of this section:
    (1) The term "commissioner" means the  commissioner  of  taxation  and
  finance.
    (2) The term "electronic funds transfer" has the meaning prescribed in
  paragraph three of subdivision (a) of section nine of this chapter.
    (3) The term "federal employer identification number" means the number
  assigned in accordance with section six thousand one hundred nine of the
  United  States internal revenue code of nineteen hundred eighty-six, and
  amendments thereto, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
    (4) The term "separate New York state employer identification  number"
  means  a  number  assigned by the department which is either a suffix to
  the federal employer identification  number  or  an  identifying  number
  unrelated to the federal employer identification number.
    (5)  The  term "payment of tax" means a payment or payment over of the
  taxes described in subparagraphs (A), (B) and (C) of  paragraph  one  of
  subdivision (b) of this section.
    (6) The term "taxpayer" means the person required to make a payment of
  tax.
    (b)  Participation  rules.  (1)  General.  Notwithstanding  any  other
  provision of law to the contrary, if, on or  after  June  first  of  any
  year,  during  the  June  first  through  May  thirty-first period which
  immediately precedes the previous June first  through  May  thirty-first
  period, a taxpayer was liable for
    (A)  more  than five hundred thousand dollars of state and local sales
  and compensating use taxes imposed by article twenty-eight and  pursuant
  to the authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter where such taxes
  are administered by the commissioner, or
    (B)  more  than  five million dollars of prepaid state and local sales
  and compensating use taxes on motor fuel and diesel motor  fuel  imposed
  pursuant to section eleven hundred two of this chapter, or
    (C) more than five million dollars of the total of the tax on gasoline
  and  similar  motor  fuel and the tax on petroleum businesses imposed by
  and pursuant to the authority of articles  twelve-A  and  thirteen-A  of
  this  chapter,  then  such taxpayer shall make payments of the taxes for
  which such dollar threshold was met  by  electronic  funds  transfer  or
  certified  check in accordance with the provisions of subdivision (c) of
  this section.
    (2) Special  transitional  rule.  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of
  paragraph one of this subdivision, for purposes of determining whether a
  taxpayer  described  in  subparagraph  (C)  of  such  paragraph shall be
  required to initially participate in  the  program  prescribed  by  this
  section,  if  such taxpayer was liable for more than three million seven
  hundred fifty thousand dollars in total article twelve-A and  thirteen-A
  taxes  during  the  September first, nineteen hundred ninety through May
  thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-one  period,  then  such  taxpayer
  shall  make  payments  of  tax by electronic funds transfer or certified
  check in accordance with the provisions of this section.
    (3) Disaggregation. Every taxpayer who is identified by either its own
  federal employer identification number or  its  own  separate  New  York
  state  employer  identification  number  shall  be treated as a separate
  taxpayer for purposes  of  determining  whether  the  dollar  thresholds
  specified  in  paragraph one or two of this subdivision have been met. A
  taxpayer seeking a  separate  New  York  state  employer  identification
  number for a branch or division may apply to the commissioner for such a
  number.  The  commissioner,  at  his  or her discretion, may assign such


 number upon a showing by the taxpayer of a legitimate  business  purpose
  for such request.
    (4)  Hardship.  (A)  If  a  taxpayer  having  liability  described  in
  subparagraph (A) of paragraph one of this subdivision can demonstrate to
  the satisfaction of the commissioner that (i) for the  two  most  recent
  consecutive  quarters,  the  state  and local sales and compensating use
  taxes properly payable by such taxpayer are less than fifty  percent  of
  the state and local sales and compensating use taxes properly payable by
  such  taxpayer for the comparable two quarters of the preceding year and
  (ii) the sum of such taxpayer's state and local sales  and  compensating
  use  tax  liability  for  such most recent consecutive quarters together
  with the product of the state and local sales and compensating use taxes
  properly payable by such  taxpayer  for  the  two  consecutive  quarters
  immediately  preceding  the  quarters  referred to in clause (i) of this
  subparagraph multiplied by the percentage arrived at under  such  clause
  is  less  than  two  hundred fifty thousand dollars in amount, then such
  taxpayer shall not be required to participate in the program  prescribed
  by  this section for the remaining quarters of the sales tax year ending
  on the next May thirty-first and for  the  immediately  succeeding  four
  sales tax quarters.
    (B)  If  a  taxpayer having liability described in subparagraph (B) or
  (C) of  paragraph  one  of  this  subdivision  can  demonstrate  to  the
  satisfaction  of the commissioner that (i) for the most recent six-month
  period, (I) the prepaid state and local sales and compensating use taxes
  on motor fuel and diesel motor fuel or (II) the total  article  twelve-A
  and  thirteen-A  taxes,  as  the  case  may be, properly payable by such
  taxpayer are less than fifty percent of such applicable taxes  described
  in  subclause  (I) or (II), as the case may be, properly payable by such
  taxpayer for the comparable six-month period of the preceding  year  and
  (ii)  the sum of such taxpayer's liability for such applicable taxes for
  the most recent six months together with the product of such  applicable
  taxes  properly  payable  by  such  taxpayer  for  the  six-month period
  immediately preceding the six-month period referred to in clause (i)  of
  this  subparagraph  multiplied  by  the percentage arrived at under such
  clause is less than two and one-half million  dollars  in  amount,  then
  such  taxpayer  shall  not  be  required  to  participate in the program
  prescribed by this section for the remaining months of the period ending
  on the next May thirty-first and for the immediately  succeeding  twelve
  months.
    (D)  If  a  taxpayer  required  to  remit  state  and  local sales and
  compensating use taxes by electronic funds transfer or  certified  check
  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  this  section  can demonstrate to the
  satisfaction of the commissioner that (i) such taxpayer's liability  for
  state  and  local  sales  and  compensating use taxes was less than four
  million dollars during the period described in  paragraph  one  of  this
  subdivision,  and  (ii)  in  any  two sales tax quarters within the most
  recent  four  consecutive  sales  tax  quarters,  such  taxpayer  was  a
  materialman within the meaning of section two of the lien law, primarily
  engaged  in furnishing building materials to contractors, subcontractors
  or repairmen for the improvement of real  property  improved  or  to  be
  improved with a residential dwelling unit, and authorized by such law to
  file  a  mechanic's  lien  upon such real property and improvement, then
  such taxpayer need not remit state and local sales and compensating  use
  taxes  by electronic funds transfer or certified check for the remainder
  of the program period in accordance  with  the  timing  requirements  of
  subdivision  (c)  of  this  section, but may instead remit such taxes by
  electronic funds transfer or certified  check  at  the  same  time  that
  payment  is required to be made for part-quarterly and quarterly returns


 required to be filed under article  twenty-eight  and  pursuant  to  the
  authority of article twenty-nine of this chapter, in the amount required
  under or pursuant to such articles at such time. The due date prescribed
  by  this  subparagraph shall be deemed to be the applicable due date for
  purposes  of  this  section  for   taxpayers   qualifying   under   this
  subparagraph.  The  provisions  of this section shall apply to taxpayers
  qualifying under this subparagraph, except to the extent that  any  such
  provision  is  either inconsistent with a provision of this subparagraph
  or is not relevant to this subparagraph.
    (c) Payment  rules.  (1)  Payment  by  electronic  funds  transfer  or
  certified  check.  On  or  before  the  third business day following the
  twenty-second day of each calendar month:
    (A) a taxpayer having  liability  described  in  subparagraph  (A)  of
  paragraph  one of subdivision (b) of this section shall, notwithstanding
  any provision of this chapter to the contrary, remit by electronic funds
  transfer or certified check: (i)  either  (I)  seventy-five  percent  of
  one-third  of  the  state  and  local  sales  and compensating use taxes
  properly payable by such taxpayer for  the  comparable  quarter  of  the
  preceding year; or
    (II)  such  taxpayer's  total  liability for state and local sales and
  compensating use taxes during the period ending  on  such  twenty-second
  day of the month, provided, however, that in such instance no penalty or
  interest  shall  be payable pursuant to paragraph two of subdivision (g)
  of this section if such taxpayer timely remits a payment of  tax  in  an
  amount  not  less than ninety percent of the taxes as finally determined
  to be due and payable for such period; and
    (ii) (I) for payments of tax due in the month  of  January,  February,
  April, May, July, August, October or November, such taxpayer's remaining
  liability,  if any, for state and local sales and compensating use taxes
  for the immediately preceding calendar month; or
    (II) for payments of tax due in the month of March, June, September or
  December, such taxpayer's remaining liability, if  any,  for  state  and
  local  sales  and  compensating  use taxes for the immediately preceding
  sales tax quarter;
    (B) a taxpayer having  liability  described  in  subparagraph  (B)  of
  paragraph  one  of  subdivision  (b)  of  this  section  shall  remit by
  electronic funds transfer or certified check either:
    (i)  three-fourths  of  the  prepaid  state  and   local   sales   and
  compensating  use  taxes  on  motor  fuel and diesel motor fuel properly
  payable by such taxpayer for the comparable month of the preceding year;
  or
    (ii) its total  liability  for  prepaid  state  and  local  sales  and
  compensating  use  taxes  on motor fuel and diesel motor fuel during the
  period ending on such twenty-second day of the month, provided, however,
  that in such instance no penalty or interest shall be  payable  pursuant
  to  paragraph  two  of  subdivision (g) of this section if such taxpayer
  timely remits a payment of tax in an amount not less than ninety percent
  of the taxes as finally determined  to  be  due  and  payable  for  such
  period;
    (C)  a  taxpayer  having  liability  described  in subparagraph (C) of
  paragraph one  of  subdivision  (b)  of  this  section  shall  remit  by
  electronic funds transfer or certified check either:
    (i) three-fourths of the total article twelve-A and article thirteen-A
  taxes  properly payable by such taxpayer for the comparable month of the
  preceding year; or
    (ii) its total liability for such taxes during the  period  ending  on
  such  twenty-second  day  of  the month, provided, however, that in such
  instance no penalty or interest shall be payable pursuant  to  paragraph


 two  of subdivision (g) of this section if such taxpayer timely remits a
  payment of tax in an amount not less than ninety percent of the taxes as
  finally determined to be due and payable for such period.
    (2)  Filing  obligations  and  payment of remaining liabilities. (A) A
  taxpayer having liability described in subparagraph (A) of paragraph one
  of subdivision (b) of this section shall, notwithstanding any  provision
  of  this  chapter  to  the  contrary,  file  only  the quarterly returns
  required under article twenty-eight and pursuant  to  the  authority  of
  article  twenty-nine  of  this chapter for each of the periods for which
  such returns are filed under and  pursuant  to  the  authority  of  such
  articles; provided, however, that for those months for which a return is
  not   required   to   be  filed  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  this
  subparagraph, the making  of  a  payment  of  tax  by  electronic  funds
  transfer  or  certified  check  covering  any  period shall be deemed to
  constitute the filing of a return for purposes  of  subdivision  (b)  of
  section  eleven hundred forty-seven of this chapter with respect to such
  period.
    (B) A taxpayer having  liability  described  in  subparagraph  (B)  of
  paragraph  one of subdivision (b) of this section shall file the returns
  required under section eleven hundred two of this chapter and shall  pay
  to  the  commissioner the amounts required to be paid with such returns,
  less the amounts remitted by  electronic  funds  transfer  or  certified
  check under this section, for each of the periods for which such returns
  are filed under such section.
    (C)  A  taxpayer  having  liability  described  in subparagraph (C) of
  paragraph one of subdivision (b) of this section shall file the  returns
  required  under  and  pursuant to the authority of articles twelve-A and
  thirteen-A of this chapter and shall pay to the commissioner the amounts
  required to be paid with such returns,  less  the  amounts  remitted  by
  electronic  funds  transfer  or  certified check under this section, for
  each of the periods for which such returns are filed under and  pursuant
  to the authority of such articles.
    (3)  Payment  date;  payment  by  certified  check.  Payment of tax by
  electronic funds transfer or certified check shall be made  to  a  bank,
  banking  house  or  trust  company  designated  by the commissioner. The
  commissioner shall designate only such banks, banking  houses  or  trust
  companies   as  are  or  shall  be  designated  by  the  comptroller  as
  depositories pursuant to  section  one  hundred  seventy-one-a  of  this
  chapter,  as added by chapter sixty-nine of the laws of nineteen hundred
  seventy-eight.  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  law  to  the
  contrary,  any  electronic  funds transfer shall be deemed to be made on
  the date payment is  received  by  the  depository  of  the  department,
  provided,  however,  that  at  the election of a taxpayer subject to the
  provisions of this section, mailing by the taxpayer of a certified check
  for the amount of the tax liability on or before the second business day
  prior to the applicable due date prescribed by  paragraph  one  of  this
  subdivision  shall  fulfill the requirements with respect to payments of
  tax by electronic funds transfer prescribed by this section and shall be
  deemed to be timely payment of such tax liability.
    (4) Special payment rule. If a taxpayer is liable for payment of taxes
  described in two or more of subparagraphs (A), (B) and (C) of  paragraph
  one  of  subdivision  (b) of this section, then such taxpayer shall make
  separate payment by electronic funds transfer or certified check of  the
  taxes described in each of such subparagraphs.
    (d)  Enrollment and initial payment; duration of participation. Within
  forty-five days after each June first, the commissioner shall notify  by
  certified  or  registered  mail all taxpayers required to participate in
  the program prescribed  by  this  section.  Such  notice  shall  contain


 language  advising  the  taxpayer of the enrollment procedure and of the
  consequences of failure to enroll in such  program,  as  well  as  of  a
  taxpayer's   right   to   challenge   such   determination  of  required
  participation  provided  a hearing is requested within forty days of the
  mailing of such notice. If a taxpayer does not enroll within forty  days
  of  the  mailing  of  such  certified  or  registered notice of required
  participation or where a taxpayer's challenge is not sustained  and  the
  taxpayer  has  not enrolled within ten days of notification thereof, the
  commissioner shall mail another notice,  in  addition  to  making  other
  reasonable  attempts,  to  inform the taxpayer of the civil penalty that
  has been assessed pursuant to paragraph one of subdivision (g)  of  this
  section,  of  the  opportunity for abatement of such penalty, and of the
  future penalties that may result from continued failure  to  enroll  and
  failure  to  pay  by  electronic funds transfer or certified check or to
  file; provided, however, that for the program period beginning  December
  first, nineteen hundred ninety-two through August thirty-first, nineteen
  hundred ninety-three, the thirty-day period referred to in this sentence
  shall  be  read  as  forty-five  days.  A  taxpayer shall make its first
  payment of tax by electronic funds transfer or  certified  check  on  or
  before  the  applicable  due  date prescribed by subdivision (c) of this
  section for the month of December in nineteen  hundred  ninety-two,  the
  month  of  September  in  nineteen hundred ninety-three and the month of
  September for any year thereafter. Unless  otherwise  provided  by  this
  section,  such  taxpayer  shall  continue  to  make  payments  of tax by
  electronic funds transfer or certified  check  in  accordance  with  the
  provisions  of  this  section through the succeeding month of August and
  shall continue  to  make  such  payments  of  tax  for  each  succeeding
  September-to-August  period  where  such  taxpayer meets the criteria of
  subdivision (b)  of  this  section  and  is  properly  notified  by  the
  commissioner  pursuant to the enrollment provisions of this subdivision.
  Provided, however, that:
    (1) A taxpayer described in  subparagraph  (A)  of  paragraph  one  of
  subdivision  (b) of this section who is newly required to participate in
  the program  for  the  September  first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-four
  through  August  thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-five period shall
  have forty-five days to enroll in the program and shall make  its  first
  payment  of  tax  by  electronic funds transfer or certified check on or
  before the applicable due date prescribed by  subdivision  (c)  of  this
  section for the month of December in nineteen hundred ninety-four; and
    (2)  A  taxpayer  described  in  subparagraph  (A) of paragraph one of
  subdivision (b) of this section who is newly required to participate  in
  the  program  for  the  September  first,  nineteen  hundred ninety-five
  through August thirty-first, nineteen hundred  ninety-six  period  shall
  make  its first payment of tax by electronic funds transfer or certified
  check on or before the applicable due date prescribed by subdivision (c)
  of  this  section  for  the  month  of  December  in  nineteen   hundred
  ninety-five.
    (e)  Voluntary  participation.  A  taxpayer  who  is  not  required to
  participate in the  program  prescribed  by  this  section  but  who  is
  required to remit any of the taxes specified in subparagraph (A), (B) or
  (C)  of  paragraph  one  of  subdivision  (b) of this section may file a
  request with the commissioner to remit any of such taxes  by  electronic
  funds  transfer  or certified check in accordance with the provisions of
  this section. Such request shall be in a form as the commissioner  shall
  require  and  shall be granted under such conditions as the commissioner
  in his or her discretion shall deem necessary.
    (f) Confidentiality. The department shall assure  the  confidentiality
  of  information  supplied  by  taxpayers  in  effecting  payments of tax


 pursuant to this section in accordance with the provisions  of  sections
  three  hundred fourteen and eleven hundred forty-six of this chapter and
  any other applicable provisions of law. The provisions of article six of
  the public officers law shall not apply to any such information supplied
  by taxpayers subject to this section.
    (g) Civil penalties and interest. (1) Failure to enroll. If a taxpayer
  required  to participate in the program prescribed by this section fails
  to enroll in such program in accordance with  the  terms  set  forth  in
  subdivision (d) of this section, such taxpayer shall pay a penalty equal
  to  five  thousand  dollars;  provided,  however,  that if such taxpayer
  enrolls  in  the  program  within  thirty  days  after  notification  of
  assessment  of  such  penalty  is sent by the department by certified or
  registered mail return receipt requested, then  such  penalty  shall  be
  abated.  If  such  taxpayer  continues  to fail to enroll in the program
  after such thirty-day period,  the  taxpayer  shall  pay  an  additional
  penalty  of five hundred dollars if the failure is for not more than one
  month, with an additional five hundred dollars for each additional month
  or fraction thereof during which such failure continues.
    (2) Failure to pay  or  late  payment.  (A)  A  taxpayer  required  or
  approved  to  participate  in the program prescribed by this section who
  fails to make a payment of tax by electronic funds transfer or certified
  check on or before the applicable due date prescribed by subdivision (c)
  of this section, or who fails to pay any tax required to be remitted  on
  or  before  such  applicable  due  date  shall, in the case of the taxes
  imposed pursuant to article twenty-eight and pursuant to  the  authority
  of  article  twenty-nine  of  this  chapter,  be  liable for penalty and
  interest as prescribed by subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of paragraph one of
  subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred forty-five  of  this  chapter,
  and in the case of the taxes imposed by and pursuant to the authority of
  articles  twelve-A and thirteen-A of this chapter, be liable for penalty
  and interest as prescribed by paragraphs (a) and (b) of subdivision  one
  of section two hundred eighty-nine-b of this chapter.
    (B)  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  law  to  the  contrary, if a
  taxpayer described in subparagraph  (B)  or  (C)  of  paragraph  one  of
  subdivision  (b)  of  this  section  fails  to  make a payment of tax by
  electronic funds transfer or certified check on or before the applicable
  due date prescribed by subdivision (c) of this section or fails  to  pay
  any  tax  required to be remitted on or before such applicable due date,
  as prescribed by subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, and also  fails  to
  pay  or  pay over to the commissioner the amounts required to be paid or
  paid over with the applicable  return  described  in  paragraph  two  of
  subdivision  (c)  of this section due the twentieth day of the following
  month, then  penalty  and  interest  for  such  additional  failure,  as
  provided  by  subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of paragraph one of subdivision
  (a) of section eleven hundred forty-five of this chapter  or  paragraphs
  (a)  and  (b) of subdivision one of section two hundred eighty-nine-b of
  this chapter, as the case may be, shall be computed on the amount  equal
  to  the  difference  between  the  total  of  the  amount  of tax due or
  determined to be due with such return and the total of the amount of tax
  required to be paid by electronic funds transfer or certified  check  on
  or  before the applicable due date prescribed by subdivision (c) of this
  section for the preceding month.
    (3) Failure to file required returns. A taxpayer required or  approved
  to  participate  in  the program prescribed by this section who complies
  with the  payment  requirements  of  subdivision  (c)  of  this  section
  (including  the  payment of remaining liabilities described in paragraph
  two of such subdivision), but who fails  to  file  any  return  required
  pursuant to article twelve-A, thirteen-A, twenty-eight or twenty-nine of


 this chapter, as the case may be, for the period for which such payments
  were  timely  and fully paid or paid over, shall be liable for a penalty
  equal to five hundred dollars.
    (h)  Administration. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the
  provisions of part IV of article  twenty-eight  of  this  chapter  shall
  apply  to  the  administration  of  and  procedures  with respect to the
  provisions  of  this  section  relating  to  the  taxes   described   by
  subparagraph  (A)  of  paragraph one of subdivision (b) of this section,
  the provisions of section eleven hundred two of this chapter relating to
  the administration of and procedures with respect to such section  shall
  apply  to  the  administration  of  and  procedures  with respect to the
  provisions  of  this  section  relating  to  the  taxes   described   by
  subparagraph  (B)  of  such paragraph one, and the provisions of article
  twelve-A relating to the administration of and procedures  with  respect
  to  such  article shall apply to the provisions of this section relating
  to the taxes described in subparagraph (C) of such paragraph one.
    (i)  Regulations.  The  commissioner  shall  have  the  authority   to
  promulgate  regulations  in  order  to  implement the provisions of this
  section.






	   § 11. Certified capital companies. (a) Definitions. For the purpose of
  this section the following terms shall mean:
    (1)  "Certification  date"  -  the  date  on which a certified capital
  company is so designated by the  department  for  a  specific  certified
  capital company program.
    (2)  "Certified  capital"  -  an  investment  of  cash  by a certified
  investor in a certified capital company which fully funds  the  purchase
  price  of  either  or  both its equity interest in the certified capital
  company or a qualified debt instrument issued by the  certified  capital
  company.  Any  such  investment  shall  be  subject to the provisions of
  article fourteen of the insurance law.
    (3) "Certified capital company" - a partnership, corporation, trust or
  limited liability company, organized  on  a  for-profit  basis  that  is
  located, headquartered and licensed or registered to conduct business in
  New  York,  that  has as its primary business activity the investment of
  cash in qualified businesses and that is certified by the department  as
  meeting the criteria set forth in subdivision (b) of this section.
    (4)  "Certified  investor"  -  any  insurance company that contributes
  certified capital.
    (5) "Department" - the department  of  financial  services;  provided,
  however,  that  "department"  shall  mean  the  department  of  economic
  development with  regard  to  any  application,  certification,  report,
  submission,  filing or other action required or governed by this section
  occurring on or after August first, two thousand eleven.
    (6) "Net profits on certified  investments"  -  the  amount  of  money
  returned  to  the  certified capital company in repayment of or exchange
  for the certified capital company's qualified investment or  investments
  in  the  qualified  business  in  excess of the amount of such qualified
  investment or investments.  Such  number  shall  aggregate  all  of  the
  certified   capital  company's  qualified  investments  where  gains  on
  qualified  investments  are   netted   against   losses   on   qualified
  investments.
    (7)  "Qualified  business"  -  an  independently  owned  and  operated
  business that meets all of the following conditions as of  the  time  of
  the first investment in the business:
    (A)  It is headquartered in New York state, and its principal business
  operations are located in New York state, and the  qualified  investment
  it  receives  is  used  solely to support its business operations in the
  state, except for advertising, promotions and sales purposes.  In  cases
  where  the  qualified  investment  is  made  in  a start-up company such
  capital must be used  solely  to  establish  and  support  its  business
  operations  in  New  York  state, except for advertising, promotions and
  sales purposes.
    (B) It has either (i) no more than one  hundred  employees,  at  least
  eighty  percent  of whom are employed in New York state or, (ii) no more
  than two hundred employees, at least eighty percent of whom are employed
  in this state, and during the  fiscal  year  immediately  preceding  the
  qualified  investment  it  had,  together  with  its  affiliates,  gross
  revenues of no more than five million dollars, on a  consolidated  basis
  as   determined   in   accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting
  principles, except that,  with  respect  to  certified  capital  company
  program  three  and certified capital company program four and certified
  capital company program five, in the case of a  company  located  in  an
  empire  zone  established  pursuant to article eighteen-B of the general
  municipal law  such  gross  revenues  shall  not  exceed  eight  million
  dollars.
    (C)  It  is  involved  in  commerce  for the purpose of developing and
  manufacturing products and systems, including but not  limited  to  high


 technology  products  and  systems such as computers, computer software,
  medical  equipment,  biotechnology,  telecommunications  equipment   and
  products,  processing  or  assembling  all types of products, conducting
  research and development on all types of products or providing services,
  but  excluding  real  estate,  real  estate  development,  insurance and
  businesses predominantly engaged in professional  services  provided  by
  accountants, lawyers or physicians.
    (D)  The  business was not organized by a certified capital company or
  an affiliate of a certified capital company, but  this  paragraph  shall
  not  prohibit  a  certified  capital  company  from providing financial,
  technical or similar advice to a business before making an investment in
  such business.
    (E) The business does not have a financial relationship,  such  as  an
  ownership interest, investment interest, or compensation agreement, with
  a  certified  capital  company  or  any affiliate of a certified capital
  company before the date on which a certified capital company  makes  its
  first  investment in the business, but this paragraph shall not prohibit
  a certified capital  company  from  providing  financial,  technical  or
  similar  advice  to  a  business  before  making  an  investment in such
  business.
    (F) For purposes of this paragraph, the term "independently owned  and
  operated  business"  means  (i)  in the case of a corporation or limited
  liability company, a corporation where no more than fifty percent of the
  voting stock of the corporation or limited liability company is owned or
  controlled, directly or indirectly, by a single  corporation,  a  single
  partnership  or a single limited liability company, and (ii) in the case
  of  a  partnership,  association,  or  other  entity,   a   partnership,
  association  or  other  entity  where  no more than fifty percent of the
  capital, profits or  other  beneficial  interest  in  such  partnership,
  association  or  other  entity  is  owned  or  controlled,  directly  or
  indirectly, by a single corporation, a single partnership  or  a  single
  limited  liability  company;  provided,  however,  that  the  term shall
  include, as a single "independently owned and operated business," parent
  and subsidiary or affiliated corporations or limited liability companies
  (i) that are engaged in an integrated  for-profit  business  enterprise,
  and  (ii)  in  which  at  least  eighty  percent  of the voting stock or
  membership interests of all of the  corporations  or  limited  liability
  companies  is  owned  or controlled, directly or indirectly, by a common
  group of shareholders or members, and no more than fifty percent of  the
  voting  stock  or  membership  interests  of  all of the corporations or
  limited  liability  companies  is  owned  or  controlled,  directly   or
  indirectly,  by  a  single  corporation,  single  partnership, or single
  limited liability company that is not  part  of  such  group  or  parent
  company or affiliated corporations or limited liability companies.
    (8)  "Qualified  debt  instrument"  -  a  debt  instrument issued by a
  certified capital company, at par value or a premium, with  an  original
  maturity  date of at least five years from date of issuance, a repayment
  schedule which is not faster than a level  principal  amortization,  and
  interest,  distribution or payment features which are not related to the
  profitability of the certified capital company or the performance of the
  certified capital company's investment portfolio.
    (9) "Qualified distribution"  -  any  distribution  or  payment  by  a
  certified capital company in connection with the following:
    (A)  Reasonable  costs and expenses of such equity holders incurred by
  such equity holders in connection with  forming,  syndicating,  managing
  and  operating  the  certified  capital company, including (i) an annual
  management fee in an amount  that  does  not  exceed  two  and  one-half
  percent  of  the certified capital of the certified capital company with


 respect to a particular certified  capital  company  program;  (ii)  the
  reasonable  and  necessary  fees paid for professional services (such as
  legal and accounting services) related to the operation of the certified
  capital  company;  (iii) with respect to program four and any subsequent
  program, all payments by the certified capital company  in  satisfaction
  of  its  indebtedness  to its certified investors, provided that no more
  than thirty-five percent of such certified capital  company's  certified
  capital  may  be  used  to  purchase  U.S.  treasury  securities,  other
  investment-grade securities,  a  guaranty,  indemnity,  bond,  insurance
  policy  or  other  payment  undertaking, or any combination thereof; and
  provided further, that nothing in this provision shall be  construed  to
  limit  a  certified capital company from expending non-certified capital
  in satisfaction of such indebtedness; and (iv) with respect  to  program
  four  and  any  subsequent program, the reasonable costs and expenses of
  forming, syndicating,  or  organizing  the  certified  capital  company,
  separate  from the costs of insuring or defeasing the obligations of the
  certified capital  company,  provided,  however,  that  such  costs  and
  expenses  shall  not  exceed  five  percent  of  the  certified  capital
  company's certified capital; and
    (B) Any increase or projected increase  in  federal  or  state  taxes,
  including  penalties  and  interest  related to state and federal income
  taxes, of the equity owners of a  certified  capital  company  resulting
  from  the  earnings  or  other  tax  liability  of the certified capital
  company to the extent that the increase is  related  to  the  ownership,
  management or operation of a certified capital company.
    (10)  "Qualified  investment"  - the investment of cash by a certified
  capital company in a qualified business for the purchase  of  any  debt,
  equity  or  hybrid  security,  of  any  nature and description whatever,
  including a debt instrument or security which has the characteristics of
  debt  but  which  provides  for  conversion  into   equity   or   equity
  participation instruments such as options or warrants, provided however,
  in the case of certified capital programs three, four and five, that any
  such debt instrument have a maturity of at least twenty-four months from
  the  date  such  debt is incurred; and further provided that a certified
  capital company, after the investment and assuming full  conversion  and
  exercise  of  any  equity  participation instruments, shall not own more
  than fifty percent of the  voting  equity  of  the  qualified  business,
  except  in the case of a follow-on investment where a specific exemption
  is granted by the department under subparagraph (D) of paragraph one  of
  subdivision  (c)  of  this section. Furthermore, except in the case of a
  follow-on investment, if a certified  capital  company  owns  more  than
  fifteen percent of the equity in a company or has a seat on the board of
  directors  of  such  company,  then  a  certified capital company cannot
  invest in such company unless the following conditions are met:  (i)  at
  least  one  other  investor  who  is  not  an affiliate of the certified
  capital company participates in the same round of investment on the same
  terms and conditions as the certified  capital  company;  and  (ii)  the
  certified  capital  company and its affiliates invest no more than fifty
  percent of the total investment made in that round of investment.
    (11) "Early stage business" - a qualified business which is  involved,
  at  the  time of investment, in activities related to the development of
  initial product or service offerings, such as prototype  development  or
  establishment  of  initial production or service processes, or, which is
  less than two years old and during the fiscal year immediately preceding
  the qualified  investment  had,  together  with  its  affiliates,  gross
  revenues of no more than two million dollars, on a consolidated basis as
  determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.


   (12)  "Superintendent"  -  the  superintendent  of financial services;
  provided, however, that "superintendent" shall mean the commissioner  of
  economic  development  with  regard  to  any application, certification,
  report, submission, filing or other action required or governed by  this
  section occurring on or after August first, two thousand eleven.
    (13)  "Certified  capital  company program" - a calendar year or years
  for which taxpayers may be allocated and  allowed  credits  pursuant  to
  this  section  and  subdivision (k) of section fifteen hundred eleven of
  this chapter and delineated as a separate program by this section.
    (14) "Starting date" - the date on which a certified  capital  company
  is  allocated certified capital for a specific certified capital company
  program pursuant to subdivision (b) of this section.
    (15) "Underserved area" - a county, including a county wholly within a
  city, in which, as of January first, two thousand, less than twenty-five
  percent of the qualified investments in qualified businesses  were  made
  by  certified  capital companies under certified capital company program
  one. The superintendent shall prepare a list of such  counties  by  July
  first, two thousand.
    (16)  "Start-up business" - a qualified business which is involved, at
  the time of investment, in activities  related  to  the  development  of
  initial  product  or service offerings, such as prototype development or
  establishment of initial production or service processes, or,  which  is
  less than two years old and during the fiscal year immediately preceding
  the  qualified  investment  had,  together  with  its  affiliates, gross
  revenues of no more than two million dollars, on a consolidated basis as
  determined in accordance with generally accepted  accounting  principles
  and  has fewer than twenty employees at the time of the investment; and,
  in addition, which has emerged within the year  prior  to  the  date  of
  investment  or  is  emerging  from, or utilizes a technology transferred
  from, a university or college research  facility  located  in  New  York
  state,  a not-for-profit research facility located in New York state, or
  an industrial research facility located in New York state, or  which  is
  conducting research in conjunction with or in the research facilities of
  a  university  or college located in New York state, or which is located
  in or has emerged within the year prior to the date of investment or  is
  emerging from an incubator facility located in New York state.
    (b)  Certification.  (1) The superintendent shall establish by rule or
  regulation  the  procedures  for  making  an  application  to  become  a
  certified  capital  company.  The  applicant  shall pay a non-refundable
  application fee of five hundred  dollars  at  the  time  of  filing  the
  application with the department.
    (2)  The superintendent may certify partnerships, corporations, trusts
  or limited liability companies, organized on a for profit  basis,  which
  submit an application to be designated as a certified capital company if
  such  applicant  is located, headquartered and licensed or registered to
  conduct business in New York, has as its primary business  activity  the
  investment  of cash in qualified businesses and meets the other criteria
  set forth in this subdivision.
    (3) A certified capital company's initial capitalization, at the  time
  of seeking certification, must be five hundred thousand dollars or more.
    (4)  The  superintendent  shall review the organizational documents of
  each applicant  for  certification  and  the  business  history  of  the
  applicant,  determine  that  the applicant's cash, marketable securities
  and other liquid assets are at least five hundred thousand dollars,  and
  determine  that  the  officers  and  the  board  of  directors,  general
  partners,  trustees,  managers,  or  members  are  trustworthy  and  are
  thoroughly acquainted with the requirements of this subdivision.


   (5)  The  superintendent  shall verify that at least two principals of
  the certified capital company or any manager of  the  certified  capital
  company  each  have no less than five years of experience in the venture
  capital or a venture capital-related industry.
    (6)  Any  offering  material  involving  the sale of securities of the
  certified capital company shall include the following statement:
    "Authorizing the formation of a Certified  Capital  Company  does  not
  constitute  the  endorsement  of  the state of New York as to either the
  quality of management or the potential for earnings of such company  and
  the state of New York is not liable for damages or losses to a Certified
  Investor in the company. Use of the word 'certified' in an offering does
  not  constitute a recommendation or endorsement of the investment by the
  state of New York.
    Investments in a prospective Certified Capital Company  prior  to  the
  time  such  company  is  certified  with  respect to a certified capital
  company program are not eligible for tax credits. In the  event  certain
  statutory  provisions  (as  specified  in section 11 of the Tax Law) are
  violated, the state of New York may require  forfeiture  of  unused  tax
  credits and repayment of used tax credits."
    (7)  Within  sixty days of application, the superintendent shall issue
  the certification or shall refuse the certification and  communicate  in
  detail   to  the  applicant  the  grounds  for  the  refusal,  including
  suggestions for the removal of those grounds.
    (8) The superintendent may certify any  previously  certified  capital
  company  which  has remained in compliance with the requirements of this
  section upon  the  application  of  such  company  to  be  designated  a
  certified  capital  company  for a certified capital company program for
  which  it  is  not  so  designated.  Such  new  certification  shall  be
  considered  a  separate  certification from any other such certification
  under this section and investments in  and  by  such  company  shall  be
  considered  separately  for purposes of subdivisions (c) and (d) of this
  section.
    (9) The superintendent shall start accepting applications to become  a
  certified  capital  company  in certified capital company program two by
  November first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine, and shall start  accepting
  applications  to become a certified capital company in certified capital
  company program three by August first, two  thousand,  and  shall  begin
  accepting   applications  to  become  a  certified  capital  company  in
  certified capital company program four by the later of August first, two
  thousand four or not more than sixty days after the  effective  date  of
  section  one of part D of chapter fifty-nine of the laws of two thousand
  four and shall  begin  accepting  applications  to  become  a  certified
  capital  company  in certified capital company program five by the later
  of July first, two thousand five or not more than sixty days  after  the
  effective  date  of  the  chapter of the laws of two thousand five which
  amended this paragraph.
    (10) A certified capital company may  obtain  a  guaranty,  indemnity,
  bond,  insurance policy and/or other payment undertaking for the benefit
  of its certified investors from any entity; provided, however, that,  in
  no case shall more than one certified investor of such certified capital
  company  or affiliates of such certified investor be entitled to provide
  such guaranty, indemnity, bond, insurance policy  and/or  other  payment
  undertaking in favor of the certified investors of the certified capital
  company and its affiliates in this state.
    (c)  Requirements for continuance of certification. (1) To continue to
  be certified with respect to  a  particular  certified  capital  company
  program,  a  certified  capital  company must make qualified investments
  according to the following schedule:


   (A) Within two years after the starting date of a  specific  certified
  capital  company  program  of  a  certified  capital  company,  at least
  twenty-five percent of its certified capital allocable to such certified
  capital company program must be placed in qualified investments.
    (B) Within three years after the starting date of a specific certified
  capital  company  program of a certified capital company, at least forty
  percent of its certified capital allocable  to  such  certified  capital
  company program must be placed in qualified investments.
    (C)  Within four years after the starting date of a specific certified
  capital company program of a certified capital company, at  least  fifty
  percent  of  its  certified  capital allocable to such certified capital
  company program must be placed in qualified investments, at least  fifty
  percent of which must have been placed in early stage businesses, except
  that  in  the  case of program four and any subsequent program, at least
  twenty-five percent of which  must  have  been  placed  in  early  stage
  businesses and an additional twenty-five percent of which must have been
  placed  in start-up businesses, and except that in the case of qualified
  investments  made  in  qualified  businesses  located  in  empire  zones
  established  pursuant to article eighteen-B of the general municipal law
  under the provisions of certified capital company program three, program
  four and  program  five  from  allocations  of  certified  capital  made
  specifically   for   such   targeted  investments  in  such  zones,  the
  requirement for  qualified  investments  in  early  stage  and  start-up
  businesses shall not apply.
    (D)  A  certified capital company, at least fifteen working days prior
  to making a proposed investment in a specific business, shall certify in
  writing to the superintendent that (i) the business in which it proposes
  to invest meets the definition of a qualified business as set  forth  in
  subdivision  (a)  of  this  section  or,  in  the  case  of  a follow-on
  investment, that such business continues to meet  the  requirements  set
  forth in subparagraphs (A) and (C) of paragraph seven of subdivision (a)
  of this section and, in either case, an explanation of its determination
  that  the  business  meets  such  requirements, and (ii) with respect to
  certified capital company program three, program four and program  five,
  whether  or  not  such business is located in an empire zone established
  pursuant to article eighteen-B of the general municipal  law  or  in  an
  underserved  area  outside  an  empire  zone.  The  certification to the
  superintendent shall include a sworn  statement  from  the  business  in
  which  the certified capital company proposes to invest, which statement
  shall  evidence  the  intention  of  the  business   to   maintain   its
  headquarters  in New York and conduct its primary business operations in
  the state of New York  after  its  receipt  of  the  investment  by  the
  certified  capital  company.  If  the superintendent determines that the
  business does not meet the definition of a qualified  business,  or,  in
  the case of a follow-on investment, that such business does not meet the
  requirements  set  forth in subparagraphs (A) and (C) of paragraph seven
  of subdivision (a) of this section, then it shall,  within  the  fifteen
  working  day  period  prior  to  the  making of the proposed investment,
  notify the certified capital company of its determination and provide an
  explanation thereof, provided, however, that the  department  may,  upon
  written  request of a certified capital company and at the discretion of
  the department, grant,  in  writing,  an  exemption  to  the  percentage
  limitations of paragraph ten of subdivision (a) of this section.
    (E)  All  certified capital not placed in qualified investments by the
  certified capital company may be held or invested in such manner as  the
  certified  capital  company,  in  its discretion, deems appropriate. The
  proceeds of all  certified  capital  returned  to  a  certified  capital
  company  after  being  originally placed in qualified investments may be


 placed again  in  qualified  investments  and  shall  count  toward  any
  requirement  in  this  subdivision  with  respect  to  placing certified
  capital in qualified investments.
    (F)  If  within ten years after the starting date of certified capital
  company program four or program five, and within twelve years after  the
  starting date of certified capital company programs one, two, and three,
  one  hundred  percent  of the certified capital allocable to a certified
  capital company participating in such program has  not  been  placed  in
  qualified  investments,  the specific certified capital company shall no
  longer be permitted to  receive  management  fees;  provided  that  such
  restriction  shall  not  apply  (i)  with  respect  to certified capital
  company programs one, two, and three, to any certified  capital  company
  that  has  not,  prior  to  October  thirty-first,  two  thousand  four,
  received, as opposed to accrued,  any  management  fees,  or  (ii)  with
  respect to any certified capital company program, to a certified capital
  company  in  which  at least fifty percent of the voting stock, capital,
  membership interests, or other beneficial ownership  interests,  as  the
  case  may  be,  are  owned  by  an  entity  that is managed, directly or
  indirectly, by a non-profit corporation.
    (2) Any business which is classified as a qualified  business  at  the
  time  of  the  first  investment in said business by a certified capital
  company shall remain classified as a qualified business and may  receive
  follow-on  investments  from  any  certified  capital  company, and such
  follow-on investments shall be qualified investments  even  though  such
  business may not meet the definition of a qualified business at the time
  of  such  follow-on  investments,  provided, however, that such business
  continues to meet the requirements set forth in  subparagraphs  (A)  and
  (C)  of  paragraph  seven  of  subdivision (a) of this section, and such
  business reaffirms its intention to maintain  its  headquarters  in  New
  York  and  conduct  its  primary business operations in the state of New
  York  as  required  in  subparagraph  (D)  of  paragraph  one  of   this
  subdivision.
    (3) No qualified investment may be made by a certified capital company
  to  the extent such investment would cause the company's total qualified
  investment outstanding with respect to the qualified business  receiving
  such investment to exceed fifteen percent of the total certified capital
  of the certified capital company at the time of such investment.
    (4)  Documents  and  other  materials  submitted  by certified capital
  companies  or  by  businesses  for  purposes  of  the   continuance   of
  certification shall not be public records if such records are determined
  by  the  superintendent  to  be  trade  or business secrets and shall be
  maintained in a confidential manner by the superintendent.
    (5) The aggregate cumulative amount of all qualified investments  made
  by the certified capital company for a certified capital company program
  from  its  starting  date  for  such  program  will be considered in the
  calculation of the percentage requirements under subparagraphs (A),  (B)
  and  (C)  of  paragraph one of this subdivision, provided, however, that
  any amounts received by a certified capital  company  from  a  qualified
  business  as  (i)  commitment  fees, closing fees, or other similar fees
  (excluding reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses, including legal fees
  and accounting fees) in excess of one percent of the  certified  capital
  company's  investment  in  the  qualified business or (ii) license fees,
  royalties, or similar charges shall not be  considered  in  any  of  the
  percentage calculations under this section.
    (6)  Each  certified capital company shall report the following to the
  superintendent:
    (A) As soon as practicable after the receipt of certified  capital  or
  an  irrevocable  funding  commitment  subject  only to the receipt of an


 allocation pursuant to subdivision (h) of this section, (i) the name  of
  each  certified  investor from which the certified capital was received,
  including such certified investor's insurance tax identification number;
  (ii)  the  amount  of  each certified investor's investment of certified
  capital; and (iii) the date on which the certified capital was received.
  Provided, however, that requests for  allocation  of  tax  credits  with
  respect  to  certified  capital company program two by certified capital
  companies on behalf of their certified investors which are  received  by
  the  superintendent  on  or  before  March  first, two thousand shall be
  treated as having been received on March first,  two  thousand  for  tax
  credits  to  be utilized in two thousand one, and if satisfactory, shall
  be given equal priority for  allocation,  and  provided,  however,  that
  requests for allocation of tax credits with respect to certified capital
  company  program three by certified capital companies on behalf of their
  certified investors which are  received  by  the  superintendent  on  or
  before  December  first,  two  thousand  shall be treated as having been
  received on December first, two thousand for tax credits to be  utilized
  in  two thousand two, and if satisfactory, shall be given equal priority
  for allocation, and provided, however, that requests for  allocation  of
  tax  credits  with  respect to certified capital company program four by
  certified capital companies on behalf of their certified investors which
  are received by the superintendent on  or  before  December  first,  two
  thousand  four  shall  be  treated  as  having been received on December
  first, two thousand four for tax credits to be utilized in two  thousand
  six,  and if satisfactory, shall be given equal priority for allocation,
  and provided, however, that requests for allocation of tax credits  with
  respect  to  certified capital company program five by certified capital
  companies on behalf of their certified investors which are  received  by
  the  superintendent  on  or  before the later of (i) November first, two
  thousand five and (ii) the one hundred twentieth day after the  date  on
  which  the superintendent began accepting applications for certification
  in connection with certified capital company program  five  pursuant  to
  paragraph  nine  of  subdivision (b) of this section shall be treated as
  having been received on such later date for tax credits to  be  utilized
  in  two  thousand  seven,  and  if  satisfactory,  shall  be given equal
  priority for allocation.
    (B) On an annual basis, on or  before  January  thirty-first  of  each
  year,  (i)  the  amount  of  the  certified  capital company's certified
  capital at the end of the immediately preceding year;  (ii)  whether  or
  not the certified capital company has invested more than fifteen percent
  of  its total certified capital in any one business; (iii) all qualified
  investments that the certified capital company made during the  previous
  calendar  year,  including  the  number  of  employees of each qualified
  business in which it has made investments at the time of such investment
  and as of December  first  of  the  preceding  calendar  year.  For  any
  qualified  business where the certified capital company no longer has an
  investment, the  certified  capital  company  shall  provide  employment
  figures  for  such  company as of the last day before the investment was
  terminated. Such report shall provide  a  separate  accounting  by  each
  certified  capital  company  program; and (iv) all qualified investments
  made in empire zones and underserved areas outside such empire zones  as
  required  under  certified  capital  company  program  three,  certified
  capital company program four and certified capital company program five.
    (C) Each certified capital company shall provide to the superintendent
  annual audited financial statements, which shall include the opinion  of
  an  independent  certified  public accountant, within ninety days of the
  close of its fiscal year. The audit  shall  address  whether  the  funds
  received by the certified capital company have been invested as required


 under   subparagraphs  (A),  (B)  and  (C)  of  paragraph  one  of  this
  subdivision.  Upon  receiving  notification  and  documentation   by   a
  certified  capital  company  that  it  has satisfied the requirements of
  subparagraph  (C)  of  paragraph  one  of  this  subdivision that it has
  invested fifty percent of its certified capital,  the  department  shall
  have  sixty days to notify such certified capital company that it has or
  has not met such requirement, with a reason for such determination if it
  has not, in the judgment of the department, met such requirement. If the
  department does not provide such notification  within  sixty  days,  the
  certified  capital  company  shall  then  be  deemed  to  have  met such
  requirement.
    (D) On or before April first of  each  year,  each  certified  capital
  company  shall  pay  an annual, non-refundable certification fee of five
  hundred dollars to the superintendent; provided that no such  fee  shall
  be  required  within  six  months of the initial certification date of a
  certified capital company.
    (E)(1) Within thirty days  of  the  decision  on  an  application  for
  certification   pursuant   to  subdivision  (b)  of  this  section,  the
  superintendent shall submit a copy of such application and  the  related
  decision  to  the department of taxation and finance. The superintendent
  shall submit a  copy  of  all  filings  of  certifications  pursuant  to
  subparagraph   (D)   of  paragraph  one  of  this  subdivision  and  any
  determination made thereon within fifteen days of such filing.
    (2) The superintendent shall annually, by March first, submit  to  the
  department  of  taxation and finance a list of persons who may claim the
  tax credit for the previous  taxable  year  and  any  other  information
  necessary  to assist the department of taxation and finance to determine
  eligibility for such tax credit.
    (d) Distributions. (1) A certified capital company may make  qualified
  distributions  at  any time. In order for a certified capital company to
  make a distribution other than a qualified distribution from a certified
  capital company program, to its equity holders, either (A) the aggregate
  cumulative amount of all qualified investments  for  such  program  must
  equal  or  exceed one hundred percent of its certified capital allocable
  to such certified capital company program, or (B) it must have  received
  written authorization to make such distribution from the superintendent.
  In no event, however, shall any such distribution to its equity holders,
  other  than  a  qualified  distribution,  be made by a certified capital
  company from a certified capital company program unless an amount  equal
  cumulatively to at least ninety percent of its certified capital of such
  program  is  invested in companies that conduct their principal business
  operations in New York state.
    (2) In the event that a business in which a  qualified  investment  is
  made relocates its principal business operations to another state during
  such  investment,  or  within three months after the termination of such
  investment, the cumulative  amount  of  qualified  investment  shall  be
  reduced  by the amount of such qualified investment, for the purposes of
  this subdivision only, unless (A) the certified capital company  invests
  an  amount  at least equal to the investment of certified capital in the
  relocated business in a qualified business located  in  New  York  state
  within  six  months  of  the  relocation  or  (B)  unless  the  business
  demonstrates that it has returned its principal business  operations  to
  New  York state within three months of such relocation. A business shall
  be deemed to have relocated its principal  business  operations  outside
  New  York  state  if the primary workplace of more than fifty percent of
  the employees of such business within the state is relocated to  another
  state.


   (3)  In  the  event that a business in which a qualified investment is
  made under certified capital company program  three,  certified  capital
  company   program  four  or  certified  capital  company  program  five,
  relocates its principal business operation within the  earlier  of  four
  years  after the date of such qualified investment or three months after
  the  termination  of  such  investment,  whereby  the  requirements   of
  paragraph  three  of  subdivision  (h) of this section to make qualified
  investments in qualified businesses located in empire zones  established
  pursuant  to  article  eighteen-B  of  the  general  municipal law or in
  underserved areas outside such empire zones no longer are satisfied, the
  cumulative amount of qualified investment shall be reduced by the amount
  of such qualified investment, for the purposes of this subdivision only,
  unless (A) the certified capital company  invests  an  amount  at  least
  equal  to  the investment of certified capital in the relocated business
  in a qualified business located in  either  an  empire  zone  or  in  an
  underserved  area  outside  an  empire  zone so that the requirements of
  paragraph three of subdivision (h) of this section are  again  satisfied
  within  six  months  of  such  relocation,  unless the certified capital
  company certifies to the superintendent that a  good  faith  effort  was
  made to make additional qualifying investments under the requirements of
  paragraph  three of subdivision (h) of this section, or (B) the business
  demonstrates that it has returned its principal  business  operation  to
  New  York  state  in  either  an  empire  zone or in an underserved area
  outside an empire zone within three months of such  relocation,  or  (C)
  the  business  demonstrates  that  it  had  a valid business purpose for
  relocating its principal business operation. A business shall be  deemed
  to have relocated its principal business operations outside of an empire
  zone  or  an  underserved  area  outside  an  empire zone if the primary
  workplace of more than fifty percent of the employees of  such  business
  within  an  empire zone or an underserved area outside an empire zone is
  relocated to an area outside the state or outside an empire zone  or  an
  underserved area outside an empire zone.
    (4)  Payments  to  debt  holders of a certified capital company may be
  made without restriction with respect to  repayments  of  principal  and
  interest  on  indebtedness  owed to them by a certified capital company,
  including  indebtedness  of  the  certified  capital  company  on  which
  certified  investors  earned  tax  credits. A debt holder that is also a
  certified investor or equity holder of a certified capital  company  may
  receive  payments  with  respect  to  such  debt without any restriction
  whatsoever.
    (5) A  certified  capital  company  that  receives  certified  capital
  investments  under  program four and any subsequent program shall pay to
  the department for deposit in the general fund an amount equal to thirty
  percent of the net profits on qualified investments. A certified capital
  company  shall  make  all  payments  required   under   this   paragraph
  concurrently  with and pro rata to distributions of profits and gains to
  its equity owners; however, nothing contained in this paragraph shall be
  construed to affect qualified distributions.
    (6) The amount of any payment required under paragraph  five  of  this
  subdivision  shall  be reduced to fifteen percent of such net profits on
  qualified investments if, at the time of such net profits  distribution,
  such   certified  capital  company  irrevocably  commits  to  both:  (A)
  re-invest the remaining fifteen percent of such net  profits  not  being
  paid  to  the general fund under paragraph five of this subdivision into
  qualified businesses, and (B) invest an additional amount  equal  to  at
  least  fifteen  percent  of such net profits distribution into qualified
  businesses which additional amount shall come from a  separate  pool  of
  venture  capital that is controlled by the certified capital company but


 that does not contain certified  capital.  In  making  investments  from
  funds  established  under  this paragraph, the certified capital company
  shall follow the requirements set forth in subparagraph (D) of paragraph
  one  of subdivision (c) of this section pertaining to obtaining approval
  of  the  investment  being  in  a  qualified   business,   except   that
  requirements   pertaining   to   empire   zones  and  underserved  areas
  requirements shall not apply. Once qualified  investments  in  qualified
  businesses  have  been  made  pursuant to this paragraph equal to thirty
  percent  of  the  net  profits  on  qualified  investments,   then   the
  requirements  under  this  subdivision shall have been satisfied and the
  proceeds from such  qualified  businesses  may  be  distributed  without
  restriction.
    (e)  Decertification.  (1)  The superintendent shall conduct an annual
  review of each certified capital company to determine if  the  certified
  capital  company  is  abiding  by  the requirements of certification, to
  advise the certified capital company as to the eligibility status of its
  qualified investments, and to ensure that no investment has been made in
  violation of this subdivision. The cost of the annual  review  shall  be
  paid  by  each  certified  capital company according to a reasonable fee
  schedule adopted by the superintendent.
    (2) Any material violation of subdivision (c)  of  this  section  with
  respect  to  a  particular  certified  capital  company program shall be
  grounds for  decertification  of  the  certified  capital  company  with
  respect  to  such  program.  If  the  superintendent  determines  that a
  certified capital company is not in compliance with the requirements  of
  subdivision  (c)  of this section with respect to a particular certified
  capital company  program,  it  shall,  by  written  notice,  inform  the
  officers  of  the  certified  capital company that the certified capital
  company will be subject to decertification with respect to such  program
  in  one  hundred  twenty  days  from  the date of mailing of the notice,
  unless the deficiencies are corrected and the certified capital  company
  is again in compliance with all requirements for certification.
    (3)  At  the  end  of  the one hundred twenty day grace period, if the
  certified capital company is still not in  compliance  with  subdivision
  (c)  of  this  section  with  respect  to a particular certified capital
  company  program,  the   superintendent   shall   send   a   notice   of
  decertification  to  the  certified capital company with respect to such
  program and to all other appropriate state agencies.
    (4) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs two and three of this
  subdivision, if a certified capital company in certified capital company
  programs three, four and  five  fails  to  satisfy  the  requirement  in
  subparagraph  (B)  of  paragraph  one of subdivision (c) of this section
  because it has been unable to make  a  sufficient  amount  of  qualified
  investments  in  qualified  businesses  located  either  in empire zones
  established pursuant to article eighteen-B of the general municipal  law
  or  in  underserved  areas  outside  such  empire  zones, such certified
  capital company shall not be subject to decertification  at  that  time.
  However,  if  such  certified  capital  company  fails  to  satisfy  the
  requirement in subparagraph (C) of paragraph one of subdivision  (c)  of
  this  section  because it has been unable to make a sufficient amount of
  qualified investments in qualified businesses  located  either  in  such
  empire  zones  or  in  underserved  areas outside such empire zones, but
  certifies to the superintendent that it had made a good faith effort  to
  make  such  investments, such certified capital company shall be allowed
  two additional years to satisfy the  requirement  in  such  subparagraph
  (C).  If,  after  the  conclusion of such two year period, the certified
  capital company still has not been able to satisfy  the  requirement  to
  make  such  investments, and such certified capital company certifies to


 the superintendent that it had made a good faith  effort  to  make  such
  investments,  the  requirement  in  paragraphs  three,  four and five of
  subdivision (h)  of  this  section  to  make  qualified  investments  in
  qualified  businesses  located  in  empire zones or in underserved areas
  shall be waived. Such certified capital company shall  then  be  allowed
  one additional year to satisfy the requirement in such subparagraph (C),
  and  if,  at  the  conclusion  of  that additional one year period, such
  requirement is still not satisfied, such certified capital company shall
  be subject to decertification and the provisions of paragraphs  two  and
  three of this subdivision shall apply.
    (5)   Once   a  certified  capital  company  has  invested  an  amount
  cumulatively equal to one hundred percent of its certified capital  with
  respect  to  a particular certified capital company program in qualified
  investments and has met all other requirements under  this  subdivision,
  the  certified  capital company shall no longer be subject to regulation
  by the superintendent and shall no longer be subject to the requirements
  of subdivision (c) of this section with respect to  such  program.  Upon
  receiving  documented  certification by a certified capital company that
  it has invested an amount equal to one hundred percent of its  certified
  capital,  the  department shall have sixty days to notify such certified
  capital company that it has or has  not  met  such  requirement  with  a
  reason  for  such  determination  if  it has not, in the judgment of the
  department, met such requirement. If the  department  does  not  provide
  such notification within sixty days, the certified capital company shall
  then be deemed to have met such requirement.
    (6)   The   superintendent   shall   send   written   notice  of  such
  decertification to the address of  each  certified  investor  whose  tax
  credit  has  been  subject to recapture or forfeiture, using the address
  shown on the last filing submitted to the superintendent.
    (f) Revocation of certification. The  superintendent  may  revoke  the
  certification  of  a certified capital company, or, at the discretion of
  the superintendent, the certification of  a  certified  capital  company
  with  respect to a particular certified capital company program only, if
  any material representation to the superintendent in connection with the
  application  process  proves  to  have  been  falsely  made  or  if  the
  application  materially  violates  any  requirement  established  by the
  superintendent  pursuant  to  this   subdivision.   In   addition,   the
  superintendent  may  revoke  the  certification  of  a certified capital
  company  if  such  certified  capital  company  (i)  falsely  certified,
  pursuant  to  paragraph  three of subdivision (d) of this section that a
  good faith effort was made to  make  additional  qualifying  investments
  under  the  requirements  of  paragraph three of subdivision (h) of this
  section, or (ii)  falsely  certified,  pursuant  to  paragraph  four  of
  subdivision (e) of this section, that it had made a good faith effort to
  make  a  sufficient  amount  of  qualifying  investments  in  qualifying
  businesses located in  empire  zones  established  pursuant  to  article
  eighteen-B  of the general municipal law or in underserved areas outside
  such empire zones.
    (g) Registration requirements. All investments for which  tax  credits
  are allowable under the provisions of subdivision (k) of section fifteen
  hundred  eleven  of  this  chapter shall satisfy the conditions of being
  registered or specifically exempt from  registration  by  provisions  or
  regulations  under  sections  three  hundred  fifty-nine-e through three
  hundred fifty-nine-ff of the general business law.
    (h) Maximum permitted credits. (1) Certified capital  company  program
  one.  The  aggregate amount of certified capital for which taxpayers may
  be allocated and allowed tax credits  pursuant  to  this  paragraph  and
  subdivision  (k)  of  section fifteen hundred eleven of this chapter may


 not exceed fifty million dollars  for  calendar  year  nineteen  hundred
  ninety-nine,  which  certified  capital  may  be  invested  in certified
  capital  companies  beginning  in   calendar   year   nineteen   hundred
  ninety-eight.  In  calendar year two thousand or thereafter, tax credits
  may be allowed pursuant to this paragraph and such subdivision  (k)  for
  an   additional  fifty  million  dollars  of  certified  capital,  which
  certified  capital  may  be  invested  in  certified  capital  companies
  beginning   in  calendar  year  nineteen  hundred  ninety-nine,  if  not
  allocated to calendar year nineteen hundred ninety-eight  in  accordance
  with  this  paragraph.  Therefore, the total amount of certified capital
  for which tax credits may be allowed pursuant to this paragraph and such
  subdivision (k) shall be one hundred million dollars.
    During any calendar year in which the  limitation  described  in  this
  paragraph  will limit the amount of certified capital, certified capital
  will be allocated in order of priority based upon the date of filing  of
  information   described   in   subparagraph  (A)  of  paragraph  six  of
  subdivision (c) of  this  section.  Certified  capital  limited  in  any
  calendar  year  by  the  application of the provisions of this paragraph
  shall be allowed and allocated in the  immediately  succeeding  calendar
  year   in   order   of   priority  set  forth  in  this  paragraph.  The
  superintendent shall advise any certified  capital  company  in  writing
  within fifteen days after receiving such filing, whether the limitations
  of  this paragraph then in effect will be applicable with respect to the
  investments  and   credits   described   in   such   filing   with   the
  superintendent.
    Certified capital may be raised by each certified capital company with
  respect  to certified capital company program one at any time subsequent
  to its certification date, and credits shall be allocated to and  vested
  in  certified  investors at the time of each such investment as provided
  in this paragraph, although such credits shall not be first  allowed  or
  incurred  for  state  tax  purposes,  until,  at the earliest, tax years
  beginning in nineteen hundred ninety-nine  with  respect  to  the  first
  fifty million dollars of credits and tax years beginning in two thousand
  with respect to the next such fifty million dollars of credits.
    (2)  Certified  capital  company  program two. The aggregate amount of
  certified capital for which taxpayers may be allocated and  allowed  tax
  credits  pursuant  to  this  paragraph  and  subdivision  (k) of section
  fifteen hundred eleven of this chapter may  not  exceed  thirty  million
  dollars  for calendar year two thousand one, which certified capital may
  be invested in certified capital companies beginning  in  calendar  year
  nineteen hundred ninety-nine.
    During  any  calendar  year  in which the limitation described in this
  paragraph will limit the amount of certified capital, certified  capital
  will  be allocated in order of priority based upon the date of filing of
  information  described  in  subparagraph  (A)  of   paragraph   six   of
  subdivision  (c)  of  this  section. The superintendent shall advise any
  certified  capital  company  in  writing,  within  fifteen  days   after
  receiving such filing, whether the limitations of this paragraph then in
  effect  will  be  applicable with respect to the investments and credits
  described in such filing with the superintendent.
    Certified capital may be raised by each certified capital company with
  respect to certified capital company program two at any time  subsequent
  to  its certification date, and credits shall be allocated to and vested
  in certified investors at the time of each such investment  as  provided
  in  this  paragraph, although such credits shall not be first allowed or
  incurred for state tax purposes,  until,  at  the  earliest,  tax  years
  beginning in two thousand one.


   (3)  Certified  capital company program three. The aggregate amount of
  certified capital for which taxpayers may be allocated and  allowed  tax
  credits  pursuant  to  this  paragraph  and  subdivision  (k) of section
  fifteen hundred eleven of this chapter may not exceed one hundred  fifty
  million  dollars  for  calendar  year  two thousand two, which certified
  capital may be invested in  certified  capital  companies  beginning  in
  calendar year two thousand.
    During  any  calendar  year  in which the limitation described in this
  paragraph will limit the amount of certified capital, certified  capital
  will  be allocated in order of priority based upon the date of filing of
  information  described  in  subparagraph  (A)  of   paragraph   six   of
  subdivision  (c)  of  this  section. The superintendent shall advise any
  certified  capital  company  in  writing,  within  fifteen  days   after
  receiving such filing, whether the limitations of this paragraph then in
  effect  will  be  applicable with respect to the investments and credits
  described in such filing with the superintendent.
    Certified capital may be raised by each certified capital company with
  respect  to  certified  capital  company  program  three  at  any   time
  subsequent  to its certification date, and credits shall be allocated to
  and vested in certified investors at the time of each such investment as
  provided in this paragraph, although such credits  shall  not  be  first
  allowed  or incurred for state tax purposes, until, at the earliest, tax
  years beginning in two thousand two. One-third of the certified  capital
  raised  by  each  certified  capital  company  with respect to certified
  capital  company  program  three  shall  be  used  to   make   qualified
  investments  in qualified businesses located in empire zones established
  pursuant to  article  eighteen-B  of  the  general  municipal  law,  and
  one-third  of  such  certified  capital  shall be used to make qualified
  investments in qualified businesses located in underserved areas outside
  such empire zones.
    (4) Certified capital company program four. The  aggregate  amount  of
  certified  capital  for which taxpayers may be allocated and allowed tax
  credits pursuant to  this  paragraph  and  subdivision  (k)  of  section
  fifteen  hundred  eleven  of  this  chapter may not exceed sixty million
  dollars for calendar year two thousand six, which certified capital  may
  be  invested  in  certified capital companies beginning in calendar year
  two thousand four.
    During any calendar year in which the  limitation  described  in  this
  paragraph  will limit the amount of certified capital, certified capital
  will be allocated in order of priority based upon the date of filing  of
  information   described   in   subparagraph  (A)  of  paragraph  six  of
  subdivision (c) of this section. The  superintendent  shall  advise  any
  certified   capital  company  in  writing,  within  fifteen  days  after
  receiving such filing, whether the limitations of this paragraph then in
  effect will be applicable with respect to the  investments  and  credits
  described in such filing with the superintendent.
    Certified capital may be raised by each certified capital company with
  respect to certified capital company program four at any time subsequent
  to  its certification date, and credits shall be allocated to and vested
  in certified investors at the time of each such investment  as  provided
  in  this  paragraph, although such credits shall not be first allowed or
  incurred for state tax purposes,  until,  at  the  earliest,  tax  years
  beginning in two thousand six. One-third of the certified capital raised
  by  each  certified  capital  company  with respect to certified capital
  company program four shall be used  to  make  qualified  investments  in
  qualified  businesses  located  in  empire zones established pursuant to
  article eighteen-B of the general municipal law, and one-third  of  such
  certified  capital  shall  be  used  to  make  qualified  investments in


 qualified businesses located in underserved areas  outside  such  empire
  zones,  provided,  however,  that in the case of an investment made by a
  certified capital company in an empire zone located  in  an  underserved
  area, the certified capital company making such an investment may choose
  to designate such investment as an investment in an underserved area but
  not  as  an  investment in an empire zone for the purpose of meeting the
  requirements of this paragraph. Fifty percent of  the  total  amount  of
  capital  invested  by  a  certified  capital  company at the time of one
  hundred percent investment of  funds  shall  be  invested  in  qualified
  businesses  that  are  involved  in  commerce for the primary purpose of
  developing  and  manufacturing  products  and  systems  covered  by  the
  activities  set  forth  in  paragraph  (b) of subdivision one of section
  thirty-one hundred two-e of the public authorities law and have a  ratio
  of  research  and  development expenditures to net sales which equals or
  exceeds six percent during the fiscal  year  immediately  preceding  the
  qualified investment.
    (5)  Certified  capital  company program five. The aggregate amount of
  certified capital for which taxpayers may be allocated and  allowed  tax
  credits  pursuant  to  this  paragraph  and  subdivision  (k) of section
  fifteen hundred eleven of this chapter  may  not  exceed  sixty  million
  dollars  for  calendar  year two thousand seven, which certified capital
  may be invested in certified capital  companies  beginning  in  calendar
  year two thousand five.
    During  any  calendar  year  in which the limitation described in this
  paragraph will limit the amount of certified capital, certified  capital
  will  be allocated in order of priority based upon the date of filing of
  information  described  in  subparagraph  (A)  of   paragraph   six   of
  subdivision  (c)  of  this  section. The superintendent shall advise any
  certified  capital  company  in  writing,  within  fifteen  days   after
  receiving such filing, whether the limitations of this paragraph then in
  effect  will  be  applicable with respect to the investments and credits
  described in such filing with the superintendent.
    Certified capital may be raised by each certified capital company with
  respect to certified capital company program five at any time subsequent
  to its certification date, and credits shall be allocated to and  vested
  in  certified  investors at the time of each such investment as provided
  in this paragraph, although such credits shall not be first  allowed  or
  incurred  for  state  tax  purposes,  until,  at the earliest, tax years
  beginning in two thousand seven.  One-third  of  the  certified  capital
  raised  by  each  certified  capital  company  with respect to certified
  capital company program five shall be used to make qualified investments
  in qualified businesses located in empire zones established pursuant  to
  article  eighteen-B  of the general municipal law, and one-third of such
  certified capital  shall  be  used  to  make  qualified  investments  in
  qualified  businesses  located  in underserved areas outside such empire
  zones, provided, however, that in the case of an investment  made  by  a
  certified  capital  company  in an empire zone located in an underserved
  area, the certified capital company making such an investment may  chose
  to designate such investment as an investment in an underserved area but
  not  as  an  investment in an empire zone for the purpose of meeting the
  requirements of this paragraph. Fifty percent of  the  total  amount  of
  capital  invested  by  a  certified  capital  company at the time of one
  hundred percent investment of  funds  shall  be  invested  in  qualified
  businesses  that  are  involved  in  commerce for the primary purpose of
  developing  and  manufacturing  products  and  systems  covered  by  the
  activities  set  forth  in  paragraph  (b) of subdivision one of section
  thirty-one hundred two-e of the public authorities law and have a  ratio
  of  research  and  development expenditures to net sales which equals or


 exceeds six percent during the fiscal  year  immediately  preceding  the
  qualified investment.
    (i) Maximum certified capital. The maximum amount of certified capital
  per  certified capital company program invested in one or more certified
  capital companies allowed in any one year to any one certified  investor
  shall  not  exceed  ten  million  dollars  for certified capital company
  programs one and three, and eight million dollars for certified  capital
  company  programs  two,  four and five for such year, provided, however,
  that if the aggregate amount of certified capital for such year, as  set
  forth  in  subdivision  (h)  of this section, has not been reached sixty
  days prior to the end  of  the  year  to  which  such  aggregate  amount
  applies, the provisions of this subdivision shall cease to apply for the
  remainder of such year. In addition, the aggregate amount of tax credits
  allowed  in  any  taxable  year  to any affiliated group of taxpayers in
  relation to certified  capital  may  not  exceed  such  maximum  amount,
  whether  or  not  such  taxpayers  file  a  combined  return pursuant to
  subdivision (f) of section fifteen hundred fifteen of this chapter.  For
  purposes  of  the  preceding sentence, the term "affiliated group" shall
  have the same meaning as described  in  section  1504  of  the  internal
  revenue code, except that the references to "at least eighty percent" in
  such section 1504 shall be read as "more than fifty percent".
    (k)  Rules  and  regulations. The superintendent, in consultation with
  the department of taxation and finance, shall prescribe such  rules  and
  regulations  as he or she shall deem necessary in order to implement the
  provisions of this  section  within  one  hundred  twenty  days  of  the
  effective date of this section.
    (l)  For  the  purposes  of this section, the term "empire zone" shall
  also include, in relation to investments made  by  a  certified  capital
  company  in  which  at least fifty percent of the voting stock, capital,
  and membership interests, as the case may be, are  owned  by  an  entity
  that is managed directly or indirectly, by a non-profit corporation, the
  liberty  zone  as  defined  in  section  one of part AA of chapter three
  hundred eighty-three of the laws of two  thousand  one,  the  resurgence
  zone  as  defined  in  section  one  of  part A of chapter three hundred
  eighty-three of the laws of two thousand one and a  federal  empowerment
  zone designated pursuant to section 1391 of the internal revenue code.




   §  12.  Internet; advertising, vendor status, nexus.  (a) For purposes
  of subdivision (b) of this section,  the  term  "person"  shall  mean  a
  corporation,  joint stock company or association, insurance corporation,
  or banking corporation, as such terms are defined in section one hundred
  eighty-three, one hundred eighty-four, or one hundred eighty-six, or  in
  article  nine-A  or  thirty-three  of this chapter, imposing tax on such
  entities.
    (b) No person shall be subject to the taxes imposed under section  one
  hundred eighty-three, one hundred eighty-four or one hundred eighty-six,
  or  article  nine-A or thirty-three of this chapter, solely by reason of
  (1) having  its  advertising  stored  on  a  server  or  other  computer
  equipment  located  in this state (other than a server or other computer
  equipment owned or leased by such person), or (2) having its advertising
  disseminated or displayed on the Internet by  an  individual  or  entity
  subject  to  tax  under  section  one  hundred eighty-three, one hundred
  eighty-four or one hundred eighty-six, or article nine-A, twenty-two  or
  thirty-three of this chapter.
    (c)  A  person,  as such term is defined in subdivision (a) of section
  eleven hundred one of this chapter, shall not be deemed to be a  vendor,
  for  purposes  of article twenty-eight of this chapter, solely by reason
  of (1) having its advertising stored  on  a  server  or  other  computer
  equipment  located  in this state (other than a server or other computer
  equipment owned or leased by such person), or (2) having its advertising
  disseminated or displayed on the Internet by  an  individual  or  entity
  subject  to  tax  under  section  one  hundred eighty-three, one hundred
  eighty-four or one hundred eighty-six, or article nine-A, twenty-two  or
  thirty-three of this chapter.
    (d)(i)  Except  as  provided  in  clause  (B)  of subparagraph (ii) of
  paragraph eight of subdivision (b) of section eleven hundred one of this
  chapter, a person selling  telecommunication  services  or  an  Internet
  access  service  shall  not  be  deemed  to be a vendor, for purposes of
  article  twenty-eight  or  twenty-nine  of  this  chapter,  of  tangible
  personal   property   or   services   sold  by  the  purchaser  of  such
  telecommunication services or Internet  access  service  solely  because
  such  purchaser  uses such telecommunication services or Internet access
  service as a means to sell such tangible personal property or services.
    (ii) For purposes of this subdivision, the term "person"  shall  refer
  to  any  person within the meaning prescribed in either paragraph (c) of
  subdivision one of section one hundred eighty-six-e of this  chapter  or
  subdivision  (a) of section eleven hundred one of this chapter, the term
  "telecommunication  services"  shall  have  the  meaning  prescribed  in
  paragraph  (g) of subdivision one of section one hundred eighty-six-e of
  this chapter, and the term "Internet  access  service"  shall  have  the
  meaning  prescribed in subdivision (v) of section eleven hundred fifteen
  of this chapter.




   §  13.  (a)  Exemption  from  taxation  for victims or targets of Nazi
  persecution. Notwithstanding any  provision  of  law  to  the  contrary,
  amounts  received (including accumulated interest) by victims or targets
  of Nazi persecution  from  an  eligible  settlement  fund,  or  from  an
  eligible  grantor  trust  established for the benefit of such victims or
  targets as set forth in this  section,  whether  or  not  includable  in
  income  for  federal income tax purposes, shall be exempt from all state
  and local taxes imposed on or measured by income. Provided however, that
  this exemption shall not apply to amounts received from assets  acquired
  with  such assets or with the proceeds from the sale of such assets. For
  the purposes of this section, "victims or targets of  Nazi  persecution"
  means  any  individual,  corporation,  partnership, sole proprietorship,
  unincorporated    association,    community,    congregation,     group,
  organization,  or other entity persecuted or targeted for persecution by
  the  Nazi  Regime  because  of   race,   religion,   ethnicity,   sexual
  orientation,  national  origin,  or  physical  or  mental  disability or
  handicap,  or  the   heirs,   successors,   administrators,   executors,
  affiliates,  or  assignees  of  such  victims  or  targets, or any other
  claimant receiving funds from an eligible settlement fund,  or  from  an
  eligible  grantor  trust  established for the benefit of such victims or
  targets. An eligible settlement fund is an entity that  is  treated  for
  federal  income  tax  purposes  as  a designated or qualified settlement
  fund, as such term is defined in section 468B of  the  internal  revenue
  code  and  the  regulations  thereunder,  which  is  established for the
  principal purpose of resolving and satisfying claims arising from or  in
  connection  with  any  act  or  omission  in  any  way  relating  to the
  Holocaust, World War II  and  its  prelude  and  aftermath,  victims  or
  targets  of  Nazi  persecution, transactions with or actions of the Nazi
  Regime, or treatment of refugees fleeing Nazi persecution by or  in  the
  Swiss  Confederation. An eligible grantor trust is a grantor trust which
  is established for the principal purpose  of  resolving  and  satisfying
  such claims.
    (b) Exemption from taxation for qualified settlement funds established
  for  the  benefit of victims or targets of Nazi persecution by or in the
  Swiss Confederation. Notwithstanding any other provision of law  to  the
  contrary, an entity that is treated for federal income tax purposes as a
  designated  or  qualified  settlement  fund,  as such term is defined in
  section  468B  of  the  internal  revenue  code  and   the   regulations
  thereunder,  or  a grantor trust, either of which is established for the
  principal purpose of resolving and satisfying claims arising from or  in
  connection  with  any  act  or  omission  in  any  way  relating  to the
  Holocaust, World War II  and  its  prelude  and  aftermath,  victims  or
  targets  of  Nazi  persecution, transactions with or actions of the Nazi
  Regime, treatment of refugees fleeing Nazi persecution,  by  or  in  the
  Swiss  Confederation,  shall  be  exempt  from  all  taxes imposed on or
  measured by income, the commercial rent tax imposed by the city  of  New
  York  and  all  sales  and use taxes whether imposed by the State or any
  local jurisdiction or municipality.




   §  14.  Empire  zones program. (a) Qualified empire zone enterprise. A
  business enterprise which is certified under article eighteen-B  of  the
  general  municipal  law  and  meets  the  employment  test  shall  be  a
  "qualified empire zone enterprise":
    (1)  except  as  provided  in  paragraphs  one-a  and  one-b  of  this
  subdivision,   for   purposes   of   articles   nine-A,  twenty-two  and
  thirty-three of this chapter, for each of the taxable years  within  the
  "business  tax benefit period," which period shall consist of (A) in the
  case of a business enterprise with a test date occurring  on  or  before
  December thirty-first, two thousand one, the first fifteen taxable years
  beginning  on  or after January first, two thousand one, (B) in the case
  of a business enterprise with a test date occurring on or after  January
  first,  two  thousand  two, but prior to April first, two thousand five,
  the fifteen taxable years next following the business enterprise's  test
  year,  and  (C)  in  the  case  of  a business enterprise which is first
  certified under article eighteen-B of the general municipal  law  on  or
  after  April  first,  two  thousand five, the ten taxable years starting
  with the taxable year in which the business enterprise's first  date  of
  certification  under  article  eighteen-B  of  the general municipal law
  occurs, but only with respect to  each  of  such  business  tax  benefit
  period years for which the employment test is met,
    (1-a)   With   respect  to  a  business  enterprise  approved  by  the
  commissioner of  economic  development  as  the  owner  of  a  qualified
  investment  project  pursuant to subdivision (w) of section nine hundred
  fifty-nine of the general municipal law, the business tax benefit period
  shall mean the ten taxable years starting with the taxable year in which
  the business enterprise's benefit period commencement date  occurs,  but
  only  with respect to each of such business tax benefit period years for
  which  the  employment  test  is  met,  as  the  term  "benefit   period
  commencement  date"  is  defined  in  this  paragraph. The term "benefit
  period  commencement  date"  shall  mean  either   (i)   the   date   of
  certification  pursuant  to  article eighteen-B of the general municipal
  law of  the  business  enterprise  at  the  location  of  the  qualified
  investment  project  or  (ii)  the  date  when  property  constituting a
  qualified investment project is first placed  in  service.  The  benefit
  period  commencement date shall be determined by an election made by the
  business  enterprise  taxable  year   which   includes   the   date   of
  certification  of  the  business  enterprise  at  the  location  of  the
  qualified investment project  pursuant  to  article  eighteen-B  of  the
  general  municipal  law,.  In  the event no such election is made by the
  business enterprise, the business tax benefit period shall be deemed  to
  commence  in  the  taxable  year  in  which  the  business enterprise is
  certified at the location of the qualified investment  project  pursuant
  to  article  eighteen-B  of  the general municipal law. The business tax
  benefit period allowed under this paragraph shall be in addition to  the
  business  tax  benefit  period allowed pursuant to paragraph one of this
  subdivision.
    (1-b)  With  respect  to  a  business  enterprise  approved   by   the
  commissioner  of  economic  development  as  the  owner of a significant
  capital investment project pursuant to subdivision (w) of  section  nine
  hundred  fifty-nine  of  the  general  municipal  law,  the business tax
  benefit period shall be increased  to  include  the  ten  taxable  years
  starting  with  the  taxable  year  in  which  property  comprising  the
  significant capital investment  project  is  first  placed  in  service,
  provided  that  such  property  is placed in service during the business
  enterprise's business tax benefit period under paragraph one-a  of  this
  subdivision.  The  business  tax  benefit  period set forth in paragraph
  one-a of this subdivision and  any  additional  periods  added  to  such


 business  tax benefit period pursuant to this paragraph shall constitute
  one continuous business tax benefit period. During such entire  business
  tax  benefit  period,  the business enterprise shall be allowed to claim
  the  tax  credits  provided  pursuant to sections fifteen and sixteen of
  this article with respect to such qualified investment project and  such
  significant  capital investment project, provided the employment test is
  met and the requirements of such credits are satisfied for each of those
  taxable years, and provided further that, the benefit period  factor  as
  set forth in subdivision (c) of section fifteen of this article shall be
  1.0 during such entire business tax benefit period.
    (2)  for  purposes  of  articles  twenty-eight and twenty-nine of this
  chapter, during the "sales and use  tax  benefit  period."  Such  period
  shall  consist of one hundred twenty consecutive months beginning on the
  later of (A) March first, two  thousand  one,  or  (B)  with  regard  to
  business  enterprises  certified  pursuant  to article eighteen-B of the
  general municipal law prior to April first, two thousand nine, the first
  day of the month next following the date  of  issuance  of  a  qualified
  empire   zone   enterprise   certification  by  the  commissioner  under
  subdivision (h)  of  this  section,  or  (C)  with  regard  to  business
  enterprises  certified  pursuant  to such article eighteen-B on or after
  April first, two  thousand  nine,  the  first  day  of  the  month  next
  following  the  date  of  certification  under  article eighteen-B as an
  empire zone business. Provided however, such period  shall  not  include
  any  month  falling  within  a  taxable  year  immediately preceded by a
  taxable year with respect to which the business enterprise did not  meet
  the employment test.
    (b) Employment test.
    (1)  General.  In  the  case  of  a business enterprise which is first
  certified under article eighteen-B of the general municipal  law  before
  April  first,  two  thousand five, the employment test shall be met with
  respect to a taxable year if the business enterprise's employment number
  in the empire  zones  for  such  taxable  year  equals  or  exceeds  its
  employment  number in such zones for the base period, and its employment
  number in the state outside of such zones for such taxable  year  equals
  or  exceeds its employment number in the state outside of such zones for
  the base period. For entities first certified between August first,  two
  thousand  two  and  March  thirty-first,  two thousand five, if the base
  period is zero years and the enterprise has an employment number in such
  zone of greater than zero with respect  to  a  taxable  year,  then  the
  employment  test  will  be met only if the enterprise qualifies as a new
  business under subdivision (j)  of  this  section.  For  entities  first
  certified  prior  to August first, two thousand two, if the entity had a
  base period of zero years or zero employment in the  base  period,  then
  the  employment  test  will be met only if the enterprise qualifies as a
  new business under subdivision (j) of this section.
    (2) Change in zone boundaries or  newly  designated  zones.  Provided,
  however, where there has been one or more revisions of the boundaries of
  an empire zone that resulted in the inclusion of the business enterprise
  within  such  zone, the employment test shall be determined with respect
  to a taxable year as if the boundaries of the revised zone on  the  last
  day of the taxable year existed during the base period and test year and
  as  if  the  enterprise  had been located in the revised zone during its
  base period and test year. In addition, where an  area  has  been  newly
  designated  as  an  empire zone, the employment test shall be determined
  with respect to a taxable year as if such newly designated zone  existed
  during  the  base period and test year and as if the enterprise had been
  located in the newly designated zone during its  base  period  and  test
  year.


   (3)  Relocation  from  a business incubator facility. Where a business
  enterprise relocates  to  an  empire  zone  from  a  business  incubator
  facility   operated  by  a  municipality  or  by  a  public  or  private
  not-for-profit entity which provides space or business support  services
  or  both  space  and  business  support  services  to  newly established
  enterprises, the employment test shall be determined with respect  to  a
  taxable  year  as  if such business enterprise was located in the empire
  zone during the base period.
    (4) In the case of a business  enterprise  which  is  first  certified
  under  article eighteen-B of the general municipal law on or after April
  first, two thousand five, and notwithstanding any other provision to the
  contrary, in the case of a business enterprise which was first certified
  between August first, two  thousand  two  and  March  thirty-first,  two
  thousand five that conducts its operations on real property that it owns
  or leases that is both located within an empire zone and that is subject
  to  a brownfield site cleanup agreement executed prior to January first,
  two thousand six in accordance with section 27-1409 of the environmental
  conservation law, the employment test shall be met  with  respect  to  a
  taxable year if the business enterprise's employment number in the state
  and the empire zones for such taxable year exceeds its employment number
  in the state and the empire zones, respectively, for the base period. If
  the  base period is zero years or the base period employment is zero and
  the enterprise has an employment number in such  zone  of  greater  than
  zero  with  respect  to a taxable year, then the employment test will be
  met only if the enterprise qualifies as a new business under subdivision
  (j) of this section.
    (5) For purposes of the sales and use tax benefit period, in the  case
  of  a  business  enterprise  which  is  first  certified  under  article
  eighteen-B of the general municipal law on or  after  April  first,  two
  thousand  five,  and  is so certified during its first taxable year, the
  employment test shall be met with respect to such first taxable year  in
  any month in which its employment number exceeds zero.
    (c) Base period. (1) Except as provided in paragraphs two and three of
  this  subdivision,  in  the case of a business enterprise which is first
  certified under article eighteen-B of the general municipal  law  before
  April  first,  two  thousand five, the term "base period" means the five
  taxable years immediately preceding  the  test  year.  If  the  business
  enterprise  has  fewer than five such years, then the term "base period"
  means such smaller set of years.
    (2) In the case of a business  enterprise  which  is  first  certified
  under  article eighteen-B of the general municipal law on or after April
  first, two thousand five, the term "base period" means the four  taxable
  years  immediately  preceding  the  taxable  year  in which the business
  enterprise was first certified under article eighteen-B of  the  general
  municipal  law.  If  the  business  enterprise  has fewer than four such
  years, then the term "base period" means such smaller set of years.
    (3) For purposes of the sales and use tax benefit period, in the  case
  of  a  business  enterprise  which  is  first  certified  under  article
  eighteen-B of the general municipal law on or  after  April  first,  two
  thousand  five,  the  term  "base  period" means the three taxable years
  immediately preceding the business  enterprise's  test  year.  For  this
  purpose,  the  definitions set forth in subdivisions (d) and (e) of this
  section shall apply. However, the definition of the term "test date"  in
  subdivision  (e) shall be read as if the words "prior to July first, two
  thousand five" were omitted from such definition.
    (d) Test year. The term "test year" means the last taxable year of the
  business  enterprise  ending  before  the  test  date.  If  a   business
  enterprise  does not have a taxable year that ends on or before the test


 date, such enterprise shall be deemed to have a test year which shall be
  either the last calendar year ending on or before its test date,  or  if
  the  enterprise  has  as  its  taxable year a fiscal year, the last such
  fiscal  year  ending  on  or  before  its  test date (whether or not the
  enterprise in fact had a taxable year during that period).
    (e) Test date. The term "test date" means the later of July first, two
  thousand or the date prior to July first, two thousand eleven  on  which
  the  business enterprise was first certified under article eighteen-B of
  the general municipal law.
    (f) Taxable year. The term "taxable year" means the  taxable  year  of
  the  business  enterprise  under section one hundred eighty-three or one
  hundred eighty-four or former section one hundred eighty-six of  article
  nine,  or  under  article  nine-A,  twenty-two  or  thirty-three of this
  chapter. If a business enterprise does not have a taxable  year  because
  it  is  exempt  from taxation or otherwise not required to file a return
  under any of such sections of article  nine  or  under  article  nine-A,
  twenty-two  or  thirty-three, then the term "taxable year" means (i) the
  business enterprise's federal taxable year, or, (ii) if  the  enterprise
  does not have a federal taxable year, the calendar year.
    (g) Employment number. (1) The term "employment number" shall mean the
  average  number of individuals, excluding general executive officers (in
  the case of a corporation), employed full-time by the enterprise for  at
  least  one-half  of  the  taxable year. Such number shall be computed by
  determining the number of such individuals employed by the  taxpayer  on
  the  thirty-first day of March, the thirtieth day of June, the thirtieth
  day of September  and  the  thirty-first  day  of  December  during  the
  applicable  taxable year, adding together the number of such individuals
  determined to be so employed on each of such dates and dividing the  sum
  so obtained by the number of such dates occurring within such applicable
  taxable  year. Such number shall not include individuals employed within
  the state within the immediately preceding sixty  months  by  a  related
  person  to  the  QEZE,  as  such  term  "related  person"  is defined in
  subparagraph (c) of paragraph three of subsection (b)  of  section  four
  hundred  sixty-five  of  the  internal revenue code. For this purpose, a
  "related person" shall include an entity which would have qualified as a
  "related person" to the QEZE if it had not been  dissolved,  liquidated,
  merged with another entity or otherwise ceased to exist or operate.
    (2)  For  a  business  enterprise satisfying the criteria set forth in
  this paragraph,  the  term  "employment  number"  with  respect  to  the
  enterprise's  first  taxable  year  shall  be  computed  by  taking into
  consideration  only  the  number  of  individuals,   excluding   general
  executive officers (in the case of a corporation), employed full-time by
  the  enterprise  on  the  last  day  of such taxable year. Such business
  enterprise shall satisfy the following  criteria:  (A)  such  enterprise
  acquired  real  or  tangible  personal property during its first taxable
  year from an entity which is not a  related  person  (as  such  term  is
  defined  in  paragraph  one  of this subdivision); (B) the first taxable
  year of such enterprise shall be a short taxable year of not  more  than
  seven  months  in  duration;  and (C) the number of individuals employed
  full-time on the last day of such first taxable year shall be  at  least
  one  hundred  ninety and substantially all of such individuals must have
  been previously  employed  by  the  entity  from  whom  such  enterprise
  purchased its assets.
    (h)  Sales  and  use tax. (1) In addition to the other requirements of
  this section, for business enterprises  certified  pursuant  to  article
  eighteen-B  of  the  general  municipal  law  prior  to April first, two
  thousand nine, in order  for  an  exemption  under  subdivision  (z)  of
  section  eleven  hundred fifteen of this chapter or the credit or refund


 described in subdivision (d) of section eleven hundred nineteen of  this
  chapter  or  any  like exemption or credit or refund imposed pursuant to
  the authority of article twenty-nine  of  this  chapter  to  apply  with
  respect  to  a  qualified  empire zone enterprise, such enterprise shall
  apply to the commissioner of taxation and finance for the issuance of  a
  qualified  empire zone enterprise certification in the manner prescribed
  by the commissioner. If such  commissioner  grants  such  certification,
  such  certification  shall  be  subject  to conditions specified by such
  commissioner. Nothing herein or in any other law shall be  construed  to
  prohibit  the disclosure, in such manner as the commissioner of taxation
  and finance deems  appropriate,  of  the  names  and  other  appropriate
  identifying  information  of those persons holding qualified empire zone
  certifications  pursuant  to  this  subdivision,  those  persons   whose
  qualified  empire  zone  enterprise  certifications have been revoked or
  persons whose  qualified  empire  zone  enterprise  certifications  have
  expired. The commissioner shall not grant any certifications pursuant to
  this subdivision after June thirtieth, two thousand ten.
    (2)  A business enterprise, certified as an empire zone business under
  article eighteen-B of the general municipal law prior  to  April  first,
  two  thousand  nine, and certified as a qualified empire zone enterprise
  by the commissioner of taxation and finance prior to August  first,  two
  thousand  nine, is eligible to claim the exemption under subdivision (z)
  of section eleven hundred fifteen of this chapter or any like  exemption
  from  tax  imposed  pursuant  to the authority of article twenty-nine of
  this chapter until September first, two thousand nine, provided that the
  other requirements  of  the  statute  are  met.  A  business  enterprise
  certified  as  an  empire  zone business under article eighteen-B of the
  general municipal law prior to  April  first,  two  thousand  nine,  and
  certified  as  a qualified empire zone enterprise by the commissioner of
  taxation and finance as of or prior to June thirtieth, two thousand ten,
  is eligible to claim the credit  or  refund  under  subdivision  (d)  of
  section  eleven  hundred  nineteen of this chapter or any like credit or
  refund imposed pursuant to the authority of article twenty-nine of  this
  chapter,  provided  that  the  other requirements of the statute are met
  during the term of its sales and use tax benefit period  notwithstanding
  the  expiration  of the empire zones program under article eighteen-B of
  the general municipal law.
    (3) During the period that a business enterprise is eligible to apply,
  or is qualified, for an exemption or a credit or refund of the sales and
  compensating use taxes under this section, the commissioner of  economic
  development   shall,   at   the  time  such  commissioner  certifies  or
  decertifies a  business  enterprise  under  article  eighteen-B  of  the
  general  municipal  law, notify the commissioner of taxation and finance
  of such  certification  or  decertification,  which  notification  shall
  include the full legal name, address and federal employer identification
  number  of  such  enterprise.  The  commissioner of economic development
  shall,  at  the  time  of  any  such  certification,  also  advise  such
  enterprise of the requirements in paragraph one of this subdivision.
    (i)  Cessation  of  status.  A business enterprise shall cease to be a
  qualified empire zone enterprise:
    (1) for purposes of articles nine-A, twenty-two  and  thirty-three  of
  this  chapter,  on  the  first  day  of  the  taxable  year during which
  revocation of its certification under article eighteen-B of the  general
  municipal law occurs, and
    (2)  for  purposes  of  articles  twenty-eight and twenty-nine of this
  chapter, on the day such revocation occurs.
    (j) New business. (1) A new business shall  include  any  corporation,
  except  a corporation which is substantially similar in operation and in


 ownership to a business entity  (or  entities)  taxable,  or  previously
  taxable,   under   section   one   hundred   eighty-three,  one  hundred
  eighty-four, former section one hundred eighty-five  or  former  section
  one  hundred  eighty-six of article nine; article nine-A or thirty-three
  of this chapter; article twenty-three of this  chapter  or  which  would
  have  been  subject  to  tax  under  such  article twenty-three (as such
  article was in  effect  on  January  first,  nineteen  hundred  eighty),
  article  thirty-two  of this chapter or which would have been subject to
  tax under such article thirty-two (as such  article  was  in  effect  on
  December  thirty-first, two thousand fourteen) or the income (or losses)
  of which is  (or  was)  includable  under  article  twenty-two  of  this
  chapter.
    (2)  For purposes of article twenty-two of this chapter, an individual
  who is either a sole proprietor or  a  member  of  a  partnership  shall
  qualify  as  an owner of a new business unless the business of which the
  individual is an owner is substantially  similar  in  operation  and  in
  ownership  to  a  business  entity taxable, or previously taxable, under
  section  one  hundred  eighty-three,  one  hundred  eighty-four,  former
  section one hundred eighty-five or former section one hundred eighty-six
  of article nine; article nine-A or article thirty-three of this chapter;
  article twenty-three of this chapter or which would have been subject to
  tax  under  such  article twenty-three (as such article was in effect on
  January first, nineteen hundred  eighty);  article  thirty-two  of  this
  chapter  or  which  would  have  been  subject to tax under such article
  thirty-two as such article was in effect on December  thirty-first,  two
  thousand  fourteen  or  the  income  (or  losses)  of  which is (or was)
  includable under article twenty-two.
    (3) For purposes of article twenty-two of this chapter, a  shareholder
  of  a  New  York  S  corporation  shall be treated as the owner of a new
  business with respect to such share if the corporation  qualifies  as  a
  new business pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision.
    (4) (A)(i) Notwithstanding paragraphs one and two of this subdivision,
  a  new  business  shall  include  any  corporation which is identical in
  operation and ownership to a business entity (or entities) taxable under
  section one hundred eighty-three or one hundred  eighty-four  or  former
  section  one  hundred  eighty-five  of  article  nine; article nine-A or
  thirty-three of this chapter or the  income  (or  losses)  of  which  is
  includable  under  article  twenty-two  of  this  chapter, provided such
  corporation and such  business  entity  or  entities  are  operating  in
  different counties in the state.
    (ii)  Notwithstanding  paragraphs  one and two of this subdivision, an
  individual who is either a sole proprietor or a member of a  partnership
  shall qualify as an owner of a new business if the business of which the
  individual  is  an owner is identical in operation and in ownership to a
  business  entity  (or  entities)  taxable  under  section  one   hundred
  eighty-three  or  one  hundred eighty-four or former section one hundred
  eighty-five of article nine; article  nine-A  or  thirty-three  of  this
  chapter  or  the income (or losses) of which is includable under article
  twenty-two of this chapter, provided such  business  and  such  business
  entity or entities are operating in different counties in the state.
    (iii)  Any  corporation qualifying as a new business or any individual
  qualifying as an owner of a new business as a result of  the  provisions
  of this subparagraph shall have the same business tax benefit period and
  sales  and  use tax benefit period as the business entity to which it is
  identical in operation and in ownership.
    (B) Notwithstanding any provisions of this subdivision to the contrary
  and notwithstanding subdivision c of section  eighteen  of  part  CC  of
  chapter  eighty-five  of  the laws of two thousand two, a corporation or


 partnership, which was first certified under article eighteen-B  of  the
  general  municipal law before August first, two thousand two, has a base
  period of zero years or zero employment for  its  base  period,  and  is
  similar  in  operation and in ownership to a business entity or entities
  taxable, or previously taxable, under sections  specified  in  paragraph
  one  or  two of this subdivision or which would have been subject to tax
  under article twenty-three of this  chapter  (as  such  article  was  in
  effect  on  January  first, nineteen hundred eighty) or which would have
  been subject to tax under article thirty-two of this  chapter  (as  such
  article  was  in effect on December thirty-first, two thousand fourteen)
  or the income or losses of which is  or  was  includable  under  article
  twenty-two  of this chapter shall not be deemed a new business if it was
  not formed for a valid business purpose, as  such  term  is  defined  in
  clause  (D)  of subparagraph one of paragraph (o) of subdivision nine of
  section two hundred eight of this chapter and was formed solely to  gain
  empire zone benefits.
    (5)  Notwithstanding  any  other provision of this section, a business
  enterprise which is approved by the commissioner of economic development
  as the owner of a qualified investment project or a significant  capital
  investment  project  pursuant to subdivision (w) of section nine hundred
  fifty-nine of the general municipal law, has a base period of zero years
  and places  in  service  property  (or  a  project  that  includes  such
  property)  which  comprises  such  qualified  investment project or such
  significant capital investment project, shall be  deemed  to  be  a  new
  business  under  this  section.  Provided,  however,  to be deemed a new
  business under this  paragraph,  such  business  enterprise  shall  have
  received  certification under article eighteen-B of the general business
  law by December thirty-first, two thousand seven.
    (k) If the designation of an area as an empire zone is  no  longer  in
  effect  because section nine hundred sixty-nine of the general municipal
  law was not amended to extend the effective date of such designation  so
  that the designations of all empire zones pursuant to article eighteen-B
  of  the  general  municipal law have expired, a business enterprise that
  was certified pursuant to article eighteen-B of  the  general  municipal
  law  on  the day immediately preceding the day on which such designation
  expired shall be deemed to continue to be certified under  such  article
  eighteen-B  for purposes of this section, and sections fifteen, sixteen,
  subdivisions five and six of section two hundred ten-B, subsections (bb)
  and (cc) of section six hundred six, subdivision (d) of  section  eleven
  hundred nineteen and subdivisions (r) and (s) of section fifteen hundred
  eleven of this chapter. In addition, if the designation of an area as an
  empire  zone  is  no  longer  in  effect  because  section  nine hundred
  sixty-nine of the general municipal law was not amended  to  extend  the
  effective  date  of  such  designation  so  that the designations of all
  empire zones pursuant to article eighteen-B of the general municipal law
  have expired, all references to empire zones in the provisions  of  this
  chapter  listed  in the previous sentence shall be read as meaning areas
  designated as empire zones on the day immediately preceding the  day  on
  which such designation expired.
    (1)  Manufacturer. For the purposes of sections fifteen and sixteen of
  this article, the term "manufacturer" shall mean a taxpayer which during
  the taxable year is principally engaged in the production  of  goods  by
  manufacturing,  processing,  assembling,  refining,  mining, extracting,
  farming,  agriculture,  horticulture,  floriculture,   viticulture,   or
  commercial  fishing,  or  a  business  engaged  in emerging technologies
  pursuant to section thirty-one hundred two-e of the  public  authorities
  law.


   (n)  Clean  energy enterprises. In determining tax benefits under this
  chapter for clean energy enterprises certified under article  eighteen-B
  of  the  general  municipal  law,  references  in this section and other
  sections in this chapter relating to qualified empire  zone  enterprises
  and empire zone benefits to "an empire zone", "the empire zone" and "the
  empire  zones"  shall be read as references to "New York State", and any
  tests or measurements relating to employment for purpose of empire  zone
  benefits  under  this  chapter  shall  be  calculated  with  respect  to
  employment within the entire state, and references to "QEZES"  shall  be
  read  as including references to such clean energy enterprises that meet
  the employment test in this section. For purposes of the  tax  reduction
  credit allowed under section sixteen of this article, for a clean energy
  enterprise, the zone allocation factor shall be one hundred percent.




   * §  14-a.  IMB  credit  for  energy taxes. (a) Allowance of credit. A
  taxpayer which is an industrial  or  manufacturing  business  (IMB),  or
  which  is a sole proprietor of an IMB or a member of a partnership which
  is an IMB,  and  which  is  subject  to  tax  under  article  nine-A  or
  twenty-two  of this chapter, shall be allowed a credit against such tax,
  pursuant to  the  provisions  referenced  in  subdivision  (d)  of  this
  section. Such credit shall be equal to the sum (or pro rata share of the
  sum,  in  the  case  of  a member of a partnership) of the taxes imposed
  under sections one hundred eighty-six-a, one hundred  eighty-six-c,  one
  hundred  eighty-nine and one hundred eighty-nine-a of this chapter which
  during the taxable year were either paid by, or passed through  to,  the
  IMB,  on  or  after January first, two thousand, but only with regard to
  gas, electricity, steam,  water  or  refrigeration,  or  gas,  electric,
  steam,  water  or refrigeration services, consumed or used by the IMB in
  this state.
    (b) Definitions. The term "industrial or manufacturing business" shall
  mean a business which during the taxable year is principally engaged  in
  activities  described  in  clause  (A),  (B)  or (C), or any combination
  thereof, of subparagraph (i) of paragraph (b) of subdivision  twelve  of
  section two hundred ten of this chapter.
    (c)  Any  person who collects from, or passes through to, the IMB, any
  tax as described in subdivision (a) of this section, shall  provide  the
  IMB  with  the information with respect to such tax passed through which
  may be required to enable the taxpayer to correctly compute  the  credit
  provided for in this section.
    (d)  Cross-references.  For  application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) Article 9-A: Section 210.26-a.
    (2) Article 22: Sections 606(i) and (t-1).
    * NB Expired for taxable years ending on and after January 1, 2007




   § 15. QEZE credit for real property taxes.  (a) Allowance of credit. A
  taxpayer which is a qualified empire zone enterprise (QEZE), or which is
  a  sole  proprietor  of  a  QEZE or a member of a partnership which is a
  QEZE, and which is subject to tax under article  nine-A,  twenty-two  or
  thirty-three  of  this  chapter,  shall be allowed a credit against such
  tax, pursuant to the provisions referenced in subdivision  (h)  of  this
  section, for eligible real property taxes.
    (b)  Amount  of credit. (1) In the case of a business enterprise which
  is first certified under article eighteen-B of the general municipal law
  before April first, two thousand five, the amount of the credit shall be
  equal to the product (or pro rata share of the product, in the case of a
  member of a partnership) of (i) the  benefit  period  factor,  (ii)  the
  employment  increase  factor  and (iii) the eligible real property taxes
  paid or incurred by the QEZE during the taxable year. However the amount
  of the credit  may  not  exceed  the  credit  limitation  set  forth  in
  subdivision (f) of this section.
    (2)  (A)  For  a  business  enterprise  which is first certified under
  article eighteen-B of the general municipal law on or after April first,
  two thousand five,  and  notwithstanding  any  other  provision  to  the
  contrary, in the case of a business enterprise which was first certified
  between  August  first,  two  thousand  two  and March thirty-first, two
  thousand five that conducts its operations on real property that it owns
  or leases that is both located within an empire zone and that is subject
  to a brownfield site cleanup agreement executed prior to January  first,
  two thousand six in accordance with section 27-1409 of the environmental
  conservation law, the amount of the credit shall be equal to the product
  (or  pro  rata  share  of  the  product,  in  the  case of a member of a
  partnership) of twenty-five percent of the total wages, health  benefits
  and retirement benefits paid to or on behalf of net new employees during
  the  taxable year, provided however, that the total amount of the credit
  shall not exceed ten  thousand  dollars  for  each  such  employee.  For
  purposes  of  computing  total  wages,  health  benefits  and retirement
  benefits, wages,  health  benefits  and  retirement  benefits  for  each
  employee in excess of forty thousand dollars shall be excluded from such
  computation.  Provided  however,  the  amount  of  the credit for a QEZE
  certified in an empire zone designated under subdivision (b) or  (c)  of
  section  nine hundred fifty-eight of the general municipal law, except a
  manufacturer certified in an empire zone designated under  section  nine
  hundred  fifty-eight  of  the  general  municipal  law, shall be further
  adjusted  by  the  product  of  the  amount  determined  above  and  the
  development  zone  employment  increase factor under subparagraph (B) of
  this paragraph. Provided further, in addition, the amount of the  credit
  may  not exceed the credit amount set forth in subdivision (f-1) of this
  section.
    (B) Development zone employment increase factor. The development  zone
  employment increase factors are set forth in the following table:
 
  Net New Employees:                 DZ Employment Increase Factor:
  1 to 10                            0.25
  11 to 49                           0.5
  50 to 75                           0.75
  76 and above                       the amount, not to exceed 1.0,
                                     of new employees divided by 100
 
    Net new employees. The number of net new employees for a QEZE is equal
  to  the  excess of the QEZE's employment number in the empire zones with
  respect to which the QEZE is certified pursuant to article eighteen-B of


 the general  municipal  law  for  the  taxable  year,  over  the  QEZE's
  employment number in such zones for the base period.
    (3)  For  a business enterprise which is first certified under article
  eighteen-B of the general municipal law on or  after  April  first,  two
  thousand  nine,  the credit allowed shall be seventy-five percent of the
  amount calculated under paragraph two of this subdivision.
    (c) Benefit period factor.  The benefit period factors are  set  forth
  in the following table:
 
  Taxable year of the benefit period:          Benefit period factor:
                 1 - 10                                 1.0
                   11                                    .8
                   12                                    .6
                   13                                    .4
                   14                                    .2
                   15                                     0
    (d)  Employment increase factor. The employment increase factor is the
  amount, not to exceed 1.0, which is the greater of:
    (1) the excess of the QEZE's employment number  in  the  empire  zones
  with  respect  to  which  the  QEZE  is  certified  pursuant  to article
  eighteen-B of the general municipal law for the taxable year,  over  the
  QEZE's  test  year employment number in such zones, divided by such test
  year employment number in such zones; or
    (2) the excess of the QEZE's employment number in such zones  for  the
  taxable  year over the QEZE's test year employment number in such zones,
  divided by 100.
    (3) For purposes of paragraph one of this subdivision, where there  is
  an  excess  as  described  in  such  paragraph,  and where the test year
  employment number is zero, then the employment increase factor shall  be
  1.0.
    (e)  Eligible  real  property  taxes. The term "eligible real property
  taxes" means taxes imposed on real property which is owned by  the  QEZE
  and  located  in  an  empire  zone  with  respect  to  which the QEZE is
  certified pursuant to article eighteen-B of the general  municipal  law,
  provided  such taxes are paid by the QEZE which is the owner of the real
  property or are paid by a tenant which either  (i)  does  not  meet  the
  eligibility  requirements under section fourteen of this article to be a
  QEZE or (ii) cannot treat such payment as eligible real  property  taxes
  pursuant  to  this  paragraph  and  such taxes become a lien on the real
  property during a taxable year in which the owner of the  real  property
  is  both  certified  pursuant  to  article  eighteen-B  of  the  general
  municipal law and a qualified empire zone enterprise.   For purposes  of
  this  subdivision,  the  term  "tax"  means  a  charge imposed upon real
  property by or on behalf of a county,  city,  town,  village  or  school
  district  for  municipal  or school district purposes, provided that the
  charge is levied for the general public welfare  by  the  proper  taxing
  authorities  at  a  like rate against all property in the territory over
  which such authorities have jurisdiction, and provided that where  taxes
  are  levied pursuant to article eighteen or article nineteen of the real
  property tax law,  the  property  must  have  been  taxed  at  the  rate
  determined  for  the class in which it is contained, as provided by such
  article eighteen or nineteen, whichever is applicable.  The  term  "tax"
  does  not  include a charge for local benefits, including any portion of
  that charge that is properly allocated  to  the  costs  attributable  to
  maintenance  or interest, when (1) the property subject to the charge is
  limited to the property that benefits from the charge, or (2) the amount
  of the charge is determined by the benefit to the property assessed,  or
  (3)  the  improvement for which the charge is assessed tends to increase


 the property value.  In addition, "eligible real property  taxes"  shall
  include  taxes  paid by a QEZE which is a lessee of real property if the
  following conditions are satisfied:  (1) the taxes must be paid  by  the
  lessee  pursuant to explicit requirements in a written lease executed or
  amended on or after June first, two thousand five, (2) such taxes become
  a lien on the real property during a taxable year in which the lessee of
  the real property is both certified pursuant to  article  eighteen-B  of
  the  general  municipal  law and a qualified empire zone enterprise, and
  (3) the lessee has made direct payment  of  such  taxes  to  the  taxing
  authority  and has received a receipt for such payment of taxes from the
  taxing authority.  In addition, the term "eligible real property  taxes"
  includes  payments  in  lieu  of  taxes made by the QEZE to the state, a
  municipal corporation or a public  benefit  corporation  pursuant  to  a
  written agreement entered into between the QEZE and the state, municipal
  corporation, or public benefit corporation. Provided, however, a payment
  in  lieu  of  taxes  made  by  the  QEZE pursuant to a written agreement
  executed or amended on or after January first, two thousand  one,  shall
  not  constitute  eligible real property taxes in any taxable year to the
  extent that such payment exceeds the product of (A) the greater  of  (i)
  the  basis for federal income tax purposes, calculated without regard to
  depreciation,  determined  as  of  the  effective  date  of  the  QEZE's
  certification  pursuant  to  article eighteen-B of the general municipal
  law of real property, including buildings and structural  components  of
  buildings, owned by the QEZE and located in empire zones with respect to
  which  the  QEZE is certified pursuant to such article eighteen-B of the
  general municipal law, and  provided  that  if  such  basis  is  further
  adjusted  or  reduced  pursuant to any provision of the internal revenue
  code, the QEZE  may  petition  the  department  and  the  department  of
  economic  development  to disregard such reduction or adjustment for the
  purpose of this subdivision or (ii) the basis  for  federal  income  tax
  purposes  of  such  real  property  described  in  clause  (i)  of  this
  subparagraph, calculated without regard to depreciation, on the last day
  of the taxable year, and provided that if such basis is further adjusted
  or reduced pursuant to any provision of the internal revenue  code,  the
  QEZE may petition the department, the department of economic development
  and  the office of real property services to disregard such reduction or
  adjustment for the purpose of this subdivision; and  (B)  the  estimated
  effective  full  value tax rate within the county in which such property
  is located,  as  most  recently  calculated  by  the  commissioner.  The
  commissioner shall annually calculate estimated effective full value tax
  rates  within  each  county for this purpose based upon the most current
  information available to him or her in relation to county,  city,  town,
  village and school district taxes.
    (f)  In  the  case  of  a business enterprise which is first certified
  under article eighteen-B of the general municipal law on or after August
  first, two thousand two and before April first, two thousand  five,  the
  credit  limitation  shall  be  the  greater  of  the employment increase
  limitation or the capital investment limitation.
    (1) The employment increase limitation shall be the product of (A) ten
  thousand dollars and (B) the excess of the QEZE's employment  number  in
  the empire zones with respect to which the QEZE is certified pursuant to
  article  eighteen-B  of  the general municipal law for the taxable year,
  over the QEZE's test year employment number in such zones.
    (2) The capital investment limitation shall be the product of (A)  ten
  percent of the greater of (i) the cost or other basis for federal income
  tax purposes, determined on the later of January first, two thousand one
  or  the  effective  date of the QEZE's certification pursuant to article
  eighteen-B of the general municipal law,  of  real  property,  including


 buildings  and structural components of buildings, owned by the QEZE and
  located in empire zones with respect to  which  the  QEZE  is  certified
  pursuant  to  such  article  eighteen-B of the general municipal law, or
  (ii)  the  cost  or  other basis for federal income tax purposes of such
  real property described in clause (i) of this subparagraph on  the  last
  day  of  the  taxable year, and (B) the greater of (i) the percentage of
  such real property described in clause (i) of subparagraph (A)  of  this
  paragraph  which  is  physically  occupied  and used by the QEZE or by a
  related person to the QEZE, as the term "related person" is  defined  in
  subparagraph  (c)  of  paragraph three of subsection (b) of section four
  hundred sixty-five of the internal revenue code, or (ii) the  percentage
  of  such  cost or other basis which is attributable to the construction,
  expansion  or  rehabilitation  of  such  property,   rather   than   the
  acquisition  of  such  real property, by the QEZE. Provided, however, if
  the percentage of such cost or other basis, which is attributable to the
  construction, expansion or rehabilitation of such real  property  equals
  or  exceeds  fifty percent, then the percentage described in clause (ii)
  of subparagraph (B) of this paragraph shall be deemed to be one  hundred
  percent.
    (f-1)  In  the  case of a business enterprise which is first certified
  under article eighteen-B of the general municipal law on or after  April
  first,  two thousand five, the credit shall be the greater of the credit
  amount as determined pursuant to paragraph two  of  subdivision  (b)  of
  this  section,  or  the  capital investment amount determined under this
  subdivision. Provided however, that in no case shall the amount  of  the
  credit  exceed the amount of the taxpayer's eligible real property taxes
  for the taxable year.
    (1)  For  a  QEZE  certified  in  an  empire  zone  designated   under
  subdivision  (a)  or  (d)  of  section  nine  hundred fifty-eight of the
  general municipal law and a manufacturer certified  in  an  empire  zone
  designated  under  section  nine  hundred  fifty-eight  of  the  general
  municipal law, the capital investment amount shall be the product of (A)
  ten percent of the greater of (i) the cost or other  basis  for  federal
  income  tax  purposes,  determined  on  the  later of January first, two
  thousand one or the effective date of the QEZE's certification  pursuant
  to  article  eighteen-B  of the general municipal law, of real property,
  including buildings and structural components of buildings, owned by the
  QEZE and located in empire zones with  respect  to  which  the  QEZE  is
  certified  pursuant  to such article eighteen-B of the general municipal
  law, or (ii) the cost or other basis for federal income tax purposes  of
  such  real  property described in clause (i) of this subparagraph on the
  last day of the taxable year, and (B) the greater of (i) the  percentage
  of  such  real  property  described in clause (i) of subparagraph (A) of
  this paragraph which is physically occupied and used by the QEZE or by a
  related person to the QEZE, as the term "related person" is  defined  in
  subparagraph  (c)  of  paragraph three of subsection (b) of section four
  hundred sixty-five of the internal revenue code, or (ii) the  percentage
  of  such  cost or other basis which is attributable to the construction,
  expansion  or  rehabilitation  of  such  property,   rather   than   the
  acquisition  of  such  real property, by the QEZE. Provided, however, if
  the percentage of such cost or other basis, which is attributable to the
  construction, expansion or rehabilitation of such real  property  equals
  or  exceeds  fifty percent, then the percentage described in clause (ii)
  of subparagraph (B) of this paragraph shall be deemed to be one  hundred
  percent.
    (2)   For  a  QEZE  certified  in  an  empire  zone  designated  under
  subdivision (b) or (c)  of  section  nine  hundred  fifty-eight  of  the
  general  municipal  law,  which  is  not  a  manufacturer,  the  capital


 investment amount shall be the product of ten percent and the amount  of
  such  cost  or  other  basis  which is attributable to the construction,
  expansion  or  rehabilitation  of  such  property,   rather   than   the
  acquisition  of  such  real  property,  and  the percentage of such real
  property described in clause (i) of subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) of
  this subdivision which is physically occupied and used by the QEZE or by
  a related person to the QEZE, as the term "related person" is defined in
  subparagraph (c) of paragraph three of subsection (b)  of  section  four
  hundred  sixty-five  of the internal revenue code. Provided, however, if
  the percentage of such cost or other basis, which is attributable to the
  construction, expansion or rehabilitation of such real  property  equals
  or exceeds fifty percent, then the percentage of physical occupation and
  use  described  in  the  preceding  sentence  shall  be deemed to be one
  hundred percent.
    (g) Credit recapture. Where a  QEZE's  eligible  real  property  taxes
  which  were the basis for the allowance of the credit provided for under
  this section are subsequently reduced as a result of a  final  order  in
  any proceeding under article seven of the real property tax law or other
  provision  of  law,  the taxpayer shall add back, in the taxable year in
  which such final order is issued, the excess of (1) the amount of credit
  originally allowed for a taxable year over  (2)  the  amount  of  credit
  determined  based upon the reduced eligible real property taxes. If such
  final order reduces real property taxes for  more  than  one  year,  the
  taxpayer  must  determine  how much of such reduction is attributable to
  each year covered by such final order and calculate the amount of credit
  which is required by this subdivision to be  recaptured  for  each  year
  based on such reduction.
    (h) Definitions and cross-references. For definitions of terms used in
  this  section  see  section fourteen of this article. For application of
  the credit provided for in this section, see the following provisions of
  this chapter:
    (2) Article 9-A: Section 210-B: subdivision 5.
    (3) Article 22: Section 606: subsections (i) and (bb).
    (4) Article 33: Section 1511: subdivision (r).




   § 15. QEZE credit for real property taxes.  (a) Allowance of credit. A
  taxpayer which is a qualified empire zone enterprise (QEZE), or which is
  a  sole  proprietor  of  a  QEZE or a member of a partnership which is a
  QEZE, and which is subject to tax under article  nine-A,  twenty-two  or
  thirty-three  of  this  chapter,  shall be allowed a credit against such
  tax, pursuant to the provisions referenced in subdivision  (h)  of  this
  section, for eligible real property taxes.
    (b)  Amount  of credit. (1) In the case of a business enterprise which
  is first certified under article eighteen-B of the general municipal law
  before April first, two thousand five, the amount of the credit shall be
  equal to the product (or pro rata share of the product, in the case of a
  member of a partnership) of (i) the  benefit  period  factor,  (ii)  the
  employment  increase  factor  and (iii) the eligible real property taxes
  paid or incurred by the QEZE during the taxable year. However the amount
  of the credit  may  not  exceed  the  credit  limitation  set  forth  in
  subdivision (f) of this section.
    (2)  (A)  For  a  business  enterprise  which is first certified under
  article eighteen-B of the general municipal law on or after April first,
  two thousand five,  and  notwithstanding  any  other  provision  to  the
  contrary, in the case of a business enterprise which was first certified
  between  August  first,  two  thousand  two  and March thirty-first, two
  thousand five that conducts its operations on real property that it owns
  or leases that is both located within an empire zone and that is subject
  to a brownfield site cleanup agreement executed prior to January  first,
  two thousand six in accordance with section 27-1409 of the environmental
  conservation law, the amount of the credit shall be equal to the product
  (or  pro  rata  share  of  the  product,  in  the  case of a member of a
  partnership) of twenty-five percent of the total wages, health  benefits
  and retirement benefits paid to or on behalf of net new employees during
  the  taxable year, provided however, that the total amount of the credit
  shall not exceed ten  thousand  dollars  for  each  such  employee.  For
  purposes  of  computing  total  wages,  health  benefits  and retirement
  benefits, wages,  health  benefits  and  retirement  benefits  for  each
  employee in excess of forty thousand dollars shall be excluded from such
  computation.  Provided  however,  the  amount  of  the credit for a QEZE
  certified in an empire zone designated under subdivision (b) or  (c)  of
  section  nine hundred fifty-eight of the general municipal law, except a
  manufacturer certified in an empire zone designated under  section  nine
  hundred  fifty-eight  of  the  general  municipal  law, shall be further
  adjusted  by  the  product  of  the  amount  determined  above  and  the
  development  zone  employment  increase factor under subparagraph (B) of
  this paragraph. Provided further, in addition, the amount of the  credit
  may  not exceed the credit amount set forth in subdivision (f-1) of this
  section.
    (B) Development zone employment increase factor. The development  zone
  employment increase factors are set forth in the following table:
 
  Net New Employees:                 DZ Employment Increase Factor:
  1 to 10                            0.25
  11 to 49                           0.5
  50 to 75                           0.75
  76 and above                       the amount, not to exceed 1.0,
                                     of new employees divided by 100
 
    Net new employees. The number of net new employees for a QEZE is equal
  to  the  excess of the QEZE's employment number in the empire zones with
  respect to which the QEZE is certified pursuant to article eighteen-B of


 the general  municipal  law  for  the  taxable  year,  over  the  QEZE's
  employment number in such zones for the base period.
    (3)  For  a business enterprise which is first certified under article
  eighteen-B of the general municipal law on or  after  April  first,  two
  thousand  nine,  the credit allowed shall be seventy-five percent of the
  amount calculated under paragraph two of this subdivision.
    (c) Benefit period factor.  The benefit period factors are  set  forth
  in the following table:
 
  Taxable year of the benefit period:          Benefit period factor:
                 1 - 10                                 1.0
                   11                                    .8
                   12                                    .6
                   13                                    .4
                   14                                    .2
                   15                                     0
    (d)  Employment increase factor. The employment increase factor is the
  amount, not to exceed 1.0, which is the greater of:
    (1) the excess of the QEZE's employment number  in  the  empire  zones
  with  respect  to  which  the  QEZE  is  certified  pursuant  to article
  eighteen-B of the general municipal law for the taxable year,  over  the
  QEZE's  test  year employment number in such zones, divided by such test
  year employment number in such zones; or
    (2) the excess of the QEZE's employment number in such zones  for  the
  taxable  year over the QEZE's test year employment number in such zones,
  divided by 100.
    (3) For purposes of paragraph one of this subdivision, where there  is
  an  excess  as  described  in  such  paragraph,  and where the test year
  employment number is zero, then the employment increase factor shall  be
  1.0.
    (e)  Eligible  real  property  taxes. The term "eligible real property
  taxes" means taxes imposed on real property which is owned by  the  QEZE
  and  located  in  an  empire  zone  with  respect  to  which the QEZE is
  certified pursuant to article eighteen-B of the general  municipal  law,
  provided  such taxes are paid by the QEZE which is the owner of the real
  property or are paid by a tenant which either  (i)  does  not  meet  the
  eligibility  requirements under section fourteen of this article to be a
  QEZE or (ii) cannot treat such payment as eligible real  property  taxes
  pursuant  to  this  paragraph  and  such taxes become a lien on the real
  property during a taxable year in which the owner of the  real  property
  is  both  certified  pursuant  to  article  eighteen-B  of  the  general
  municipal law and a qualified empire zone enterprise.   For purposes  of
  this  subdivision,  the  term  "tax"  means  a  charge imposed upon real
  property by or on behalf of a county,  city,  town,  village  or  school
  district  for  municipal  or school district purposes, provided that the
  charge is levied for the general public welfare  by  the  proper  taxing
  authorities  at  a  like rate against all property in the territory over
  which such authorities have jurisdiction, and provided that where  taxes
  are  levied pursuant to article eighteen or article nineteen of the real
  property tax law,  the  property  must  have  been  taxed  at  the  rate
  determined  for  the class in which it is contained, as provided by such
  article eighteen or nineteen, whichever is applicable.  The  term  "tax"
  does  not  include a charge for local benefits, including any portion of
  that charge that is properly allocated  to  the  costs  attributable  to
  maintenance  or interest, when (1) the property subject to the charge is
  limited to the property that benefits from the charge, or (2) the amount
  of the charge is determined by the benefit to the property assessed,  or
  (3)  the  improvement for which the charge is assessed tends to increase


 the property value.  In addition, "eligible real property  taxes"  shall
  include  taxes  paid by a QEZE which is a lessee of real property if the
  following conditions are satisfied:  (1) the taxes must be paid  by  the
  lessee  pursuant to explicit requirements in a written lease executed or
  amended on or after June first, two thousand five, (2) such taxes become
  a lien on the real property during a taxable year in which the lessee of
  the real property is both certified pursuant to  article  eighteen-B  of
  the  general  municipal  law and a qualified empire zone enterprise, and
  (3) the lessee has made direct payment  of  such  taxes  to  the  taxing
  authority  and has received a receipt for such payment of taxes from the
  taxing authority.  In addition, the term "eligible real property  taxes"
  includes  payments  in  lieu  of  taxes made by the QEZE to the state, a
  municipal corporation or a public  benefit  corporation  pursuant  to  a
  written agreement entered into between the QEZE and the state, municipal
  corporation, or public benefit corporation. Provided, however, a payment
  in  lieu  of  taxes  made  by  the  QEZE pursuant to a written agreement
  executed or amended on or after January first, two thousand  one,  shall
  not  constitute  eligible real property taxes in any taxable year to the
  extent that such payment exceeds the product of (A) the greater  of  (i)
  the  basis for federal income tax purposes, calculated without regard to
  depreciation,  determined  as  of  the  effective  date  of  the  QEZE's
  certification  pursuant  to  article eighteen-B of the general municipal
  law of real property, including buildings and structural  components  of
  buildings, owned by the QEZE and located in empire zones with respect to
  which  the  QEZE is certified pursuant to such article eighteen-B of the
  general municipal law, and  provided  that  if  such  basis  is  further
  adjusted  or  reduced  pursuant to any provision of the internal revenue
  code, the QEZE  may  petition  the  department  and  the  department  of
  economic  development  to disregard such reduction or adjustment for the
  purpose of this subdivision or (ii) the basis  for  federal  income  tax
  purposes  of  such  real  property  described  in  clause  (i)  of  this
  subparagraph, calculated without regard to depreciation, on the last day
  of the taxable year, and provided that if such basis is further adjusted
  or reduced pursuant to any provision of the internal revenue  code,  the
  QEZE may petition the department, the department of economic development
  and  the office of real property services to disregard such reduction or
  adjustment for the purpose of this subdivision; and  (B)  the  estimated
  effective  full  value tax rate within the county in which such property
  is located,  as  most  recently  calculated  by  the  commissioner.  The
  commissioner shall annually calculate estimated effective full value tax
  rates  within  each  county for this purpose based upon the most current
  information available to him or her in relation to county,  city,  town,
  village and school district taxes.
    (f)  In  the  case  of  a business enterprise which is first certified
  under article eighteen-B of the general municipal law on or after August
  first, two thousand two and before April first, two thousand  five,  the
  credit  limitation  shall  be  the  greater  of  the employment increase
  limitation or the capital investment limitation.
    (1) The employment increase limitation shall be the product of (A) ten
  thousand dollars and (B) the excess of the QEZE's employment  number  in
  the empire zones with respect to which the QEZE is certified pursuant to
  article  eighteen-B  of  the general municipal law for the taxable year,
  over the QEZE's test year employment number in such zones.
    (2) The capital investment limitation shall be the product of (A)  ten
  percent of the greater of (i) the cost or other basis for federal income
  tax purposes, determined on the later of January first, two thousand one
  or  the  effective  date of the QEZE's certification pursuant to article
  eighteen-B of the general municipal law,  of  real  property,  including


 buildings  and structural components of buildings, owned by the QEZE and
  located in empire zones with respect to  which  the  QEZE  is  certified
  pursuant  to  such  article  eighteen-B of the general municipal law, or
  (ii)  the  cost  or  other basis for federal income tax purposes of such
  real property described in clause (i) of this subparagraph on  the  last
  day  of  the  taxable year, and (B) the greater of (i) the percentage of
  such real property described in clause (i) of subparagraph (A)  of  this
  paragraph  which  is  physically  occupied  and used by the QEZE or by a
  related person to the QEZE, as the term "related person" is  defined  in
  subparagraph  (c)  of  paragraph three of subsection (b) of section four
  hundred sixty-five of the internal revenue code, or (ii) the  percentage
  of  such  cost or other basis which is attributable to the construction,
  expansion  or  rehabilitation  of  such  property,   rather   than   the
  acquisition  of  such  real property, by the QEZE. Provided, however, if
  the percentage of such cost or other basis, which is attributable to the
  construction, expansion or rehabilitation of such real  property  equals
  or  exceeds  fifty percent, then the percentage described in clause (ii)
  of subparagraph (B) of this paragraph shall be deemed to be one  hundred
  percent.
    (f-1)  In  the  case of a business enterprise which is first certified
  under article eighteen-B of the general municipal law on or after  April
  first,  two thousand five, the credit shall be the greater of the credit
  amount as determined pursuant to paragraph two  of  subdivision  (b)  of
  this  section,  or  the  capital investment amount determined under this
  subdivision. Provided however, that in no case shall the amount  of  the
  credit  exceed the amount of the taxpayer's eligible real property taxes
  for the taxable year.
    (1)  For  a  QEZE  certified  in  an  empire  zone  designated   under
  subdivision  (a)  or  (d)  of  section  nine  hundred fifty-eight of the
  general municipal law and a manufacturer certified  in  an  empire  zone
  designated  under  section  nine  hundred  fifty-eight  of  the  general
  municipal law, the capital investment amount shall be the product of (A)
  ten percent of the greater of (i) the cost or other  basis  for  federal
  income  tax  purposes,  determined  on  the  later of January first, two
  thousand one or the effective date of the QEZE's certification  pursuant
  to  article  eighteen-B  of the general municipal law, of real property,
  including buildings and structural components of buildings, owned by the
  QEZE and located in empire zones with  respect  to  which  the  QEZE  is
  certified  pursuant  to such article eighteen-B of the general municipal
  law, or (ii) the cost or other basis for federal income tax purposes  of
  such  real  property described in clause (i) of this subparagraph on the
  last day of the taxable year, and (B) the greater of (i) the  percentage
  of  such  real  property  described in clause (i) of subparagraph (A) of
  this paragraph which is physically occupied and used by the QEZE or by a
  related person to the QEZE, as the term "related person" is  defined  in
  subparagraph  (c)  of  paragraph three of subsection (b) of section four
  hundred sixty-five of the internal revenue code, or (ii) the  percentage
  of  such  cost or other basis which is attributable to the construction,
  expansion  or  rehabilitation  of  such  property,   rather   than   the
  acquisition  of  such  real property, by the QEZE. Provided, however, if
  the percentage of such cost or other basis, which is attributable to the
  construction, expansion or rehabilitation of such real  property  equals
  or  exceeds  fifty percent, then the percentage described in clause (ii)
  of subparagraph (B) of this paragraph shall be deemed to be one  hundred
  percent.
    (2)   For  a  QEZE  certified  in  an  empire  zone  designated  under
  subdivision (b) or (c)  of  section  nine  hundred  fifty-eight  of  the
  general  municipal  law,  which  is  not  a  manufacturer,  the  capital


 investment amount shall be the product of ten percent and the amount  of
  such  cost  or  other  basis  which is attributable to the construction,
  expansion  or  rehabilitation  of  such  property,   rather   than   the
  acquisition  of  such  real  property,  and  the percentage of such real
  property described in clause (i) of subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) of
  this subdivision which is physically occupied and used by the QEZE or by
  a related person to the QEZE, as the term "related person" is defined in
  subparagraph (c) of paragraph three of subsection (b)  of  section  four
  hundred  sixty-five  of the internal revenue code. Provided, however, if
  the percentage of such cost or other basis, which is attributable to the
  construction, expansion or rehabilitation of such real  property  equals
  or exceeds fifty percent, then the percentage of physical occupation and
  use  described  in  the  preceding  sentence  shall  be deemed to be one
  hundred percent.
    (g) Credit recapture. Where a  QEZE's  eligible  real  property  taxes
  which  were the basis for the allowance of the credit provided for under
  this section are subsequently reduced as a result of a  final  order  in
  any proceeding under article seven of the real property tax law or other
  provision  of  law,  the taxpayer shall add back, in the taxable year in
  which such final order is issued, the excess of (1) the amount of credit
  originally allowed for a taxable year over  (2)  the  amount  of  credit
  determined  based upon the reduced eligible real property taxes. If such
  final order reduces real property taxes for  more  than  one  year,  the
  taxpayer  must  determine  how much of such reduction is attributable to
  each year covered by such final order and calculate the amount of credit
  which is required by this subdivision to be  recaptured  for  each  year
  based on such reduction.
    (h) Definitions and cross-references. For definitions of terms used in
  this  section  see  section fourteen of this article. For application of
  the credit provided for in this section, see the following provisions of
  this chapter:
    (2) Article 9-A: Section 210-B: subdivision 5.
    (3) Article 22: Section 606: subsections (i) and (bb).
    (4) Article 33: Section 1511: subdivision (r).




   §  16. QEZE tax reduction credit.  (a) Allowance of credit. A taxpayer
  which is a qualified empire zone enterprise (QEZE), or which is  a  sole
  proprietor  of  a QEZE or a member of a partnership which is a QEZE, and
  which is subject to tax under article nine-A, twenty-two or thirty-three
  of this chapter, shall be allowed a credit against such tax, pursuant to
  the provisions referenced in subdivision (g)  of  this  section,  to  be
  computed as hereinafter provided.
    (b) Amount of credit. The amount of the credit shall be the product of
  (i)  the  benefit  period  factor,  (ii) the employment increase factor,
  (iii) the zone allocation factor and (iv) the tax factor.
    (c) Benefit period factor. The benefit period factor for  the  taxable
  year  shall  be  as  prescribed in subdivision (c) of section fifteen of
  this article.
    (d) Employment increase factor. The employment increase factor for the
  taxable year shall be  as  prescribed  in  subdivision  (d)  of  section
  fifteen of this article.
    (e)  Zone  allocation  factor. The zone allocation factor shall be the
  percentage representing the QEZE's economic  presence  in  empire  zones
  with  respect to which the QEZE is certified under article eighteen-B of
  the general municipal law. This percentage shall be computed by:
    (1) ascertaining the percentage which the average value of the  QEZE's
  real  and  tangible personal property, whether owned or rented to it, in
  empire zones with respect to which the QEZE is certified  under  article
  eighteen-B of the general municipal law during the period covered by the
  taxpayer's  report  or  return  bears to the average value of the QEZE's
  real and tangible personal property, whether  owned  or  rented  to  it,
  within  the  state  during such period; provided that the term "value of
  the QEZE's real and tangible personal  property"  shall  have  the  same
  meaning  as  such  term  has  in  subparagraph  one  of paragraph (a) of
  subdivision three of section two hundred ten of this chapter; and
    (2) ascertaining the percentage of the total wages, salaries and other
  personal service compensation, similarly computed, during such period of
  employees, except general executive officers,  of  the  QEZE  in  empire
  zones  with  respect  to  which  the  QEZE  is  certified  under article
  eighteen-B of the general municipal law, to the  total  wages,  salaries
  and other personal service compensation, similarly computed, during such
  period,  of  all  the  QEZE's employees within the state, except general
  executive officers; and
    (3) adding together the percentages so  determined  and  dividing  the
  result by the number of percentages.
    For purposes of article twenty-two of this chapter, references in this
  subdivision  to  property,  wages,  salaries  and other personal service
  compensation shall be deemed to be references to  such  items  connected
  with the conduct of a business.
    (f)  Tax factor.  (1) General. The tax factor shall be, in the case of
  article nine-A of this chapter, the amount of  tax  determined  for  the
  taxable  year  under  paragraph  (a)  of  subdivision one of section two
  hundred ten of such article. The tax factor shall be,  in  the  case  of
  article  twenty-two  of this chapter, the tax determined for the taxable
  year under subsections (a) through (d) of section  six  hundred  one  of
  such  article.  The  tax  factor  shall  be,  in  the  case  of  article
  thirty-three  of  this  chapter,  the  larger  of  the  amounts  of  tax
  determined  for  the  taxable  year  under  paragraphs  one and three of
  subdivision (a) of section fifteen hundred two of such article.
    (2) Sole proprietors, partners and  S  corporation  shareholders.  (A)
  Where  the  taxpayer  is  a  sole  proprietor of a qualified empire zone
  enterprise, the taxpayer's tax factor  shall  be  that  portion  of  the
  amount  determined  in  paragraph  one  of  this  subdivision  which  is


 attributable to the income of the qualified empire zone enterprise. Such
  attribution shall be made in accordance with the ratio of the taxpayer's
  income from the qualified empire zone enterprise  allocated  within  the
  state,  entering  into New York adjusted gross income, to the taxpayer's
  New York adjusted gross income, or in accordance with such other methods
  as the commissioner may prescribe as providing  an  apportionment  which
  reasonably  reflects  the  portion of the taxpayer's tax attributable to
  the income of the qualified empire zone enterprise. In no event may  the
  ratio so determined exceed 1.0.
    (B)(i)  Where  the  taxpayer  is  a member of a partnership which is a
  qualified empire zone enterprise, the taxpayer's  tax  factor  shall  be
  that  portion  of  the  amount  determined  in  paragraph  one  of  this
  subdivision which is attributable to the income of the partnership. Such
  attribution shall be made in accordance with the ratio of the  partner's
  income  from the partnership allocated within the state to the partner's
  entire  income,  or  in  accordance  with  such  other  methods  as  the
  commissioner   may   prescribe   as  providing  an  apportionment  which
  reasonably reflects the portion of the partner's tax attributable to the
  income of the partnership. In no  event  may  the  ratio  so  determined
  exceed 1.0.
    (ii)  For  purposes  of  article  nine-A  of  this  chapter,  the term
  "partner's income from  the  partnership"  means  partnership  items  of
  income,  gain,  loss  and deduction, and New York modifications thereto,
  entering into business income and the  term  "partner's  entire  income"
  means  business  income  allocated  within  the  state.  For purposes of
  article thirty-three of this chapter, the term  "partner's  income  from
  the  partnership"  means  partnership  items  of  income, gain, loss and
  deduction, and New York modifications thereto, entering into entire  net
  income  or  entire  net income plus compensation and the term "partner's
  entire income" means entire  net  income,  or  entire  net  income  plus
  compensation,  allocated  within  the  state.  For  purposes  of article
  twenty-two  of  this  chapter,  the  term  "partner's  income  from  the
  partnership"   means   partnership  items  of  income,  gain,  loss  and
  deduction, and New York modifications thereto, entering  into  New  York
  adjusted  gross income, and the term "partner's entire income" means New
  York adjusted gross income.
    (C) Where the taxpayer is a shareholder of a New  York  S  corporation
  which  is  a  qualified  empire  zone  enterprise, the shareholder's tax
  factor shall be that portion of the amount determined in  paragraph  one
  of  this  subdivision  which  is  attributable  to  the  income of the S
  corporation. Such attribution shall be made in accordance with the ratio
  of the shareholder's income from the S corporation allocated within  the
  state,   entering   into   New   York  adjusted  gross  income,  to  the
  shareholder's New York adjusted gross income, or in accordance with such
  other  methods  as  the  commissioner  may  prescribe  as  providing  an
  apportionment which reasonably reflects the portion of the shareholder's
  tax  attributable to the income of the qualified empire zone enterprise.
  In no event may the ratio so determined exceed 1.0.
    (3) Combined returns  or  reports.    (A)  Where  the  taxpayer  is  a
  qualified  empire zone enterprise and is required or permitted to make a
  return or report on a combined basis under  article  nine-A  or  article
  thirty-three  of  this  chapter,  the taxpayer's tax factor shall be the
  amount  determined  in  paragraph  one  of  this  subdivision  which  is
  attributable to the income of the qualified empire zone enterprise. Such
  attribution  shall be made in accordance with the ratio of the qualified
  empire zone enterprise's  income  allocated  within  the  state  to  the
  combined group's income, or in accordance with such other methods as the
  commissioner   may   prescribe   as  providing  an  apportionment  which


 reasonably reflects the portion of the combined group's tax attributable
  to the income of the qualified empire zone enterprise. In no  event  may
  the ratio so determined exceed 1.0.
    (B)  The  term  "income of the qualified empire zone enterprise" means
  entire net income, minimum taxable income, alternative entire net income
  or entire net income plus compensation calculated as if the taxpayer was
  filing separately and the term "combined group's  income"  means  entire
  net  income,  minimum  taxable  income, alternative entire net income or
  entire net income plus compensation as shown on the combined  return  or
  report, allocated within the state.
    (4)  If  the amount determined in paragraph one of this subdivision is
  less than zero, a taxpayer shall not be  allowed  a  credit  under  this
  section.
    (g) Definitions and cross-references. For definitions of terms used in
  this  section  see  sections  fourteen  and fifteen of this article. For
  application of  the  credit  provided  for  in  this  section,  see  the
  following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) Article 9-A: Section 210-B: subdivision 6.
    (2) Article 22: Section 606: subsections (i) and (cc).
    (3) Article 33: Section 1511: subdivision (s).




   §  17.  Empire  zones  tax  benefits  report.    (a) The department of
  taxation and finance must publish an empire zones  tax  benefits  report
  annually  by  June thirtieth. The first report must be published by June
  thirtieth, two thousand eleven.
    (b) (1)  The  empire  zones  tax  benefits  report  must  contain  the
  following  information  about  the empire zone tax credits claimed under
  articles nine, nine-A,  twenty-two  and  thirty-three  of  this  chapter
  during the previous calendar year:
    (A) the name of each taxpayer claiming a credit; and
    (B) the amount of each credit earned by each taxpayer.
    (2)  If  the  taxpayer  claims  a  empire  zone tax credit because the
  taxpayer is a member of a limited liability  company,  a  partner  in  a
  partnership  or a shareholder in a subchapter S corporation, the name of
  each limited liability company, partnership or subchapter S  corporation
  earning  any  of  those  credits and the amount of credit earned by each
  entity must be included in the report instead of information  about  the
  taxpayer claiming the credit.
    (c)  The  empire  zones  tax  benefits  report  must  also contain the
  following information about the sales and use tax  refunds  and  credits
  claimed under subdivision (d) of section eleven hundred nineteen of this
  chapter during the previous calendar year:
    (A) the name of each taxpayer claiming a credit or refund; and
    (B) the total amount of credits or refunds allowed to each taxpayer.
    (d)  The  information included in the empire zones tax benefits report
  will be based on the information filed with the  department  during  the
  previous calendar year, to the extent that it is practicable to use that
  information.




   §  18. Low-income housing credit.  (a) Allowance of credit. A taxpayer
  subject to tax under article nine-A, twenty-two or thirty-three of  this
  chapter  shall  be  allowed  a  credit against such tax, pursuant to the
  provisions referenced in subdivision (d) of this section,  with  respect
  to   the  ownership  of  eligible  low-income  buildings  for  which  an
  eligibility statement has been issued by the commissioner of housing and
  community renewal. The amount of the credit shall be the  credit  amount
  for  each  such  building  allocated by such commissioner as provided in
  article two-A of the public housing law.  The  credit  amount  shall  be
  allowed  for each of the ten taxable years in the credit period, and any
  reduction in first-year credit as provided in subdivision two of section
  twenty-two of such law shall be allowed in the eleventh taxable year.
    (b) Credit recapture. (1) General. If,
    (A) as of the close of any taxable year in the compliance period,  the
  amount  of  the  qualified  basis  of  any  building with respect to the
  taxpayer is less than
    (B) the amount of such basis as of the close of the preceding  taxable
  year,
    (C)  then  the  credit  recapture  amount  must  be added back for the
  taxable year.
    (2) Credit recapture amount. The credit recapture amount is an  amount
  equal to the sum of
    (A)  the  aggregate  decrease  in  the credits allowed to the taxpayer
  under this section for all prior taxable years which would have resulted
  if the accelerated portion of the credit allowable  by  reason  of  this
  section were not allowed for all prior taxable years with respect to the
  excess  of  the amount described in subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) of
  this subdivision over the amount described in subparagraph (A)  of  such
  paragraph, plus
    (B)  interest  at  the  overpayment rate established under section one
  thousand ninety-six of this  chapter  on  the  amount  determined  under
  subparagraph  (A)  of this paragraph for each prior taxable year for the
  period beginning on the due date for filing the  report  for  the  prior
  taxable year involved.
    (3)  Accelerated  portion  of credit. For purposes of paragraph two of
  this subdivision, the accelerated portion of the credit  for  the  prior
  taxable years with respect to any amount of basis is the excess of
    (A)  the  aggregate  credit allowed by reason of this section (without
  regard to this subdivision) for such years with respect to  such  basis,
  over
    (B)  the  aggregate  credit which would be allowable by reason of this
  section for such years with respect  to  such  basis  if  the  aggregate
  credit  which would (but for this subdivision) have been allowed for the
  entire compliance period were allowable ratably over fifteen years.
    (4) Special rules. For purposes of  this  subdivision,  the  rules  of
  section 42 (j)(4)(B) and (C) of the internal revenue code shall apply in
  determining the credit recapture amount.
    (5)  Exceptions  to  recapture. Recapture under this subdivision shall
  not apply to a reduction in qualified basis
    (A) by reason of a casualty loss, if the commissioner, in consultation
  with the commissioner of housing and community renewal, determines  that
  such  loss  is  restored  by  reconstruction  or  replacement  within  a
  reasonable period, or
    (B) by reason of a change in floor space devoted to  low-income  units
  in  a building, if such building remains an eligible low-income building
  after such change, and if the commissioner,  in  consultation  with  the
  commissioner  of  housing  and  community  renewal, determines that such
  change is de minimis, or


   (C) by reason of error in complying with low-income eligibility  tests
  referred  to  in  subdivision  five  of section twenty-one of the public
  housing law, if the commissioner, in consultation with the  commissioner
  of  housing  and  community  renewal,  determines  that such error is de
  minimis.
    (6)  Recapture  by partners of a partnership. In the case of ownership
  of a building or interest therein by a partnership which has thirty-five
  or more partners, the provisions of section  42(j)(5)  of  the  internal
  revenue  code shall apply to any recapture under this subdivision unless
  the partnership elects not to have such provisions apply.
    (6-a) The taxpayer that originally received the  credit  shall  remain
  solely  liable  for  all  obligations  and  liabilities  imposed  on the
  taxpayer with respect to the credit, none of  which  shall  apply  to  a
  party to whom the credit has been subsequently transferred.
    (7)  (A) The credit recapture required under this subdivision will not
  apply solely by reason of the disposition of a building or  an  interest
  therein if it is reasonably expected that such building will continue to
  be  operated  as  an  eligible  low-income  building  for  the remaining
  compliance period with respect to such building.
    (B) Statute of limitations. If a building (or an interest therein)  is
  disposed  of  during  any taxable year and there is any reduction in the
  qualified basis of such building which results in  an  increase  in  tax
  under this section for such taxable or any subsequent taxable year, then
    (i)  the  statutory  period  for the assessment of any deficiency with
  respect to such increase in tax will not expire before the expiration of
  three years from the date the  commissioner  of  housing  and  community
  renewal  is notified by the taxpayer (in such manner as the commissioner
  of housing and community renewal may prescribe)  of  such  reduction  in
  qualified basis, and
    (ii)  such  deficiency  may  be assessed before the expiration of such
  three-year period notwithstanding the provisions of  any  other  law  or
  rule of law which would otherwise prevent such assessment.
    (c)  Construction with public housing law; definitions. The provisions
  of this section shall be construed in conjunction with the provisions of
  article two-A of the public housing law. For definitions relating to the
  low-income housing credit, see section twenty-one of such law.
    (d) Cross-references. For application of the credit  provided  for  in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) Article 9-A: Section 210-B: subdivision 15,
    (2) Article 22: Section 606: subsections (i) and (x),
    (3) Article 33: Section 1511: subdivision (n).




   §  19.  Green  building  credit. (a) Allowance of credit. (1) General.
  (A) Green building credit. A taxpayer subject to tax under article nine,
  nine-A, twenty-two or thirty-three of this chapter shall  be  allowed  a
  green  building  credit  against  such  tax,  pursuant to the provisions
  referenced in subdivision (f) of this  section.  Provided,  however,  no
  credit  shall  be  allowed  under  this  section unless the taxpayer has
  complied  with  the  applicable  requirements  of   paragraph   two   of
  subdivision (d) of this section (relating to reports to DEC). The amount
  of  the  credit  shall  be the sum of the credit components specified in
  paragraphs two through seven of this subdivision. Provided, however, the
  amount of each such credit component shall  not  exceed  the  limit  set
  forth  in  the initial credit component certificate obtained pursuant to
  subdivision (c) of this section. In the  determination  of  such  credit
  components,  no cost paid or incurred by the taxpayer shall be the basis
  for more than one such component.
    (B) Credit to successor owner. If a credit is allowed  to  a  building
  owner  pursuant  to  this subdivision with respect to property, and such
  property (or an interest therein) is sold, the  credit  for  the  period
  after the sale which would have been allowable under this subdivision to
  the prior owner had the property not been sold shall be allowable to the
  new  owner.  Credit  for the year of sale shall be allocated between the
  parties on the basis of the number of days during  such  year  that  the
  property or interest was held by each.
    (C)  Credit  to  successor  tenant. If a credit is allowed to a tenant
  pursuant to this subdivision with  respect  to  property,  and  if  such
  tenancy  is  terminated but such property remains in use in the building
  by a successor tenant, the credit for the period after such  termination
  which  would  have  been  allowable  under this subdivision to the prior
  tenant had the tenancy not been terminated shall  be  allowable  to  the
  successor  tenant. Credit for the year of termination shall be allocated
  between the parties on the basis of the number of days during such  year
  that the property was used by each.
    (D) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, in the
  case  of  allowance of credit under this section to a successor owner or
  tenant, as provided in subparagraph (B) or (C) of  this  paragraph,  the
  commissioner  shall  have the authority to reveal to the successor owner
  or tenant any information, with respect to the credit of the prior owner
  or tenant, which is the basis for the denial in whole or in part of  the
  credit claimed by such successor owner or tenant.
    (2)  Green  whole-building  credit component. The green whole-building
  credit component shall be equal to  the  applicable  percentage  of  the
  allowable  costs  paid  or  incurred  by  the taxpayer (whether owner or
  tenant), for  either  the  construction  of  a  green  building  or  the
  rehabilitation of a building which is not a green building to be a green
  building.  Provided,  however, the credit component shall not exceed the
  maximum amount specified in the initial  credit  component  certificate.
  The  applicable  percentage  shall  be  1.4  percent, except that if the
  building is located in an  economic  development  area,  the  applicable
  percentage  shall  be  1.6  percent.  The  credit  component  amount  so
  determined shall be allowed for the credit allowance year, but  only  if
  (A) the taxpayer has obtained and filed both an initial credit component
  certificate   and   an   eligibility   certificate  issued  pursuant  to
  subdivision (c) of this section, (B) a certificate of occupancy for  the
  building  has  been  issued and (C) where the credit allowance year is a
  year described in subparagraph (B) of paragraph two-a of subdivision (b)
  of this section, the green building or rehabilitation remains in service
  during such year. Such credit component amount shall be allowed also for
  each of the next four succeeding taxable years with respect to which the


 taxpayer has obtained and filed an eligibility certificate  pursuant  to
  subdivision  (c) of this section. Provided, further, the allowable costs
  may not exceed, in the aggregate, one hundred fifty dollars  per  square
  foot  with  respect  to  the portion of the building which comprises the
  base building and seventy-five dollars per square foot with  respect  to
  the portion of the building which comprises the tenant space.
    (3)  Green  base  building  credit  component. The green base building
  credit component shall be equal to  the  applicable  percentage  of  the
  allowable  costs  paid  or  incurred  by the taxpayer, if the owner, for
  either  the  construction  of  a  green  base  building   or   for   the
  rehabilitation  of a base building which is not a green base building to
  be a green base building. Provided, however, the credit component  shall
  not  exceed the maximum amount specified in the initial credit component
  certificate.  The applicable percentage shall  be  one  percent,  except
  that  if  the  building  is located in an economic development area, the
  applicable percentage shall be 1.2 percent. The credit component  amount
  so  determined  shall be allowed for the credit allowance year, but only
  if (A) the taxpayer has  obtained  and  filed  both  an  initial  credit
  component  certificate and an eligibility certificate issued pursuant to
  subdivision (c) of this section, (B) a certificate of occupancy for  the
  building  has  been  issued and (C) where the credit allowance year is a
  year described in subparagraph (B) of paragraph two-a of subdivision (b)
  of this section, the green base building or  rehabilitation  of  a  base
  building  remains  in  service  during  such year. Such credit component
  amount shall be allowed also  for  each  of  the  next  four  succeeding
  taxable  years with respect to which the taxpayer has obtained and filed
  an eligibility certificate pursuant to subdivision (c) of this  section.
  Provided,  further,  the  allowable  costs for the base building may not
  exceed, in the aggregate, one hundred fifty dollars per square foot.
    (4) Green tenant space credit component. The green tenant space credit
  component shall be equal to the applicable percentage of allowable costs
  for tenant improvements paid or incurred by the taxpayer (whether  owner
  or  tenant)  in  constructing  (including  completing)  tenant space, or
  rehabilitating tenant space which is not green tenant space to be  green
  tenant  space.  Provided, however, the credit component shall not exceed
  the  maximum  amount  specified  in   the   initial   credit   component
  certificate. The applicable percentage shall be one percent, except that
  if  the  building  is  located  in  an  economic  development  area  the
  applicable percentage shall be 1.2 percent. Provided, however, that  the
  owner,  or  a  tenant  who occupies fewer than ten thousand square feet,
  shall qualify for such green tenant space credit component only  in  the
  event  that  the  base  building  is  a  green base building. The credit
  component amount so determined shall be allowed for the credit allowance
  year, but only if (A) the taxpayer has obtained  and  filed  an  initial
  credit  component  certificate  and  an  eligibility  certificate issued
  pursuant to subdivision (c) of this section and  (B)  where  the  credit
  allowance  year  is  a  year  described in subparagraph (B) of paragraph
  two-a of subdivision (b) of this section, the  construction,  completion
  or  rehabilitation  remains  in  service  during  such year. Such credit
  component amount shall be  allowed  also  for  each  of  the  next  four
  succeeding taxable years with respect to which the taxpayer has obtained
  and filed an eligibility certificate pursuant to subdivision (c) of this
  section.  Provided,  however, the allowable costs for tenant space shall
  not exceed, in the aggregate, seventy-five dollars per square  foot.  In
  the  event  that  both  an  owner and tenant incur such costs for tenant
  space with respect to the same  tenant  space  and  such  costs  in  the
  aggregate  exceed  seventy-five dollars per square foot, the owner shall


 have priority as to costs constituting the basis for  the  green  tenant
  space credit component.
    (5)  Fuel cell credit component. A fuel cell credit component shall be
  allowed for the installation of  a  fuel  cell  which  is  a  qualifying
  alternate energy source, installed to serve a green building, green base
  building or green tenant space. The amount of the credit component shall
  be  six  percent of the sum of the capitalized costs paid or incurred by
  the taxpayer with respect to each fuel  cell  installed  to  serve  such
  building  or space, including the cost of the foundation or platform and
  the labor cost associated with installation, such capitalized costs  not
  to  exceed  one  thousand  dollars  per  kilowatt  of installed DC rated
  capacity. Provided, however, the credit component shall not  exceed  the
  maximum  amount  specified  in the initial credit component certificate.
  The fuel cell credit component amount so determined shall be allowed for
  the credit allowance year, but only if (A) the taxpayer has obtained and
  filed  an  initial  credit  component  certificate  and  an  eligibility
  certificate  issued  pursuant to subdivision (c) of this section and (B)
  where the credit allowance year is a year described in subparagraph  (B)
  of  paragraph  two-a  of  subdivision (b) of this section, the fuel cell
  remains in service during such year. Such credit component amount  shall
  be  allowed  also  with  respect  to each of the four taxable years next
  following during which the  fuel  cell  remains  in  service.  Provided,
  however,  that  the amount of any federal, state or local grant received
  by the taxpayer and used for the purchase and/or  installation  of  such
  fuel  cell and which was not included in the federal gross income of the
  taxpayer shall be subtracted from the amount of such cost.
    (6) Photovoltaic module credit component. A photovoltaic module credit
  component shall be allowed for the installation of photovoltaic  modules
  which constitute a qualifying alternate energy source installed to serve
  a  green building, green base building or green tenant space. The amount
  of the credit component shall be twenty percent of the incremental  cost
  paid  or  incurred  by the taxpayer for building-integrated photovoltaic
  modules  and  five  percent  of  the  cost  of   non-building-integrated
  photovoltaic modules, in either case such cost not to exceed the product
  of  (i)  three  dollars  and (ii) the number of watts included in the DC
  rated capacity of  the  photovoltaic  modules.  Provided,  however,  the
  credit  component  shall  not exceed the maximum amount specified in the
  initial credit component certificate. The  credit  component  amount  so
  determined  shall  be allowed for the credit allowance year, but only if
  (A) the taxpayer has obtained and  filed  an  initial  credit  component
  certificate   and   an   eligibility   certificate  issued  pursuant  to
  subdivision (c) of this section and (B) where the credit allowance  year
  is   a  year  described  in  subparagraph  (B)  of  paragraph  two-a  of
  subdivision (b) of this section, the modules remain  in  service  during
  such year. Such credit amount shall be allowed also for the four taxable
  years  next  following  during  which  the  modules  remain  in service.
  Provided, however, that the amount of any federal, state or local  grant
  received  by  the taxpayer and used for the purchase and/or installation
  of such photovoltaic equipment and which was not included in the federal
  gross income of the taxpayer shall be subtracted from the amount of such
  cost.
    (7) Green refrigerant component. A green refrigerant  component  shall
  be  allowed  for  new air conditioning equipment (including chillers and
  absorption chillers, water or air cooled unitary equipment, water-cooled
  heat pumps, packaged terminal heat pumps, air  conditioners,  and  other
  similar  air conditioning equipment) that uses an EPA-approved non-ozone
  depleting refrigerant installed to serve a green  building,  green  base
  building or green tenant space. The amount of the credit component shall


 be  two  percent  of  the  cost  of such air conditioning equipment. The
  commissioner  of  environmental  conservation,  in   consultation   with
  NYSERDA,  shall  promulgate  regulations  concerning  the eligibility of
  other  EPA-approved  refrigerants  to  receive a credit pursuant to this
  paragraph. Provided, however, the credit component shall not exceed  the
  maximum  amount  specified  in the initial credit component certificate.
  The green refrigerant component amount so determined  shall  be  allowed
  for the credit allowance year, but only if (A) the taxpayer has obtained
  and  filed  an  initial  credit component certificate and an eligibility
  certificate issued pursuant to subdivision (c) of this section, and  (B)
  where  the credit allowance year is a year described in subparagraph (B)
  of  paragraph  two-a  of  subdivision  (b)  of  this  section,  the  air
  conditioning  equipment remains in service. Such credit component amount
  shall be allowed also with respect to each of  the  four  taxable  years
  next  following  during  which the air conditioning equipment remains in
  service.
    (b) Definitions. As used in this section, the  following  terms  shall
  have the following meanings:
    (1)  "Allowable  costs"  means  amounts properly chargeable to capital
  account (other than for land), which are paid or incurred  on  or  after
  June   first,   nineteen   hundred  ninety-nine,  for:  construction  or
  rehabilitation; commissioning costs; interest paid  or  incurred  during
  the   construction   or  rehabilitation  period;  legal,  architectural,
  engineering and other professional fees  allocable  to  construction  or
  rehabilitation;   closing  costs  for  construction,  rehabilitation  or
  mortgage loans; recording taxes and filing fees incurred with respect to
  construction or rehabilitation; site costs (such as  temporary  electric
  wiring,   scaffolding,   demolition  costs,  and  fencing  and  security
  facilities); and costs of furniture, carpeting,  partitions,  walls  and
  wall coverings, ceilings, drapes, blinds, lighting, plumbing, electrical
  wiring  and  ventilation; provided that such costs shall not include the
  cost of telephone systems and computers (other  than  electrical  wiring
  costs)  and  shall  not  include  the cost of fuel cells or photovoltaic
  modules (including installation) or the cost  of  new  air  conditioning
  equipment using an EPA-approved non-ozone depleting refrigerant or other
  EPA-approved  refrigerant  approved by the commissioner of environmental
  conservation (excluding installation).
    (2) "Base building" means all areas of a  building  not  intended  for
  occupancy  by  a  tenant  or  owner,  including  but  not limited to the
  structural components of the building, exterior walls, floors,  windows,
  roofs, foundations, chimneys and stacks, parking areas, mechanical rooms
  and  mechanical  systems,  and  owner-controlled and/or operated service
  spaces,  sidewalks,  main  lobby,  shafts  and  vertical  transportation
  mechanisms, stairways and corridors.
    (2-a)  "Credit allowance year" means the later of (A) the taxable year
  during which the property, construction,  completion  or  rehabilitation
  referred  to  in paragraphs two through seven of subdivision (a) of this
  section has been placed in service or has received a  final  certificate
  of  occupancy  or  (B)  the first taxable year with respect to which the
  credit  may  be  claimed  pursuant  to  the  initial  credit   component
  certificate issued pursuant to subdivision (c) of this section.
    (3)  "Commissioning"  means  the  testing  and  fine-tuning  of  heat,
  ventilating and air conditioning and  other  systems  to  assure  proper
  functioning  and  adherence  to  design  criteria and the preparation of
  system operation manuals and instruction of maintenance personnel.
    (4) "DEC"  means  the  New  York  state  department  of  environmental
  conservation. "DOH" means the New York state department of health. "EPA"
  means the United States environmental protection agency.


   (5)  "Economic development area" means an area which is designated (A)
  an empire zone pursuant to article eighteen-B of the  general  municipal
  law  or  (B)  an  empowerment  zone  or enterprise community pursuant to
  section 1391 of the Internal Revenue Code.
    (6)  "Eligible  building" means a building located in this state which
  is:
    (A) classified B2, B3, B4, C1, C2, C5, or C6 for purposes of  the  New
  York  state  uniform  fire  prevention  and  building  code or similarly
  classified under any subsequent code; provided that  any  such  building
  contains at least twenty thousand square feet of interior space, or
    (B)  a residential multi-family building with at least twelve dwelling
  units that contain at least twenty  thousand  square  feet  of  interior
  space, or
    (C)  one  or more residential multi-family buildings with at least two
  dwelling units that are part of a single or phased construction  project
  that contains, in the aggregate, at least twenty thousand square feet of
  interior  space;  provided  that  in any single phase of such project at
  least ten thousand square feet of interior space is  under  construction
  or rehabilitation, or
    (D)  any  combination of buildings described in subparagraphs (A), (B)
  and (C) of this paragraph, and
    (E) is not a building located on freshwater wetlands or tidal wetlands
  the construction of which requires a permit  under  section  24-0701  or
  25-0403,  respectively,  of  the  environmental  conservation law, or on
  wetlands such that the construction thereof requires a  permit  pursuant
  to section 404 of the federal clean water act (33 U.S.C. § 1344).
    (7)  "Energy  code"  means  the  New  York  state  energy conservation
  construction code.
    (8) "Fuel cell" means a device that produces electricity directly from
  hydrogen or hydrocarbon fuel through a  non-combustive  electro-chemical
  process.
    (9)  "Green  base  building" means a base building which is part of an
  eligible building and which meets the following standards:
    (A) Energy and energy efficiency. (i)  Energy  use  is  no  more  than
  sixty-five  percent (in the case of new construction of a base building)
  or seventy-five percent  (in  the  case  of  rehabilitation  of  a  base
  building)  of  the  use permitted under the energy code or, in the event
  such standard is revised or superseded, energy use shall meet such other
  energy efficiency standards that  DEC,  in  consultation  with  NYSERDA,
  shall  establish in regulations promulgated pursuant to paragraph one of
  subdivision (e) of this section, in effect at the time the base building
  or rehabilitation thereof is placed in service.
    (ii) All  appliances  and  any  heating,  cooling  and  water  heating
  equipment  used  in  the  base  building  and subject to the regulations
  promulgated by DEC, in consultation with NYSERDA, pursuant to  paragraph
  one  of  subdivision  (e)  of  this  section,  shall  meet the standards
  established by such regulations in effect at the time the base  building
  or rehabilitation thereof is placed in service.
    (B)  Zoning,  indoor  air  quality,  building  materials, finishes and
  furnishings. (i) The base building  shall  comply  with  all  applicable
  zoning, land use and erosion control requirements, stormwater management
  ordinances, building code requirements and environmental regulations. In
  the  case  of  the  rehabilitation of an existing building, all existing
  environmental hazards shall be identified and managed in accordance with
  applicable laws, regulations and industry guidelines.
    (ii) Buildings classified B2, B3, B4, C1, C2, C5, or C6, for  purposes
  of  the  New  York  state  uniform fire prevention and building code, or


 similarly classified under any subsequent code, shall meet the following
  indoor air quality requirements:
    (I)  ventilation  and  exchange  of  indoor/outdoor air shall meet the
  standards established by regulations promulgated by DEC, in consultation
  with DOH and NYSERDA, pursuant to paragraph two of  subdivision  (e)  of
  this section;
    (II)  if  smoking  is  permitted  in  specific  areas of the building,
  separate air ventilation and circulation shall be provided  for  smoking
  and non-smoking areas;
    (III)  the ventilation system shall include an air purging system that
  is capable of replacing one hundred percent of the air on any floor,  on
  a  minimum of two floors at a time. The air shall be purged for a period
  of one week on every floor immediately prior to initial occupancy and on
  any floor that undergoes renovation immediately prior  to  re-occupancy;
  provided  that,  if  a  taxpayer  obtains  certification from a licensed
  architect, engineer, certified industrial hygienist, or  other  licensed
  or   certified  professional  whom  the  commissioner  of  environmental
  conservation shall approve,  pursuant  to  regulations,  verifying  that
  off-gassing  and  any  other  contamination can be reduced to comparable
  levels in less than one week, the period of purging  may  be  shortened.
  The  taxpayer  shall maintain a copy of such certification in accordance
  with the provisions of subdivision (d) of this section.
    (C)  Building  fresh  air  intake  shall  be  located  a  minimum   of
  twenty-five feet away from loading areas, building exhaust fans, cooling
  towers and other point sources of contamination.
    (D)  During  construction  or  rehabilitation,  the ventilation system
  components  and  pathways  shall  be  protected  from  contamination  in
  accordance   with   an  indoor  air  quality  management  plan  for  the
  construction  or  rehabilitation  process  that  meets   the   standards
  established  in regulations promulgated by DEC, in consultation with DOH
  and NYSERDA, pursuant to  paragraph  two  of  subdivision  (e)  of  this
  section.   In   the  event  that  such  areas  are  not  protected  from
  contamination in accordance with such standards, they shall  be  cleaned
  prior to occupancy.
    (E)  A  licensed  engineer,  certified  industrial hygienist, or other
  licensed  or   certified   professional   whom   the   commissioner   of
  environmental conservation shall approve, pursuant to regulations, shall
  conduct  indoor  air quality testing with respect to the entire building
  immediately following occupancy, if any, and  on  an  annual  basis,  to
  monitor  supply  and  return  air  and  ambient air for carbon monoxide,
  carbon dioxide, total volatile organic compounds, radon, and particulate
  matter. Provided, however, once radon measurements have been found to be
  satisfactory, subsequent annual testing is not  required.  The  taxpayer
  shall  record baseline readings immediately following occupancy, if any,
  and annually thereafter.  In  the  event  that  the  taxpayer  does  not
  establish  that  during  a  taxable  year  during  which any part of the
  building is occupied, indoor air quality met the  standards  established
  in regulations promulgated by DEC, in consultation with DOH and NYSERDA,
  pursuant  to  paragraph two of subdivision (e) of this section, the base
  building shall not constitute a green base building.
    (F) The mechanical plant of the  building  shall  be  commissioned  in
  accordance  with the standards established in regulations promulgated by
  DEC, in consultation with  NYSERDA,  pursuant  to  subparagraph  (D)  of
  paragraph  one of subdivision (e) of this section, which standards shall
  be informed by documents such  as  ASHRAE  G-1  and  the  United  States
  general  services  administration  "Model  Commissioning  Plan and Guide
  Specifications". For purposes of this  subparagraph  the  term  "ASHRAE"


 means   the   American   society   of  heating,  refrigerating  and  air
  conditioning engineers.
    (G)  Separate waste disposal chutes or a carousel compactor system for
  recyclable materials shall be provided for the  recycling  of  waste  by
  occupants, or recycling shall be otherwise facilitated by, at a minimum,
  providing  a readily accessible designated collection area or areas with
  sufficient  space  to  store  recyclable  materials  separately  between
  collection dates.
    (H)  All  plumbing  fixtures in the public areas of the building shall
  meet the plumbing fixture requirements of the energy policy act of  1992
  or  any  successor  provision  in  effect  at  the  time the building or
  rehabilitation is placed in service.
    (I) Prior to initial occupancy and upon  request,  the  owner  of  the
  building  shall provide each tenant with (1) written notification of the
  opportunity to apply for a tax credit pursuant to this section  and  (2)
  written   guidelines  regarding  opportunities  to  improve  the  energy
  efficiency and air quality of tenant space and  to  reduce  and  recycle
  waste streams.
    (J)  All building materials, finishes and furnishings used in the base
  building  and  subject  to  the  regulations  promulgated  by  DEC,   in
  consultation  with  NYSERDA,  pursuant  to subparagraph (A) of paragraph
  three of subdivision (e) of  this  section,  shall  meet  the  standards
  established  by  such  regulations in effect at the time the building or
  rehabilitation is placed in service; provided further that with  respect
  to  furnishings,  this  requirement  shall apply only to newly purchased
  items.
    (K) All tenant space in the building occupied by  the  owner  must  be
  green tenant space.
    (10)  "Green building" means a building wherein the base building is a
  green base building and all tenant space is green tenant space.
    (11) "Green tenant space" means tenant space in  a  building  if  such
  building  is an eligible building and if such tenant space complies with
  the following requirements:
    (A) Energy and energy efficiency. (i) Energy use for tenant  space  is
  no  more  than  sixty-five  percent (in the case of new construction) or
  seventy-five  percent  (in  the  case  of  rehabilitation)  of  the  use
  permitted  under  the  energy  code  or,  in  the event such standard is
  revised  or  superseded,  energy  use  shall  meet  such  other   energy
  efficiency  standards  that  DEC,  in  consultation  with NYSERDA, shall
  establish in  regulations  promulgated  pursuant  to  paragraph  one  of
  subdivision  (e) of this section, in effect at the time the improvements
  with respect to which a tax credit is claimed are placed in service.
    (ii) All  appliances  and  any  heating,  cooling  and  water  heating
  equipment  used  in  the  tenant  space  and  subject to the regulations
  promulgated by DEC, in consultation with NYSERDA, pursuant to  paragraph
  one  of  subdivision  (e)  of  this  section  shall  meet  the standards
  established by such regulations or, in the event that such standards are
  revised, the standards in effect  at  the  time  the  improvements  with
  respect to which a tax credit is claimed are placed in service.
    (B)   Code  requirements,  indoor  air  quality,  building  materials,
  finishes and furnishings. (i) The tenant space  shall  comply  with  all
  applicable building code requirements and environmental regulations and,
  with  respect  to  projects  other  than  new construction, all existing
  environmental hazards shall be identified and managed in accordance with
  applicable laws, regulations and industry guidelines.
    (ii) In the case of buildings classified B2, B3, B4, C1,  C2,  C5,  or
  C6,  for  purposes  of  the  New  York state uniform fire prevention and
  building code,  or  similarly  classified  under  any  subsequent  code,


 ventilation  and exchange of indoor/outdoor air shall meet the standards
  established in regulations promulgated by DEC, in consultation with  DOH
  and  NYSERDA,  pursuant  to  paragraph  two  of  subdivision (e) of this
  section.
    (iii)  For buildings in which smoking is permitted, the taxpayer shall
  ensure that, if  smoking  is  permitted  in  the  tenant  space,  it  is
  permitted  only in areas in which the air ventilation and circulation is
  separate from that for non-smoking areas.
    (iv) During construction or  rehabilitation,  the  ventilation  system
  components  and  pathways  shall  be  protected  from  contamination  in
  accordance  with  an  indoor  air  quality  management  plan   for   the
  construction   or   rehabilitation  process  that  meets  the  standards
  established in regulations promulgated by DEC, in consultation with  DOH
  and  NYSERDA,  pursuant  to  paragraph  two  of  subdivision (e) of this
  section.  In  the  event  that  such  areas  are  not   protected   from
  contamination  in  accordance with such standards, they shall be cleaned
  prior to occupancy.
    (v) A licensed engineer,  certified  industrial  hygienist,  or  other
  licensed   or   certified   professional   whom   the   commissioner  of
  environmental conservation shall approve, pursuant to regulations, shall
  conduct indoor air quality testing with  respect  to  the  tenant  space
  immediately  following  occupancy,  if  any,  and on an annual basis, to
  monitor supply and return air  and  ambient  air  for  carbon  monoxide,
  carbon dioxide, total volatile organic compounds, radon, and particulate
  matter. Provided, however, once radon measurements have been found to be
  satisfactory,  subsequent  annual  testing is not required. The taxpayer
  shall record baseline readings immediately following occupancy, if  any,
  and  annually  thereafter.  In  the  event  that  the  taxpayer does not
  establish that during a taxable year during which the  tenant  space  is
  occupied,   indoor   air   quality  met  the  standards  established  in
  regulations promulgated by DEC, in consultation with  DOH  and  NYSERDA,
  pursuant to paragraph two of subdivision (e) of this section, the tenant
  space shall not constitute green tenant space.
    (vi) All plumbing fixtures in the tenant space shall meet the plumbing
  fixture  requirements  of  the  energy  policy  act of 1992 or successor
  provision in effect at the time the improvements with respect to which a
  tax credit is claimed are placed in service.
    (vii) All building materials, finishes and  furnishings  selected  for
  use  in  the  tenant space and subject to the regulations promulgated by
  DEC, in consultation with  NYSERDA,  pursuant  to  subparagraph  (A)  of
  paragraph  three  of  subdivision  (e)  of  this section, shall meet the
  standards established by such regulations or, in  the  event  that  such
  standards  are  revised,  the  standards  in  effect  at  the  time  the
  improvements with respect to which a tax credit is claimed are placed in
  service, provided that, with respect to  furnishings,  this  requirement
  shall apply only to newly purchased items.
    (12)  "Incremental  cost  of building-integrated photovoltaic modules"
  means:
    (A) the cost  of  building-integrated  photovoltaic  modules  and  any
  associated  inverter, additional wiring or other electrical equipment or
  additional mounting or structural materials, less the cost  of  spandrel
  glass  or other building material that would have been used in the event
  that building-integrated photovoltaic modules were not installed,
    (B) incremental labor costs properly allocable to on-site preparation,
  assembly and original installation of photovoltaic modules, and
    (C) incremental architectural and engineering services and designs and
  plans  directly  related  to  the  construction   or   installation   of
  photovoltaic modules.


   (13)   "NYSERDA"   means  the  New  York  state  energy  research  and
  development authority.
    (14)  "Qualifying  alternate energy sources" means building-integrated
  and  non-building-integrated  photovoltaic  modules   and   fuel   cells
  installed  to  serve  the  base  building or tenant space which have the
  capability to monitor their AC output,  and  which  are  validated  upon
  installation,  and annually thereafter, to ensure that such systems meet
  their design specifications.
    (15) "Tenant improvements" means improvements which are  necessary  or
  appropriate  to support or conduct the business of a tenant or occupying
  owner.
    (16) "Tenant space" means the  portion  of  a  building  intended  for
  occupancy by a tenant or occupying owner.
    (c)  Certifications.    (1) Initial credit component certificate. Upon
  application by a taxpayer, DEC shall issue an initial  credit  component
  certificate  where  the taxpayer has made a showing that the taxpayer is
  likely within a reasonable time to place in service property which would
  warrant the allowance of a credit under this section.  Such  certificate
  shall  state  the first taxable year for which the credit may be claimed
  and an expiration date, and shall  apply  only  to  property  placed  in
  service by such expiration date. Such expiration date may be extended at
  the  discretion  of  DEC,  in  order to avoid unwarranted hardship. Such
  certificates  shall  state  the  maximum  amount  of  credit   component
  allowable  for  each  of  the  five  taxable  years for which the credit
  component is allowed, under paragraphs two through seven of  subdivision
  (a) of this section.
    (a)  Period  one. Initial credit component certificates for period one
  may be issued in years 2000-2004. Such certificates for period one shall
  not be issued, in the  aggregate,  for  more  than  twenty-five  million
  dollars  worth  of credit components. In addition, such certificates for
  period one shall be limited in their applicability, as follows:
 
  Credit components in the aggregate           With respect to taxable
  shall not be allowed for more than:          years beginning in:
 
  $ 1 million                                  2001
  $ 2 million                                  2002
  $ 3 million                                  2003
  $ 4 million                                  2004
  $ 5 million                                  2005
  $ 4 million                                  2006
  $ 3 million                                  2007
  $ 2 million                                  2008
  $ 1 million                                  2009
  Provided,  however,  that  if  as  of  the  end  of  a  calendar   year,
  certificates for credit component amounts totalling less than the amount
  permitted with respect to taxable years commencing in such calendar year
  have  been  issued,  then  the  amount permitted with respect to taxable
  years commencing in the subsequent calendar year shall be  augmented  by
  the amount of such shortfall.
    (b)  Period  two. Initial credit component certificates for period two
  may be issued in years 2005-2009. Such certificates for period two shall
  not be issued, in the  aggregate,  for  more  than  twenty-five  million
  dollars worth of credit components. The total amount of credit component
  allowable for the five taxable years for which the credit components are
  allowed,  as  set forth on any one initial credit component certificate,
  shall be limited to two million dollars. However, a taxpayer that is the
  owner or tenant of more than one building that qualifies for the credits


 provided for under this section may be issued initial  credit  component
  certificates  with  respect  to  each  such  building with the aggregate
  amount of credit components permitted for each  such  certificate  being
  two  million  dollars. Provided further, a taxpayer that is the owner or
  tenant of a building for which an initial credit  component  certificate
  was  issued  for  period  one,  shall  not  be  issued an initial credit
  component certificate with respect to such building for period  two.  In
  addition,  such  certificates  for  period two shall be limited in their
  applicability, as follows:
 
  Credit components in the aggregate           With respect to taxable
  shall not be allowed for more than:          years beginning in:
 
  $ 1 million                                  2006
  $ 2 million                                  2007
  $ 3 million                                  2008
  $ 4 million                                  2009
  $ 5 million                                  2010
  $ 4 million                                  2011
  $ 3 million                                  2012
  $ 2 million                                  2013
  $ 1 million                                  2014
  Provided,  however,  that  if  as  of  the  end  of  a  calendar   year,
  certificates  for credit component amounts totaling less than the amount
  permitted with respect to taxable years commencing in such calendar year
  have been issued, then the amount  permitted  with  respect  to  taxable
  years  commencing  in the subsequent calendar year shall be augmented by
  the amount of such shortfall. Provided, further, that if at the  end  of
  calendar  year  two  thousand  nine,  certificates  for credit component
  amounts issued by the DEC have totaled  less  than  twenty-five  million
  dollars  for  calendar years 2005-2009, then the period to issue initial
  credit component certificates shall be extended to the end  of  calendar
  year  two  thousand  ten  and the DEC shall be permitted to issue in two
  thousand ten initial credit  component  certificates  for  amounts  that
  equal  the  difference  between  the  amounts  issued for calendar years
  2005-2009 and twenty-five million dollars.
    (c) For purposes of either period one or two, if  a  taxpayer  who  is
  issued  an  initial credit component certificate is unable to claim as a
  credit any amount of credit  component  (i)  such  amount  of  unclaimed
  credit  component  may be allocated to another taxpayer that has already
  been  issued  an  initial  credit  component   certificate   with   such
  certificate  being reissued to reflect the amount so allocated, provided
  that such other taxpayer applied for and would have qualified  for  such
  additional  amount,  and  with  respect to period two the initial credit
  component certificate of such  other  taxpayer  as  augmented  does  not
  exceed  the  two million dollar limit, or as an alternative (ii) the DEC
  may issue to other applicants new initial credit component  certificates
  which include such amounts of unclaimed credit components. If a taxpayer
  is  unable  to claim all or a portion of the amount of credit components
  after the close of the last  calendar  year  for  which  initial  credit
  component  certificates  may be issued, the DEC shall have twelve months
  to  accept  applications  for  and  issue   initial   credit   component
  certificates for such amount of unclaimed credit components.
    (2)  Eligibility  certificate.  For  each  taxable  year  for  which a
  taxpayer claims a credit under this section  with  respect  to  a  green
  building,  green  base  building  or green tenant space, a fuel cell, or
  photovoltaic  modules,  or   air   conditioning   equipment   using   an
  EPA-approved  non-ozone  depleting  refrigerant  or  other  EPA-approved


 refrigerant approved by the commissioner of environmental  conservation,
  the  taxpayer  shall  obtain  from an architect or professional engineer
  licensed to practice in this  state  an  eligibility  certificate.  Such
  certificate  shall  consist  of  a certification, under the seal of such
  architect or engineer, that the building, base building or tenant  space
  with  respect  to which the credit is claimed is a green building, green
  base building or green tenant space, respectively, that the fuel cell or
  photovoltaic modules constitute qualifying alternate energy sources  and
  that  the  air  conditioning  equipment  uses  an EPA-approved non-ozone
  depleting refrigerant or other EPA-approved refrigerant approved by  the
  commissioner  of environmental conservation and remains in service. Such
  certification shall  be  made  in  accordance  with  the  standards  and
  guidelines in effect at the time the property which is the basis for the
  credit  was  placed  in  service. Such certification shall set forth the
  specific findings upon which the certification was based.  The  taxpayer
  shall file such certificate, and the associated initial credit component
  certificate,  with  the claim for credit and shall file duplicate copies
  with DEC. Such  certificate  shall  include  sufficient  information  to
  identify  each  building or space, and such other information as DEC and
  the commissioner shall prescribe.
    (3) Wrongful certification. If DEC  has  reason  to  believe  that  an
  architect  or  professional  engineer, in making any certification under
  this subdivision, engaged in professional misconduct, then DEC shall  so
  inform the education department.
    (d)  Other  requirements;  miscellaneous.  (1)  Record  keeping.  Each
  taxpayer shall, for any taxable year for which the green building credit
  provided for under this section is  claimed,  maintain  records  of  the
  following information:
    (A)  annual  energy  consumption for building, base building or tenant
  space;
    (B) annual results of air monitoring;
    (C) annual confirmation that the building,  base  building  or  tenant
  space  continues  to  meet  requirements  regarding  smoking  areas,  if
  provided;
    (D) tenant guidelines referred to in  subparagraph  (I)  of  paragraph
  nine of subdivision (b) of this section, if applicable;
    (E)  all  written  notification  of tenants and requests to remedy any
  indoor air quality problems;
    (F) initial and annual (by month) results of validation of performance
  of photovoltaic modules and fuel cells; and
    (G) certifications as  to  off-gassing  and  other  contamination,  as
  prescribed  in  subclause  (III)  of  clause (ii) of subparagraph (B) of
  paragraph nine of subdivision (b) of this section, where applicable.
    (2) Reporting to DEC. Each taxpayer shall  also  provide  to  DEC  the
  information  described in paragraph one of this subdivision, in the form
  and at the time prescribed  by  DEC,  such  time  to  be  determined  in
  consultation  with  the commissioner. Such information shall be provided
  to DEC with respect to each taxable  year  with  respect  to  which  the
  taxpayer claims a credit under this section.
    (3)  Regulations.  The commissioner, the commissioner of environmental
  conservation and the commissioner of education are hereby authorized  to
  promulgate and adopt regulations necessary to the implementation of this
  section.  Such regulations shall construe the provisions of this section
  in such a manner as to encourage the  development  of  green  buildings,
  green  base  buildings  and  green tenant space and to maintain high but
  commercially reasonable standards for obtaining tax  credits  hereunder.
  Such regulations shall establish a reasonable time or period of time for
  submission  of applications, and shall establish a method for allocating


 initial  credit  component  certificates  among   eligible   applicants.
  Regulations,  standards or requirements adopted pursuant to this section
  shall apply only to a "green base building" as defined in paragraph nine
  of  subdivision  (b)  of  this section, a "green building" as defined in
  paragraph ten of subdivision (b) or "green tenant space" as  defined  in
  paragraph eleven of subdivision (b) of this section.
    (4)  Report.  For  period  one, on or before April first, two thousand
  eleven, the commissioner and the commissioner of  DEC,  jointly  and  in
  consultation  with  NYSERDA, shall submit a written report regarding the
  number of certifications and taxpayers claiming the credit provided  for
  under  this section; the amount of the credits claimed, the geographical
  distribution of the  credits  claimed;  and  any  other  such  available
  information  DEC  may  deem  meaningful  and  appropriate. A preliminary
  version of such report for period one shall be so issued by April first,
  two thousand five. For  period  two,  on  or  before  April  first,  two
  thousand  sixteen  the commissioner and the commissioner of DEC, jointly
  and  in  consultation  with  NYSERDA,  shall  submit  a  written  report
  regarding  the  number of certificates and taxpayers claiming the credit
  provided for under this section; the amount of the credits claimed,  the
  geographical  distribution  of  the  credits claimed; and any other such
  available  information  DEC  may  deem  meaningful  and  appropriate.  A
  preliminary  version  of  such  report for period two shall be issued by
  April first, two thousand ten. The commissioner and the commissioner  of
  DEC  shall ensure that the information is presented and/or classified in
  a manner consistent with the secrecy requirements of this  chapter.  DEC
  shall  also  make  recommendations  regarding  the  establishment  of  a
  permanent green building tax credit program. Recommendations may include
  methods to enhance the effectiveness, simplicity or other aspects of the
  program. The report shall be submitted to the  governor,  the  temporary
  president  of  the  senate, the speaker of the assembly, the chairman of
  the senate finance committee and the chairman of the assembly  ways  and
  means committee.
    (e)  Standards  and regulations. (1) Energy standards: base buildings.
  Within six months of  the  effective  date  of  this  section,  DEC,  in
  consultation  with NYSERDA, shall promulgate the following, with respect
  to base buildings:
    (A) regulations establishing standards for  energy  use  for  eligible
  buildings.  DEC,  in  consultation  with NYSERDA shall review and update
  such regulations if deemed necessary at least every two years  from  the
  date on which such regulations are promulgated.
    (B)  regulations  establishing  standards  for appliances and heating,
  cooling and water heating equipment that, on the effective date of  this
  section,  are  covered  by specifications from organizations such as the
  United States department of energy or environmental  protection  agency.
  The   development   of  such  regulations  shall  be  informed  by  such
  specifications. DEC, in  consultation  with  NYSERDA  shall  review  and
  update  such  regulations  if  deemed necessary at least every two years
  from the date on which such regulations are promulgated.
    (C) regulations indicating the methodology by which a  taxpayer  shall
  demonstrate  compliance  with  subparagraph  (A)  of  paragraph  nine of
  subdivision (b) of this section. Such regulations shall  include,  at  a
  minimum,  a requirement to conduct hourly computer modeling for one full
  year.
    (D)  regulations  establishing  standards  for  the  commissioning  of
  buildings.
    (2)  Indoor  air  standards:  base buildings. Within six months of the
  effective date of this  section,  DEC,  in  consultation  with  DOH  and
  NYSERDA,  shall  promulgate  regulations  establishing  standards,  with


 respect  to  base  buildings,  for  (A)  ventilation  and  exchange   of
  indoor/outdoor  air,  (B)  indoor  air  quality management plans for the
  construction or rehabilitation process, and (C) indoor air quality  with
  respect  to levels of carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide and total volatile
  organic compounds, radon and particulate matter.
    (3)  Standards  for  materials,  water  conservation,  drainage:  base
  buildings.  Within  one year of the effective date of this section, DEC,
  in consultation with  NYSERDA,  shall  promulgate  the  following,  with
  regard to base buildings:
    (A)   regulations   establishing  standards  for  building  materials,
  finishes and  furnishings  regarding  minimum  percentages  of  recycled
  content and renewable source material and maximum levels of toxicity and
  volatile  organic  compounds  and any other standards that the DEC deems
  appropriate.  Standards  shall  be  developed  for  building  materials,
  finishes  and  furnishings,  including  but  not limited to concrete and
  concrete masonry units; wood and  wood  products;  millwork  substrates;
  insulation; ceramic, ceramic/glass and cementitious tiles; ceiling tiles
  and   panels;  flooring  and  carpet;  paints,  coatings,  sealants  and
  adhesives; and furniture. The development of  such  standards  shall  be
  informed by the LEED rating system. The DEC shall review and update such
  regulations  if  deemed necessary at least every two years from the date
  on which such regulations are promulgated. For purposes of this  clause,
  "LEED  rating  system"  means the leadership in energy and environmental
  design green building rating system  criteria  being  developed  by  the
  United States green building council.
    (B)  regulations establishing standards for buildings located in areas
  where water use is not metered, which regulations shall  require,  at  a
  minimum, that the building include one of the following features:
    (i)  a  gray water system that recovers non-sewage waste water or uses
  roof or ground storm water collection systems, or recovers ground  water
  from sump pumps;
    (ii)  for  buildings with a cooling tower system, such system shall be
  designed with delimiters to reduce drift and evaporation; or
    (iii) for buildings with exterior plants, all  such  plants  shall  be
  tolerant  of climate, soils and natural water availability and shall not
  receive  watering  from  municipal  potable  water  after  a  period  of
  establishment is complete.
    (C)  regulations establishing standards for buildings located in areas
  that do not have sewers or that  have  designated  storm  sewers,  which
  regulations shall require, at a minimum, that the building shall include
  one of the following features:
    (i)  an  oil  grit separator or water quality pond for pretreatment of
  runoff from any surface parking areas; or
    (ii)  at  least  fifty  percent  of  nonlandscaped  areas   (including
  roadways,  surface  parking,  plazas  and  pathways),  if  any, shall be
  comprised of pervious paving materials.
    (D) regulations indicating the methodology by  which  taxpayers  shall
  demonstrate  compliance with subparagraphs (B) and (C) of paragraph nine
  of subdivision (b) of this section.
    (4) Energy standards: tenant space. Within six months of the effective
  date  of  this  section,  DEC,  in  consultation  with  NYSERDA,   shall
  promulgate  regulations,  with  respect  to tenant space, indicating the
  methodology  by  which  taxpayers  shall  demonstrate  compliance   with
  subparagraph (A) of paragraph eleven of subdivision (b) of this section.
    (5) Standards for indoor air quality, building materials, finishes and
  furnishings: tenant space. Within one year of the effective date of this
  section,  DEC,  in  consultation  with DOH and NYSERDA, shall promulgate
  regulations, with respect to tenant space, indicating the methodology by


 which taxpayers shall demonstrate compliance with  subparagraph  (B)  of
  paragraph eleven of subdivision (b) of this section.
    (f)  Cross-references.  For  application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) Article nine: Section one hundred eighty-seven-d;
    (2) Article nine-A: Subdivision sixteen of section two hundred ten-B;
    (3) Article twenty-two: Subsections (i) and (y) of section six hundred
  six;
    (4) Article thirty-three: Subdivision (o) of section  fifteen  hundred
  eleven.




   §   20.  Credit  for  transportation  improvement  contributions.  (a)
  Allowance of credit. For taxable years beginning before  January  first,
  two thousand nine, a taxpayer subject to tax under article nine, nine-A,
  twenty-two,  thirty-two or thirty-three of this chapter shall be allowed
  a credit against such tax, pursuant  to  the  provisions  referenced  in
  subdivision  (d)  of  this  section. The credit shall be allowed where a
  taxpayer has made a certified  contribution  of  at  least  ten  million
  dollars  to  a  qualified  transportation improvement project in a prior
  taxable year. The credit shall be equal to six percent of the taxpayer's
  increased qualified business facility payroll for the taxable year.  The
  aggregate of all credit amounts allowed to the taxpayer pursuant to this
  section  with  respect  to a certified contribution shall not exceed the
  amount of such certified contribution.
    (b) Definitions. As used in this section, the  following  terms  shall
  have the following meanings:
    (1)  Qualified  business  facility  ("QBF").  A  business facility the
  construction or expansion of which is  intended  to  be  enhanced  by  a
  qualified  transportation improvement project, as described in paragraph
  three of this subdivision.
    (2) Certified contribution. The term "certified contribution" means  a
  contribution certified jointly by the commissioner of transportation and
  the  commissioner  of  economic  development  as  a  contribution  to  a
  qualified  transportation  improvement   project,   such   certification
  indicating the date and amount of such contribution by the taxpayer, and
  including  a  description  of  the  associated  QBF. The commissioner of
  transportation and the comptroller are authorized to accept,  hold  and,
  notwithstanding  section four of the state finance law, to disburse such
  contributions, in  the  same  manner  as  is  authorized  for  municipal
  contributions in section ten of the highway law.
    (3)  Qualified transportation improvement project. The term "qualified
  transportation  improvement  project"  means  the  design,  development,
  construction,  and/or  improvement  of transportation infrastructure and
  related facilities or systems, including, but not limited to,  highways,
  roadways,  bridges,  ramps or lanes; or railroad, port, aviation or mass
  transit  facilities;  or  ferry  or  marine  facilities;  or  associated
  right-of-way   and   associated   connections  to  existing  or  planned
  transportation  infrastructure  or  facilities.  Such  project  must  be
  designed  in  part to enhance the planned construction or expansion of a
  QBF.  A  project  for  the  design,  development,  construction,  and/or
  improvement  of  transportation infrastructure and related facilities or
  systems shall be  considered  a  "qualified  transportation  improvement
  project"  under  this section only if the commissioner of transportation
  and the commissioner of economic development jointly determine, in their
  sole discretion, that the  project  would  promote  the  development  of
  employment  opportunities  in  connection with such QBF by creating more
  than one thousand new jobs in connection therewith, and is in  the  best
  interests of the people of the state. The undertaking of said project is
  declared   to   be  for  a  public  purpose,  and  the  commissioner  of
  transportation is authorized to participate in the costs thereof.
    (4) Increased QBF payroll. The term "increased QBF payroll" means  the
  excess,  if  any,  of (A) the taxpayer's total wages, salaries and other
  personal service compensation of employees employed in connection with a
  QBF  other  than  general  executive  officers  (in  the   case   of   a
  corporation),  for  the  taxable  year,  over  (B)  the  average  of the
  taxpayer's total wages, salaries and other personal service compensation
  of such employees for the taxable year in  which  the  contribution  was
  made  and  for  the two immediately preceding taxable years, if any, but
  only to the extent that such excess exists with regard to the state.


   (c) Recapture. (1) If the taxpayer has made a  contribution  which  is
  the  basis  for a credit allowed under this section, and if with respect
  to the third full taxable year (the  "test  year")  next  following  the
  taxable  year during which such contribution was made (the "contribution
  year") the employment increase test described in paragraph three of this
  subdivision  is  not  met,  the  taxpayer  shall add back the sum of the
  amounts of such credit which have been allowed  for  all  prior  taxable
  years,  and  shall  be allowed no further credit under this section with
  respect to such contribution with respect to any other taxable year.
    (2) The amount required to be added back pursuant to this  subdivision
  shall  be augmented by an amount equal to the product of such amount and
  the underpayment rate of interest (without regard to  compounding),  set
  by  the  commissioner pursuant to subsection (e) of section one thousand
  ninety-six of this chapter, in the case of taxpayers which  applied  the
  credit   against   tax   under   article  nine,  nine-A,  thirty-two  or
  thirty-three, or pursuant to  subsection  (j)  of  section  six  hundred
  ninety-seven  of  this chapter, in the case of taxpayers who applied the
  credit against tax under article twenty-two of this chapter,  in  effect
  on the last day of the taxable year.
    (3) The employment increase test shall be deemed met where the average
  number of full-time employees of the taxpayer employed (A) in connection
  with a QBF and (B) in this state, during the test year, exceeds, in each
  case,  such  number determined with respect to the contribution year and
  the two immediately preceding taxable years by one thousand.
    (4) The average number  of  employees  in  a  taxable  year  shall  be
  computed  by  ascertaining  the  number  of  employees,  except  general
  executive officers (in the case  of  a  corporation),  employed  by  the
  taxpayer  on  the  thirty-first day of March, the thirtieth day of June,
  the thirtieth day of September and the thirty-first day of  December  in
  the taxable year, by adding together the number of employees ascertained
  on  each of such dates and dividing the sum so obtained by the number of
  such abovementioned dates occurring within the taxable year.
    (d) Cross-references. For application of the credit  provided  for  in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) Article 9: Section 187-e,
    (2) Article 9-A: Section 210: subdivision 32,
    (3) Article 22: Section 606: subsections (i) and (z),
    (4) Article 32: Section 1456: subsection (n),
    (5) Article 33: Section 1511: subdivision (p).




   * §  21. Brownfield redevelopment tax credit. (a) Allowance of credit.
  (1) General. A taxpayer subject  to  tax  under  article  nine,  nine-A,
  twenty-two  or  thirty-three  of  this chapter shall be allowed a credit
  against such tax, pursuant to the provisions referenced  in  subdivision
  (f)  of  this  section.  Such  credit shall be allowed with respect to a
  qualified site, as such term is defined in paragraph one of  subdivision
  (b) of this section. The amount of the credit in a taxable year shall be
  the  sum of the credit components specified in paragraphs two, three and
  four of this subdivision applicable in such year.
    (2) Site preparation credit component.  The  site  preparation  credit
  component  shall  be  equal  to  the  applicable  percentage of the site
  preparation costs paid or incurred by the taxpayer  with  respect  to  a
  qualified  site.  The credit component amount so determined with respect
  to a site's qualification for  a  certificate  of  completion  shall  be
  allowed  for  the  taxable  year  in  which  the  effective  date of the
  certificate of completion occurs. The credit component amount determined
  other than with respect to such qualification shall be allowed  for  the
  taxable  year  in  which  the  improvement to which the applicable costs
  apply is placed in service for  up  to  five  taxable  years  after  the
  issuance  of such certificate of completion; provided, however, that for
  any qualified site to which a certificate of completion is issued on  or
  after   July   first,  two  thousand  fifteen  but  on  or  before  June
  twenty-fourth, two thousand  twenty-one,  the  site  preparation  credit
  component  for such costs shall be allowed for up to seven taxable years
  after the issuance of  such  certificate  of  completion;  and  provided
  further,  however,  that for any qualified site located in cities with a
  population greater than two hundred five  thousand  and  less  than  two
  hundred  fifteen thousand in counties with a population greater than one
  million but less than one million  ten  thousand  based  on  the  latest
  federal  decennial  census  for  which  the  department of environmental
  conservation has issued a certificate of completion to the  taxpayer  on
  or  after  January  first,  two  thousand  seventeen and before December
  thirty-first,  two  thousand  seventeen,  the  site  preparation  credit
  component  for  such  costs  shall  be allowed for up to fifteen taxable
  years after the issuance of such certificate of completion.
    (3) Tangible property credit component.
    (i) The tangible property credit  component  shall  be  equal  to  the
  applicable  percentage of the cost or other basis for federal income tax
  purposes of tangible personal  property  and  other  tangible  property,
  including  buildings  and  structural  components  of  buildings,  which
  constitute qualified tangible property and may include any related party
  service fee paid; provided that in determining the cost or  other  basis
  of such property, the taxpayer shall exclude the acquisition cost of any
  item  of  property with respect to which a credit under this section was
  allowable to  another  taxpayer;  and  provided  further  that  for  the
  purposes  of  this  section,  starting  with  taxable  year two thousand
  twenty-two,  on  sites  that  comply  with  the  track  one  remediation
  standards promulgated pursuant to subdivision four of section 27-1415 of
  the environmental conservation law, stadiums, baseball parks, basketball
  courts  and other athletic facilities shall be considered buildings, and
  that components of stadiums,  baseball  parks,  basketball  courts,  and
  other  athletic  facilities  constructed on such sites, including sports
  field turf, site lighting, sidewalks, access and entry ways,  and  other
  improvements added to land, shall be considered structural components of
  buildings  under the internal revenue code, and shall be included in the
  definition of tangible property for the  purposes  of  this  section.  A
  related  party  service  fee shall be allowed only in the calculation of
  the tangible property credit component and shall not be allowed  in  the


 calculation  of  the  site  preparation  credit component or the on-site
  groundwater remediation credit component. The portion  of  the  tangible
  property credit component which is attributable to related party service
  fees  shall be allowed only as follows: (A) in the taxable year in which
  the qualified tangible property described in subparagraph (iii) of  this
  paragraph  is  placed  in service, for that portion of the related party
  service fees which have been earned and actually  paid  to  the  related
  party  on  or  before  the  last  day of such taxable year; and (B) with
  respect to any other taxable year for which the tangible property credit
  component may be claimed under this subparagraph and in which the amount
  of any additional related party service fees are actually  paid  by  the
  taxpayer  to  the  related party, the tangible property credit component
  for such amount shall be  allowed  in  such  taxable  year.  The  credit
  component  amount so determined shall be allowed for the taxable year in
  which such qualified tangible property is first placed in service  on  a
  qualified  site  with  respect  to which a certificate of completion has
  been issued to the taxpayer, or  for  the  taxable  year  in  which  the
  certificate  of  completion is issued if the qualified tangible property
  is placed in service  prior  to  the  issuance  of  the  certificate  of
  completion.  This  credit  component shall only be allowed for up to one
  hundred twenty months after the date of the issuance of such certificate
  of completion, provided, however, that for qualified sites  to  which  a
  certificate  of  completion  is  issued on or after March twentieth, two
  thousand ten, but prior to  January  first,  two  thousand  twelve,  the
  commissioner  may  extend  the  credit  component  for up to one hundred
  forty-four months after the date of such issuance, if the  commissioner,
  in  consultation  with  the  commissioner of environmental conservation,
  determines that the requirements for the credit would have been  met  if
  not  for  the  restrictions  related  to  the  state  disaster emergency
  declared pursuant to executive  order  202  of  2020  or  any  extension
  thereof  or  subsequent  executive order issued in response to the novel
  coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic; provided, however, with respect to  any
  qualified  site  for  which the department of environmental conservation
  has issued a certificate of completion to the taxpayer on or after March
  twentieth, two  thousand  ten  and  before  December  thirty-first,  two
  thousand  fifteen,  this credit component shall be allowed for up to one
  hundred eighty months after the date of the issuance of such certificate
  of completion; and provided further, with respect to any qualified  site
  located  in  cities  with  a  population  greater  than two hundred five
  thousand and less than two hundred fifteen thousand in counties  with  a
  population  greater  than  one  million  but  less  than one million ten
  thousand based on the latest federal  decennial  census  for  which  the
  department  of  environmental  conservation  has issued a certificate of
  completion to the taxpayer on  or  after  January  first,  two  thousand
  seventeen and before December thirty-first, two thousand seventeen, this
  credit  component  shall  be allowed for up to one hundred eighty months
  after the date of the issuance of such certificate of completion.
    (ii) The tangible property credit  component  shall  be  allowed  with
  respect  to  property leased to a second party only if such second party
  is either (A) not a party responsible  for  the  disposal  of  hazardous
  waste  or the discharge of petroleum at the site according to applicable
  principles of  statutory  or  common  law  liability,  or  (B)  a  party
  responsible  according  to  applicable principles of statutory or common
  law liability if such party's liability arises solely from operation  of
  the  site subsequent to the disposal of hazardous waste or the discharge
  of petroleum, and is so certified by the commissioner  of  environmental
  conservation at the request of the taxpayer, pursuant to section 27-1419
  of   the  environmental  conservation  law.  Notwithstanding  any  other


 provision of law to the contrary, in the case  of  allowance  of  credit
  under  this  section  to  such a lessor, the commissioner shall have the
  authority to reveal to such lessor any information, with respect to  the
  issue of qualified use of property by the lessee, which is the basis for
  the  denial  in  whole  or  in part, or for the recapture, of the credit
  claimed by such lessor. For purposes of  the  tangible  property  credit
  component   allowed   under  this  section  the  taxpayer  to  whom  the
  certificate of completion is issued, as provided for  under  subdivision
  five  of  section  27-1419  of  the  environmental conservation law, may
  transfer the benefits and burdens  of  the  certificate  of  completion,
  which  run  with  the  land and to the applicant's successors or assigns
  upon transfer or sale of all or any portion of an interest or estate  in
  the qualified site. However, the taxpayer to whom certificate's benefits
  and  burdens are transferred shall not include the cost of acquiring all
  or any portion of an interest or estate in  the  site  and  the  amounts
  included  in  the cost or other basis for federal income tax purposes of
  qualified tangible property already claimed  by  the  previous  taxpayer
  pursuant to this section.
    (iii) The term "related party service fee" shall mean any fee or other
  monetary  compensation  earned  by  a  related party and calculated as a
  percentage of project and/or  acquisition  costs,  in  consideration  of
  services  rendered  to  or  for  the  benefit  of  the  taxpayer placing
  qualified  tangible  property  in  service  in   connection   with   the
  acquisition  and  development  of  such  property.  For purposes of this
  subparagraph, "related party" shall have the  same  meaning  as  related
  person  as defined in subparagraph (c) of paragraph three of subdivision
  (b) of section four hundred sixty-five of the internal revenue code.
    (iv) Eligible costs for the tangible  property  credit  component  are
  limited  to  costs for tangible property that has a depreciable life for
  federal income tax purposes of fifteen years or more,  costs  associated
  with  demolition  and  excavation  on the site and the foundation of any
  buildings constructed as part of the site cover that  are  not  properly
  included  in  the  site  preparation component and costs associated with
  non-portable  equipment,   machinery   and   associated   fixtures   and
  appurtenances used exclusively on the site, whether or not such property
  has  a depreciable life for federal income tax purposes of fifteen years
  or more.
    (v) With respect to any qualified site for  which  the  department  of
  environmental  conservation  has  issued  a notice to the taxpayer on or
  after July first, two thousand fifteen or the date of publication in the
  state register  of  proposed  regulations  defining  "underutilized"  as
  provided  in  subdivision thirty of section 27-1405 of the environmental
  conservation law,  whichever  shall  be  later,  that  its  request  for
  participation has been accepted under subdivision six of section 27-1407
  of  the environmental conservation law, and the site is eligible for the
  tangible property credit component because it is an  affordable  housing
  project  pursuant  to  subdivision  one-a  of  section  27-1407  of  the
  environmental conservation law, the portion  of  eligible  costs  to  be
  included  in  the  calculation of the tangible property credit component
  will be determined by multiplying the  total  costs  qualified  for  the
  tangible property credit component by a fraction, the numerator of which
  shall  be  the  square  footage of space of the affordable housing units
  dedicated to residential occupancy and the denominator of which shall be
  the total square footage of the building.
    (3-a) (A) Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the  contrary,
  the  tangible property credit component available for any qualified site
  pursuant to  paragraph  three  of  this  subdivision  shall  not  exceed
  thirty-five million dollars or three times the sum of the costs included


 in  the  calculation  of  the  site preparation credit component and the
  on-site groundwater remediation credit component  under  paragraphs  two
  and  four,  respectively,  of this subdivision, and the costs that would
  have  been included in the calculation of such components if not treated
  as an expense and deducted pursuant to section one hundred  ninety-eight
  of  the  internal  revenue  code,  whichever is less; provided, however,
  that: (1) in the case of a qualified  site  to  be  used  primarily  for
  manufacturing   activities,   the  tangible  property  credit  component
  available for any qualified site pursuant to  paragraph  three  of  this
  subdivision shall not exceed forty-five million dollars or six times the
  sum  of  the  costs  included in the calculation of the site preparation
  credit  component  and  the  on-site  groundwater   remediation   credit
  component   under   paragraphs  two  and  four,  respectively,  of  this
  subdivision, and  the  costs  that  would  have  been  included  in  the
  calculation of such components if not treated as an expense and deducted
  pursuant  to  section  one  hundred ninety-eight of the internal revenue
  code, whichever is less; and (2) the provisions of this paragraph  shall
  not   apply   to   any  qualified  site  for  which  the  department  of
  environmental conservation has issued a notice to  the  taxpayer  before
  June twenty-third, two thousand eight that its request for participation
  has  been  accepted  under  subdivision  six  of  section 27-1407 of the
  environmental conservation law.
    (B) For the  purposes  of  this  paragraph,  the  term  "manufacturing
  activities"  means the production of goods by manufacturing, processing,
  assembling,  refining,   mining,   extracting,   farming,   agriculture,
  horticulture,  floriculture, viticulture or commercial fishing; provided
  however, that  the  generation  and  distribution  of  electricity,  the
  distribution of natural gas, and the production of steam associated with
  the  generation  of  electricity,  shall  not  constitute  manufacturing
  activities.
    (C) In order to properly administer the  credits  set  forth  in  this
  subdivision,   the   department   may  disclose  information  about  the
  calculation  and  the  amounts  of  the  credits  claimed   under   this
  subdivision  on  a  taxpayer's return to the department of environmental
  conservation and other taxpayers claiming tax credits under this section
  with respect to the same qualifying site.
    (D) With respect to any qualified site for  which  the  department  of
  environmental  conservation  has  issued a notice to the taxpayer before
  July first, two thousand fifteen or the date of publication in the state
  register of proposed regulations defining "underutilized" as provided in
  subdivision thirty of section 27-1405 of the environmental  conservation
  law,  whichever  shall  be later, that its request for participation has
  been  accepted  under  subdivision  six  of  section  27-1407   of   the
  environmental  conservation  law,  or where the taxpayer has either been
  issued or received a certificate of  completion  from  another  taxpayer
  under  section 27-1419 of the environmental conservation law before July
  first, two thousand fifteen or the date  of  publication  in  the  state
  register of proposed regulations defining "underutilized" as provided in
  subdivision  thirty of section 27-1405 of the environmental conservation
  law, whichever shall be later, if the qualifying site is  located  in  a
  brownfield  opportunity  area  and  is developed in conformance with the
  goals  and  priorities  established  for  that   applicable   brownfield
  opportunity   area  as  designated  pursuant  to  section  nine  hundred
  seventy-r of the general municipal law, the applicable percentage of the
  tangible property credit component will be increased by two percent.
    (4) On-site groundwater  remediation  credit  component.  The  on-site
  groundwater   remediation   credit  component  shall  be  equal  to  the
  applicable percentage of the on-site groundwater remediation costs  paid


 or  incurred  by  the  taxpayer with respect to a qualified site (to the
  extent that such groundwater remediation costs are not included  in  the
  determination  of the site preparation credit or the cost or other basis
  included  in  the  determination  of  the tangible property credit). The
  credit component so determined for costs incurred and paid with  respect
  to  and  prior  to  the issuance of a certificate of completion shall be
  allowed for the taxable year in which the effective date of the issuance
  of a certificate of  completion  occurs.  The  credit  component  amount
  determined  in taxable years after the effective date of the issuance of
  a certificate of completion shall be allowed in the  taxable  year  such
  qualified costs are incurred and paid for up to five taxable years after
  the  issuance of such certificate of completion; provided, however, that
  with respect to any qualified site for which a certificate of completion
  has been issued on or after July first, two thousand fifteen but  on  or
  before June twenty-fourth, two thousand twenty-one, the credit component
  amount  determined  in  taxable  years  after  the effective date of the
  issuance of a certificate of completion shall be allowed in the  taxable
  year  such qualified costs are incurred and paid for up to seven taxable
  years after the issuance of such certificate of completion.
    (5) Applicable percentage. (A) For  purposes  of  computing  the  site
  preparation   and  on-site  groundwater  remediation  credit  components
  pursuant to paragraphs two and four of this subdivision, with respect to
  such  qualified  sites  for  which  the  department   of   environmental
  conservation   has   issued   a  notice  to  the  taxpayer  before  June
  twenty-third, two thousand eight that its request for participation  has
  been   accepted   under  subdivision  six  of  section  27-1407  of  the
  environmental conservation law, or where the taxpayer  has  either  been
  issued  or  received  a  certificate of completion from another taxpayer
  under section 27-1419 of the environmental conservation law for  such  a
  site,  and,  for  purposes  of computing the tangible property component
  pursuant to paragraph three of this subdivision  with  respect  to  such
  qualified  sites  for which the department of environmental conservation
  has issued a notice to the taxpayer  before  July  first,  two  thousand
  fifteen  or  the  date  of publication in the state register of proposed
  regulations defining "underutilized" as provided in  subdivision  thirty
  of  section  27-1405  of  the  environmental conservation law, whichever
  shall be later, that its request for  participation  has  been  accepted
  under   subdivision   six   of  section  27-1407  of  the  environmental
  conservation law, or where  the  taxpayer  has  either  been  issued  or
  received a certificate of completion from another taxpayer under section
  27-1419  of  the  environmental  conservation  law  for such a site, the
  applicable percentage shall be twelve percent in  the  case  of  credits
  claimed  under article nine, nine-A or thirty-three of this chapter, and
  ten percent in the case of credits claimed under article  twenty-two  of
  this  chapter,  except  that where at least fifty percent of the area of
  the qualified site relating to the credit provided for in  this  section
  is  located  in  an  environmental  zone  as defined in paragraph six of
  subdivision (b) of this section,  the  applicable  percentage  shall  be
  increased by an additional eight percent. Provided, however, as afforded
  in  section  27-1419  of  the  environmental  conservation  law,  if the
  certificate of completion indicates that the  qualified  site  has  been
  remediated  to  Track 1 as that term is described in subdivision four of
  section 27-1415 of the environmental conservation  law,  the  applicable
  percentage  set  forth  in the first sentence of this paragraph shall be
  increased by an additional two percent.
    (B) With respect to such qualified site for which  the  department  of
  environmental  conservation  has  issued  a notice to the taxpayer on or
  after  July  first,  two  thousand  fifteen,  that   its   request   for


 participation has been accepted under subdivision six of section 27-1407
  of the environmental conservation law, the applicable percentage for the
  tangible  property  credit component of the brownfield redevelopment tax
  credit  pursuant to paragraph three of this subdivision shall be the sum
  of ten percent and the following additional percentages,  provided  that
  if  the sum is greater than twenty-four percent, the total percentage of
  the tangible property credit component shall be twenty-four percent  and
  is  otherwise  subject  to the limitations set forth in paragraphs three
  and three-a of this subdivision:
    (i) five percent for a site which:
    (1) is located within an environmental zone; or
    (2) is in a disadvantaged community as that term is defined in section
  27-1405 of the environmental conservation law for which  the  department
  of  environmental conservation has issued a notice to the taxpayer on or
  after January first, two thousand  twenty-three  that  its  request  for
  participation has been accepted under subdivision six of section 27-1407
  of the environmental conservation law;
    (ii)  five  percent  for a site located within a designated brownfield
  opportunity area and is developed in  conformance  with  the  goals  and
  priorities  established  for that applicable brownfield opportunity area
  and meets the conformance determinations pursuant to subdivision ten  of
  section nine hundred seventy-r of the general municipal law;
    (iii)  five  percent  for  a  site developed as affordable housing, as
  defined in section 27-1405 of the environmental conservation law;
    (iv) five percent for a site to be used  primarily  for  manufacturing
  activities  as  such  term  is  defined in subparagraph (B) of paragraph
  three-a of this subdivision;
    (v) five percent for sites remediated to  Track  1  as  that  term  is
  defined  in  subdivision  four  of  section 27-1415 of the environmental
  conservation law; and
    (vi) for a qualified site for which the  department  of  environmental
  conservation  has  issued  a  notice to the taxpayer on or after January
  first, two thousand twenty-three that its request for participation  has
  been   accepted   under  subdivision  six  of  section  27-1407  of  the
  environmental conservation law, five  percent  for  sites  developed  as
  renewable  energy  facility  sites  as defined in section 27-1405 of the
  environmental conservation law.
    (C) The taxpayer  shall  submit,  in  the  manner  prescribed  by  the
  commissioner,  information  sufficient  to  demonstrate  that  the  site
  qualifies for any credit components available under subparagraph (B)  of
  this paragraph. If the site is receiving the credit component authorized
  pursuant  to clause (ii) of subparagraph (B) of this paragraph for being
  located within a designated brownfield opportunity  area,  the  taxpayer
  shall  submit  a  certification  from  the  secretary  of state that the
  development is in conformance with such brownfield opportunity area plan
  pursuant to section nine hundred seventy-r of the general municipal law.
    (6) Site preparation costs and on-site groundwater  remediation  costs
  paid  or  incurred  by the taxpayer with respect to a qualified site and
  the cost or other basis for federal  income  tax  purposes  of  tangible
  personal  property  and other tangible property, including buildings and
  structural components of buildings, which constitute qualified  tangible
  property shall only include costs paid or incurred by the taxpayer on or
  after  the date of the brownfield site cleanup agreement executed by the
  taxpayer and the department of environmental  conservation  pursuant  to
  section 27-1409 of the environmental conservation law.
    (7)  The  amount  of  any  grant received from the federal, state or a
  local government or an instrumentality  or  public  benefit  corporation
  thereof  received  by  the taxpayer and used to pay for any of the costs


 described in paragraphs two, three and four of this  subdivision,  which
  was  not  included in the federal gross income of the taxpayer, shall be
  subtracted in computing the credit components under this section.
    (b)  Definitions.  As  used in this section, the following terms shall
  have the following meanings:
    (1) Qualified site. A "qualified site" is a site with respect to which
  a certificate of completion has been  issued  to  the  taxpayer  by  the
  commissioner  of  environmental conservation pursuant to section 27-1419
  of the environmental conservation law.
    (2) Site preparation costs. The term "site  preparation  costs"  shall
  mean  all  amounts  properly  chargeable to a capital account, which are
  paid  or  incurred  which  are   necessary   to   implement   a   site's
  investigation,  remediation,  or  qualification  for  a  certificate  of
  completion,  and  shall  include  costs  of:   excavation;   demolition;
  activities  undertaken under the oversight of the department of labor or
  in accordance with standards established by the department of health  to
  remediate and dispose of regulated materials including asbestos, lead or
  polychlorinated  biphenyls; environmental consulting; engineering; legal
  costs;   transportation,   disposal,   treatment   or   containment   of
  contaminated  soil;  remediation  measures taken to address contaminated
  soil  vapor;  cover  systems  consistent  with  applicable  regulations;
  physical  support of excavation; dewatering and other work to facilitate
  or  enable  remediation  activities;  sheeting,   shoring,   and   other
  engineering   controls   required   to  prevent  off-site  migration  of
  contamination from the qualified site or migrating  onto  the  qualified
  site;  and the costs of fencing, temporary electric wiring, scaffolding,
  and security facilities until such time as the certificate of completion
  has been issued. Site  preparation  shall  include  all  costs  paid  or
  incurred within sixty months after the last day of the tax year in which
  the   certificate  of  completion  is  issued  that  are  necessary  for
  compliance  with   the   certificate   of   completion   or   subsequent
  modifications   thereof,   or  the  remedial  program  defined  in  such
  certificate of completion including but  not  limited  to  institutional
  controls, engineering controls, an approved site management plan, and an
  environmental  easement  with  respect  to the qualified site; provided,
  however, with respect to any qualified site for which a  certificate  of
  completion  was  issued on or after July first, two thousand fifteen but
  on  or  before  June  twenty-fourth,  two  thousand   twenty-one,   site
  preparation  shall include all costs paid or incurred within eighty-four
  months after the last day of the tax year in which  the  certificate  of
  completion  is  issued  that  are  necessary  for  compliance  with  the
  certificate of completion or subsequent modifications  thereof,  or  the
  remedial program defined in such certificate of completion including but
  not limited to institutional controls, engineering controls, an approved
  site  management plan, and an environmental easement with respect to the
  qualified site, provided, however, with respect to  any  qualified  site
  located  in  cities  with  a  population  greater  than two hundred five
  thousand and less than two hundred fifteen thousand in counties  with  a
  population  greater  than  one  million  but  less  than one million ten
  thousand based on the latest federal  decennial  census  for  which  the
  department  of  environmental  conservation  has issued a certificate of
  completion to the taxpayer on  or  after  January  first,  two  thousand
  seventeen and before December thirty-first, two thousand seventeen, this
  credit  component  shall  be allowed for up to one hundred eighty months
  after the date of the issuance of such certificate of  completion.  Site
  preparation  cost shall not include the costs of foundation systems that
  exceed the cover system requirements in the  regulations  applicable  to
  the qualified site.


   (3)  Qualified  tangible  property.  "Qualified  tangible property" is
  property described in either subparagraph (A) or (B) of  this  paragraph
  which:
    (A)  (i) is depreciable pursuant to section one hundred sixty-seven of
  the internal revenue code,
    (ii) has a useful life of four years or more,
    (iii) has been acquired by purchase as defined in section one  hundred
  seventy-nine (d) of the internal revenue code,
    (iv) has a situs on a qualified site in this state, and
    (v)  is  principally  used by the taxpayer for industrial, commercial,
  recreational  or  environmental  conservation  purposes  (including  the
  commercial development of residential housing); or
    (B) (i) is, or when occupied becomes, part of a dwelling whose primary
  ownership  structure  is covered under either article nine-B of the real
  property law or meets the requirements of  section  216  (b)(1)  of  the
  Internal  Revenue  Code  or  is part of an affordable housing project as
  defined  in  subdivision  twenty-nine  of   section   27-1405   of   the
  environmental  conservation  law,  where units are sold as single family
  homes or multiple family dwellings;
    (ii) has been acquired by purchase (as defined in section one  hundred
  seventy-nine (d) of the Internal Revenue Code);
    (iii) has a situs on a qualified site in this state; and
    (iv)  for  purposes of this subparagraph only, and notwithstanding any
  other section of law to the contrary,  property  qualifying  under  this
  subparagraph  shall  be deemed to be qualified tangible property for the
  purposes of paragraph one of subdivision (d) of  this  section;  and  in
  addition, for the purposes of this subdivision only, property qualifying
  under  this  subparagraph shall be deemed to have been placed in service
  for the purposes of paragraph three of subdivision (a) of  this  section
  when a certificate of occupancy is issued for such property.
    (4)   On-site   groundwater   remediation  costs.  The  term  "on-site
  groundwater  remediation  costs"  shall  mean   all   amounts   properly
  chargeable  to  a  capital account, which are paid or incurred which are
  necessary to implement a site's groundwater investigation,  remediation,
  or  qualification  for  a  certificate of completion not already covered
  under site preparation costs, and shall include costs of:  environmental
  consulting;   engineering;   legal   costs;   transportation,  disposal,
  treatment or containment of contaminated groundwater; sheeting, shoring,
  and other engineering controls required to prevent off-site migration of
  groundwater contamination from the qualified site or migrating onto  the
  qualified  site; and the costs of fencing, temporary electric wiring and
  security facilities until such time as the certificate of completion  is
  issued.  On-site  groundwater  remediation costs shall include all costs
  paid or incurred within sixty months after the last day of the tax  year
  in  which the certificate of completion is issued that are necessary for
  compliance  with   the   certificate   of   completion   or   subsequent
  modifications  thereof,  or  the groundwater remedial program defined in
  such  certificate  of  completion   including   but   not   limited   to
  institutional   controls,   engineering   controls,   an  approved  site
  management plan specific to  on-site  groundwater  remediation,  and  an
  environmental  easement  with  respect  to the qualified site. Provided,
  however, with respect to any qualified site for which a  certificate  of
  completion  has been issued on or after July first, two thousand fifteen
  but on or before June twenty-fourth, two  thousand  twenty-one,  on-site
  groundwater  remediation  costs  shall  include  all  such costs paid or
  incurred within eighty-four months after the last day of the tax year in
  which the certificate of completion is issued.


   (5) Certificate of completion. A "certificate of completion" issued by
  the commissioner  of  environmental  conservation  pursuant  to  section
  27-1419 of the environmental conservation law.
    (6) Environmental zones (EN-Zones). An "environmental zone" shall mean
  an  area  designated  as  such  by the commissioner of labor. Such areas
  shall be census tracts that satisfy either of the following criteria:
    (A) areas that have both:
    (i) a poverty rate of at least twenty percent based on the most recent
  five year American Community Survey; and
    (ii) an unemployment rate of at least one and  one-quarter  times  the
  statewide  unemployment rate based on the most recent five year American
  Community Survey, or;
    (B) areas that have a poverty rate of at least two times  the  poverty
  rate  for  the  county  in which the areas are located based on the most
  recent five year American Community Survey.
    Such designation shall be made and a list of  all  such  environmental
  zones shall be established by the commissioner of labor based on the two
  thousand  nine  through  two thousand thirteen American Community Survey
  estimate.  Upon   request   of   the   commissioner   of   environmental
  conservation,  the  commissioner  of labor shall update such designation
  based on the most recent American Community Survey, or its successor.
    The determination of whether a site is  located  in  an  environmental
  zone  shall  be  based  on  the  date  the  department  of environmental
  conservation issued a notice  to  the  taxpayer  that  its  request  for
  participation in the brownfield cleanup program has been deemed complete
  pursuant  to  subdivision  three of section 27-1407 of the environmental
  conservation law.
    (c) Qualifying property.  Property  which  qualifies  for  the  credit
  provided  for  under this section and also for a credit provided for (1)
  under either subdivision one or subdivision three of section two hundred
  ten-B of this chapter, or both, or (2) subsection (a) or subsection  (j)
  of section six hundred six of this chapter, or both may be the basis for
  either  the credit provided for under this section or one of the credits
  enumerated in paragraph one or two of this subdivision, but not both.
    (d) Depreciable property.  (1)  With  respect  to  qualified  tangible
  property   which   is   depreciable  pursuant  to  section  one  hundred
  sixty-seven of the internal revenue code  but  is  not  subject  to  the
  provisions  of  section  one  hundred sixty-eight of such code and which
  ceases to be in qualified use prior to the end of the  taxable  year  in
  which  the credit is to be taken, the amount of the credit shall be that
  portion of the credit provided for in this subdivision which  represents
  the ratio which the months of qualified use bear to the months of useful
  life.  If  property  on  which  credit  has  been  taken ceases to be in
  qualified use prior to the  end  of  its  useful  life,  the  difference
  between  the  credit taken and the credit allowed for actual use must be
  added back in the year in which the property ceased to be  in  qualified
  use.  Provided,  however, if such property ceases to be in qualified use
  after it has been in qualified use  for  more  than  twelve  consecutive
  years,  it  shall not be necessary to add back the credit as provided in
  this paragraph. The amount of credit allowed for  actual  use  shall  be
  determined  by  multiplying  the  original credit by the ratio which the
  months of qualified use bear to the months of useful life. For  purposes
  of  this paragraph, the useful life of property shall be the same as the
  taxpayer uses for  depreciation  purposes  when  computing  its  federal
  income tax liability.
    (2)  Except  with  respect to that property to which paragraph four of
  this subdivision applies, with respect to  qualified  tangible  property
  which  is  three-year  property, as defined in subsection (e) of section


 one hundred sixty-eight of the internal revenue code, which ceases to be
  in qualified use prior to the end of  the  taxable  year  in  which  the
  credit is to be taken, the amount of the credit shall be that portion of
  the credit provided for in this section which represents the ratio which
  the  months  of  qualified  use bear to thirty-six. If property on which
  credit has been taken ceases to be in qualified use prior to the end  of
  thirty-six  months,  the  difference  between  the  credit taken and the
  credit allowed for actual use must be added back in the  year  in  which
  the property ceased to be in qualified use. The amount of credit allowed
  for actual use shall be determined by multiplying the original credit by
  the ratio which the months of qualified use bear to thirty-six.
    (3)  Except  with  respect to that property to which paragraph four of
  this subdivision applies, with respect to  qualified  tangible  property
  which is subject to the provisions of section one hundred sixty-eight of
  the  internal  revenue code other than three-year property as defined in
  subsection (e) of such section one hundred sixty-eight which  ceases  to
  be  in  qualified  use prior to the end of the taxable year in which the
  credit is to be taken, the amount of the credit shall be that portion of
  the credit provided for in this section which represents the ratio which
  the months of qualified use bear to sixty. If property on  which  credit
  has  been  taken ceases to be in qualified use prior to the end of sixty
  months, the difference between the credit taken and the  credit  allowed
  for  actual  use  must  be  added back in the year in which the property
  ceased to be in qualified use. The amount of credit allowed  for  actual
  use  shall be determined by multiplying the original credit by the ratio
  which the months of qualified use bear to sixty.
    (4) With respect to any qualified tangible property to  which  section
  one hundred sixty-eight of the internal revenue code applies, which is a
  building  or a structural component of a building and which ceases to be
  in qualified use prior to the end of  the  taxable  year  in  which  the
  credit is to be taken, the amount of the credit shall be that portion of
  the credit provided for in this section which represents the ratio which
  the  months  of  qualified  use  bear to the total number of months over
  which the taxpayer chooses to deduct the  property  under  the  internal
  revenue code. If property on which credit has been taken ceases to be in
  qualified  use  prior  to  the end of the period over which the taxpayer
  chooses to deduct the property under  the  internal  revenue  code,  the
  difference  between  the  credit taken and the credit allowed for actual
  use must be added back in the year in which the property ceased to be in
  qualified use. Provided, however, if  such  property  ceases  to  be  in
  qualified  use  after  it has been in qualified use for more than twelve
  consecutive years, it shall not be necessary to add back the  credit  as
  provided  in this paragraph. The amount of credit allowed for actual use
  shall be determined by multiplying the  original  credit  by  the  ratio
  which  the  months  of  qualified use bear to the total number of months
  over which the  taxpayer  chooses  to  deduct  the  property  under  the
  internal revenue code.
    (e)  If  the  certificate  of  completion  issued to the taxpayer with
  respect to a  qualified  site  is  revoked  by  a  determination  issued
  pursuant  to  section 27-1419 of the environmental conservation law, the
  amount of any credit allowed by this section shall be added back in  the
  taxable  year in which such determination is final and no longer subject
  to judicial review.
    (f) Cross-references. For application of the credit  provided  for  in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) Article 9: Section 187-g
    (2) Article 9-A: Section 210-B, subdivision 17
    (3) Article 22: Section 606, subsections (i) and (dd)


   (4) Article 33: Section 1511, subdivision (u).
    * NB There are 2 § 21's




   * §   21.  Disclosure  of  taxpayer  information  in  cases  involving
  abandoned property. (a) General. Notwithstanding any provision of law to
  the contrary, the commissioner may furnish to the  comptroller  or  duly
  designated  officer  or  employee  of  the state department of audit and
  control the name,  address  and  taxpayer  identification  number  of  a
  taxpayer to whom a refund or reimbursement of tax is owed, together with
  the  amount  of  such  refund  or reimbursement, for the sole purpose of
  identifying owners of  abandoned  property  paid  to  and  held  by  the
  comptroller  pursuant  to  section  one hundred two of the state finance
  law.
    (b) Secrecy requirement and  penalty  for  violation.  (1)  Except  in
  accordance with a proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law,
  it  shall  be  unlawful  for any person to whom the taxpayer information
  described in subdivision (a) of this section is disclosed in  accordance
  with  this  section to divulge or make known in any manner such taxpayer
  information for uses not authorized under this section.
    (2) (A) Any officer or employee of the state  who  willfully  violates
  the provisions of this subdivision shall be dismissed from office and be
  incapable  of  holding  any  public office in this state for a period of
  five years thereafter.
    (B) Cross-reference. For criminal penalties, see article  thirty-seven
  of this chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 21's






	   § 22. Tax credit for remediated brownfields.  (a) Definitions. As used
  in this section the following terms shall have the following meanings:
    (1) Certificate of completion. A "certificate of completion" issued by
  the  commissioner  of  environmental  conservation  pursuant  to section
  27-1419 of the environmental conservation law.
    (2) Qualified site. For purposes of this section, a  "qualified  site"
  is  a  site  with  respect to which a certificate of completion has been
  issued by the commissioner of  environmental  conservation  pursuant  to
  section 27-1419 of the environmental conservation law.
    (3)  Developer.  (i)  A  "developer" is a taxpayer under article nine,
  nine-A, twenty-two or thirty-three of this chapter who or  which  either
  (I)  has  been  issued  a  certificate  of  completion with respect to a
  qualified site or (II) has purchased  or  in  any  other  way  has  been
  conveyed  all  or any portion of a qualified site from a taxpayer or any
  other party who or which has been issued  a  certificate  of  completion
  with  respect  to such site provided, such purchase or conveyance occurs
  within  seven  years  of  the  effective  date  of  the  certificate  of
  completion issued with respect to such qualified site. Provided further,
  that  the  taxpayer  who  or which is purchasing all or any portion of a
  qualified site and the taxpayer or any other party who or which has been
  issued a certificate of completion with respect to such site may not  be
  related  persons,  as  such  term  is  defined  in  subparagraph  (C) of
  paragraph three of subsection (b) of section four hundred sixty-five  of
  the internal revenue code.
    (ii)  Where  the  entity  to whom a certificate of completion has been
  issued is a partnership, or where the entity which has purchased all  or
  any  portion  of  a qualified site from a taxpayer who or which has been
  issued a certificate of completion with respect to such site within  the
  applicable  time limit is a partnership, any partner in such partnership
  who or which is  taxable  under  article  nine,  nine-A,  twenty-two  or
  thirty-three  of this chapter shall be a developer under this paragraph.
  Where the entity to whom a certificate of completion has been issued  is
  a New York S corporation, or where the entity which has purchased all or
  any  portion  of  a qualified site from a taxpayer who or which has been
  issued a certificate of completion with respect to such site within  the
  applicable  time  limit  is a New York S corporation, any shareholder in
  such New York S corporation shall be a developer under this paragraph.
    (4) Cessation of status. A taxpayer shall cease to be a  developer  on
  the  first  day  of  the  taxable  year  during  which revocation of its
  certificate of completion under section  27-1419  of  the  environmental
  conservation  law is final and no longer subject to judicial review, and
  the amount of any credit allowed by this section shall be added back  in
  the  taxable  year  in  which  such determination is final and no longer
  subject to judicial review.
    (5) Environmental zones (EN-Zones). An "environmental zone" shall mean
  an area designated as such by the commissioner of economic  development.
  Such  areas  so  designated  are areas which are census tracts and block
  numbering areas which, as of the two thousand census, satisfy either  of
  the following criteria:
    (A) areas that have both:
    (i)  a  poverty  rate of at least twenty percent for the year to which
  the data relate;
    (ii) an unemployment rate of at least one and  one-quarter  times  the
  statewide unemployment rate for the year to which the data relate, or;
    (B)  areas  that have a poverty rate of at least two times the poverty
  rate for the county in which the areas are located for the year to which
  the data relate, provided, however, that a qualified site shall only  be
  deemed  to  be  located in an environmental zone under this subparagraph


 (B) if such site was the subject of a brownfield site cleanup  agreement
  pursuant  to  section 27-1409 of the environmental conservation law that
  was entered into prior to September first, two thousand ten.
    Such  designation  shall  be made and a list of all such environmental
  zones shall be established by the commissioner of  economic  development
  no  later  than  December  thirty-first,  two  thousand  four  provided,
  however, that a qualified site shall only be deemed to be located in  an
  environmental zone under subparagraph (B) of this paragraph if such site
  was  the  subject  of  a  brownfield  site cleanup agreement pursuant to
  section 27-1409 of the environmental conservation law that  was  entered
  into prior to September first, two thousand ten.
    (b) Remediated brownfield credit for real property taxes for qualified
  sites.   (1) Allowance of credit. A developer of a qualified site who or
  which is subject to  tax  under  article  nine,  nine-A,  twenty-two  or
  thirty-three  of  this  chapter,  shall be allowed a credit against such
  tax, pursuant to the provisions referenced in  paragraph  nine  of  this
  subdivision, for eligible real property taxes imposed on such site.
    (2)  Amount  of  credit. The amount of the credit shall be twenty-five
  percent of the product of  (i)  the  benefit  period  factor,  (ii)  the
  employment  number  factor,  and  (iii) the eligible real property taxes
  paid or incurred by the developer  of  the  qualified  site  during  the
  taxable  year  (or  the  pro  rata  share of such taxes in the case of a
  partner in a partnership or a shareholder in a New York S  corporation),
  except  that  if  the  real  property which is the subject of the credit
  provided for under this  section  is  attributed  to  a  qualified  site
  located  in  an  environmental  zone  as  defined  in  paragraph five of
  subdivision (a) of this section, the amount of the credit shall  be  the
  product  of the factors and taxes referred to in subparagraphs (i), (ii)
  and (iii) of this paragraph. However, the amount of the credit  may  not
  exceed  the  credit  limitation  set  forth  in  paragraph seven of this
  subdivision.
    (3) Benefit period factor. The benefit period factor  is  a  numerical
  value  corresponding  with  a  benefit period of ten consecutive taxable
  years commencing  in  the  taxpayer's  taxable  year  during  which  the
  certificate  of  completion  is  issued  for  the  qualified site or the
  taxpayer's first taxable year commencing on or after  April  first,  two
  thousand  five,  whichever  is later. The benefit period factors are set
  forth in the following table:
  Taxable year of benefit period:     Benefit period factor:
  1-10                                1.0
    (4) Employment number factor. (i) The employment  number  factors  are
  set forth in the following table:
  Average number of full-time                  Employment number factor:
  employees employed by the
  developer of a qualified site, plus
  the average number of full-time
  employees employed by a lessee
  or lessees
  of a portion of such qualified
  site, where such employees are
  employed at such site
  during the taxable year:
  At least 25 but less than 50                    .25
  At least 50 but less than 75                    .50
  At least 75 but less than 100                   .75
  At least 100                                   1.00
    (ii)  For  purposes of this paragraph, the average number of full-time
  employees, excluding general executive officers, employed by a developer


 and a lessee at  a  qualified  site  during  a  taxable  year  or  other
  applicable  period, shall be computed by ascertaining the number of such
  employees employed by the developer and such lessee on the  thirty-first
  day  of March, the thirtieth day of June, the thirtieth day of September
  and the thirty-first day of December during each taxable year  or  other
  applicable  period,  by  adding  together the number of such individuals
  ascertained on each of such dates and dividing the sum  so  obtained  by
  the  number  of  such  dates occurring within such taxable year or other
  applicable period. Where the developer is a partner in a partnership  or
  a  shareholder  in  a  New  York  S corporation, the number of full-time
  employees of the partnership or the New York S corporation respectively,
  at such qualified site, shall be used for purposes of this calculation.
    (5) Eligible real property taxes. The  term  "eligible  real  property
  taxes"  means  taxes  imposed  on  real  property  which  consists  of a
  qualified site owned by the developer, provided such taxes become a lien
  on the real property in a period during which the  real  property  is  a
  qualified  site.  In  addition,  the term "eligible real property taxes"
  includes payments in lieu of taxes by the developer, with respect  to  a
  qualified  site,  to  the  state,  a  municipal  corporation or a public
  benefit corporation pursuant to a written agreement entered into between
  the developer and the state, a municipal corporation or a public benefit
  corporation. Provided, however, such a payment in lieu  of  taxes  shall
  not  constitute  eligible real property taxes in any taxable year to the
  extent that such payment exceeds the product of (A) the greater  of  (i)
  the  basis  for  federal income tax purposes, determined on the date the
  taxpayer becomes a developer as defined  under  this  section,  of  real
  property,  including  buildings  and structural components of buildings,
  owned by the developer and located on a qualified site with  respect  to
  which  the taxpayer is a developer, or (ii) the basis for federal income
  tax purposes of such real property  described  in  clause  (i)  of  this
  subparagraph  on the last day of the taxable year, and (B) the estimated
  effective full value tax rate within the county in which  such  property
  is  located,  as  most  recently  calculated  by  the  commissioner. The
  commissioner shall annually calculate estimated and effective full value
  tax rates within each county  for  this  purpose  based  upon  the  most
  current information available to him or her in relation to county, city,
  town,  village  and  school  district taxes. Provided further, where the
  amount of the credit determined under paragraph two of this  subdivision
  is  the total product of the factors and tax specified therein, the term
  "eligible real property taxes" under this paragraph shall apply only  to
  taxes  imposed  on real property which is attributed to a qualified site
  located in an environmental zone. Where the developer is a partner in  a
  partnership  or  a  shareholder  in  a New York S corporation, such real
  property  shall  be  owned  by  the  partnership  or  the  New  York   S
  corporation, respectively.
    (6) Credit recapture. Where a developer's eligible real property taxes
  which  were the basis for the allowance of the credit provided for under
  this subdivision are subsequently reduced as a result of a  final  order
  in  any  proceeding  under article seven of the real property tax law or
  other provision of law, the taxpayer shall add back, in the taxable year
  in which such final order is issued, the excess of  (i)  the  amount  of
  credit  originally  allowed  for  a taxable year over (ii) the amount of
  credit determined based upon the reduced eligible real  property  taxes.
  If  such final order reduces real property taxes for more than one year,
  the taxpayer must determine how much of such reduction  is  attributable
  to  each  year  covered  by such final order and calculate the amount of
  credit which is required by this paragraph to  be  recaptured  for  each
  year based on such reduction.


   (7)  Credit  limitation. The credit limitation shall be the product of
  (i) ten thousand dollars  and  (ii)  the  average  number  of  full-time
  employees  employed by the developer of a qualified site and a lessee or
  lessees of a portion of such qualified site during the taxable year,  as
  such  average  is  computed under subparagraph (ii) of paragraph four of
  this subdivision.
    (8) Credit option. If the qualified site is located  in  whole  or  in
  part  in  an  area  designated  as  an  empire  zone pursuant to article
  eighteen-B of the general  municipal  law,  and  a  taxpayer  meets  the
  eligibility  requirements  for  both  the credit provided for under this
  section and the QEZE credit for real property taxes provided  for  under
  section  fifteen  of  this  article, with respect to all or part of such
  site, such taxpayer shall not be allowed to claim both such credits. The
  taxpayer shall be required, in the first taxable year such  taxpayer  is
  allowed  to claim a credit under this section, to elect whether to claim
  the credit provided for under this section or the  credit  provided  for
  under  section fifteen of this article. Such election shall be made with
  the filing of the return or report required under article nine,  nine-A,
  twenty-two,  thirty-two  or  thirty-three  of this chapter, whichever is
  applicable, for such taxable year. Such election shall apply to  and  be
  binding  in  each  subsequent  taxable  year  applicable  to  the credit
  provided for under either  this  section  or  section  fifteen  of  this
  article. A taxpayer who or which has been allowed a credit under section
  fifteen  of  this article, in a taxable year preceding the first taxable
  year such taxpayer is allowed to claim  a  credit  under  this  section,
  shall  not  be  precluded  from making the election provided for in this
  paragraph.
    (9) Cross-references. For application of the credit  provided  for  in
  this subdivision, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (i) Article 9: Section 187-h.
    (ii) Article 9-A: Section 210-B: subdivision 18.
    (iii) Article 22: Section 606: subsections (i) and (ee).
    (iv) Article 33: Section 1511: subdivision (v).




   §  23.  Environmental  remediation insurance credit.  (a) Allowance of
  credit. General. A taxpayer subject to tax under article  nine,  nine-A,
  twenty-two  or  thirty-three  of  this chapter shall be allowed a credit
  against such tax, pursuant to the provisions referenced  in  subdivision
  (e)  of  this  section.  The amount of such credit shall be equal to the
  lesser of thirty thousand dollars or fifty percent of the premiums  paid
  on  or  after the date of the brownfield site cleanup agreement executed
  by  the  taxpayer  and  the  department  of  environmental  conservation
  pursuant to section 27-1409 of the environmental conservation law by the
  taxpayer  for environmental remediation insurance issued with respect to
  a qualified site.
    (b) Definitions. As used in this section, the  following  terms  shall
  have the following meanings:
    (1) Qualified site. A "qualified site" is a site with respect to which
  a  certificate  of  completion  has  been  issued to the taxpayer by the
  commissioner of environmental conservation pursuant to  section  27-1419
  of  the environmental conservation law to an "applicant" as that term is
  defined in subdivision one  of  section  27-1405  of  the  environmental
  conservation law.
    (2) Certificate of completion. A "certificate of completion" issued by
  the  commissioner  of  environmental  conservation  pursuant  to section
  27-1419 of the environmental conservation law.
    (3)  Environmental  remediation  insurance.  The  term  "environmental
  remediation  insurance"  shall  mean that type of insurance described in
  section three thousand four hundred forty-seven of the insurance law.
    (c) The credit provided for in subdivision one of this  section  shall
  be  allowed  for the taxable year in which the certificate of completion
  is issued to the taxpayer. Such credit shall be allowed only  once  with
  respect to a particular certificate of completion.
    (d)  If  the  certificate  of  completion  issued to the taxpayer with
  respect to a  qualified  site  is  revoked  by  a  determination  issued
  pursuant  to  section 27-1419 of the environmental conservation law, the
  amount of credit allowed by this section shall  be  added  back  in  the
  taxable  year in which such determination is final and no longer subject
  to judicial review.
    (e) Cross-references. For application of the credit  provided  for  in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) Article 9: Section 187-i
    (2) Article 9-A: Section 210-B, subdivision 19
    (3) Article 22: Section 606, subsections (i) and (ff)
    (4) Article 33: Section 1511, subdivision (w).






   §  24.  Empire  state  film  production  credit.  (a) (1) Allowance of
  credit. A taxpayer which is a qualified film production  company,  or  a
  qualified  independent  film  production  company,  or  which  is a sole
  proprietor of or a member of a partnership which  is  a  qualified  film
  production  company  or a qualified independent film production company,
  and which is subject to tax under articles nine-A or twenty-two of  this
  chapter,  shall  be  allowed  a credit against such tax, pursuant to the
  provisions referenced in subdivision (c) of this section, to be computed
  as hereinafter provided.
    (2) The amount of the credit shall be the product (or pro  rata  share
  of  the  product,  in  the  case of a member of a partnership) of thirty
  percent and the qualified production  costs  paid  or  incurred  in  the
  production  of  a  qualified  film,  provided  that:  (i)  the qualified
  production costs (excluding post  production  costs)  paid  or  incurred
  which   are  attributable  to  the  use  of  tangible  property  or  the
  performance of services at a qualified film production facility  in  the
  production  of  such qualified film equal or exceed seventy-five percent
  of the production  costs  (excluding  post  production  costs)  paid  or
  incurred  which  are attributable to the use of tangible property or the
  performance of services at  any  film  production  facility  within  and
  without  the  state  in  the production of such qualified film, and (ii)
  except with respect to a qualified independent film  production  company
  or  pilot,  at  least  ten  percent  of  the total principal photography
  shooting days spent in the production of such  qualified  film  must  be
  spent at a qualified film production facility. However, if the qualified
  production   costs   (excluding   post   production   costs)  which  are
  attributable to the use of  tangible  property  or  the  performance  of
  services  at  a  qualified film production facility in the production of
  such qualified film is less than three million dollars, then the portion
  of the qualified production costs attributable to the  use  of  tangible
  property  or  the  performance  of  services  in  the production of such
  qualified film outside of a qualified film production facility shall  be
  allowed  only  if  the shooting days spent in New York outside of a film
  production facility in the production of such qualified  film  equal  or
  exceed  seventy-five percent of the total shooting days spent within and
  without New York outside of a film production facility in the production
  of such qualified film. The credit shall be allowed for the taxable year
  in which the production of such qualified film is completed. However, in
  the case of a qualified film that receives funds from additional pool 2,
  no credit shall be claimed before the later of (1) the taxable year  the
  production  of  the  qualified film is complete, or (2) the taxable year
  that includes the last day of the allocation year for which the film has
  been allocated credit by the department of economic development. If  the
  amount  of the credit is at least one million dollars but less than five
  million dollars, the credit shall be claimed  over  a  two  year  period
  beginning  in  the first taxable year in which the credit may be claimed
  and in the next succeeding taxable year, with one-half of the amount  of
  credit  allowed  being claimed in each year. If the amount of the credit
  is at least five million dollars, the credit shall  be  claimed  over  a
  three  year  period  beginning  in  the  first taxable year in which the
  credit may be claimed and in the next two succeeding taxable years, with
  one-third of the amount of the credit  allowed  being  claimed  in  each
  year.
    (3)  No  qualified  production  costs used by a taxpayer either as the
  basis for the allowance of the credit provided for under this section or
  used in the calculation of the credit provided for  under  this  section
  shall  be  used  by  such  taxpayer  to  claim  any other credit allowed
  pursuant to this chapter.


   (4) (i) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this  subdivision,
  a  qualified  film  production  company  or  qualified  independent film
  production company, that has applied for credit under the provisions  of
  this  section, agrees as a condition for the granting of the credit: (A)
  to include in each qualified film distributed by DVD, or other media for
  the  secondary  market,  a  New  York  promotional video approved by the
  governor's office of motion picture and  television  development  or  to
  include  in  the  end  credits  of  each qualified film "Filmed With the
  Support of the New York State Governor's Office of  Motion  Picture  and
  Television  Development" and a logo provided by the governor's office of
  motion picture and television development, and (B) to  certify  that  it
  will  purchase  taxable  tangible  property  and  services,  defined  as
  qualified production costs pursuant to paragraph one of subdivision  (b)
  of  this  section,  only  from companies registered to collect and remit
  state and local sales and use taxes pursuant  to  articles  twenty-eight
  and twenty-nine of this chapter.
    (ii) On or after January first, two thousand twenty-three, a qualified
  film production company or qualified independent film production company
  that  has applied for credit under the provisions of this section shall,
  as a condition for the granting of the credit,  file  a  diversity  plan
  with the governor's office for motion picture and television development
  outlining   specific   goals   for   hiring  a  diverse  workforce.  The
  commissioner  of  economic  development  shall  promulgate   regulations
  implementing  the requirements of this paragraph, which, notwithstanding
  any provisions to the contrary in  the  state  administrative  procedure
  act, may be adopted on an emergency basis, to ensure compliance with the
  provisions  of  this paragraph. The governor's office for motion picture
  and television development  shall  review  each  submitted  plan  as  to
  whether  it  meets  the  requirements established by the commissioner of
  economic development, and shall verify that the  applicant  has  met  or
  made  good-faith  efforts  in  achieving these goals. The diversity plan
  also shall indicate whether the qualified  film  production  company  or
  qualified  independent  film  production  company  that  has applied for
  credit under the provisions of this section intends  to  participate  in
  training,  education,  and  recruitment  programs  that  are designed to
  promote and encourage the training and hiring in the film and television
  industry of New York  residents  who  represent  the  diversity  of  the
  State's population.
    (5)   For  the  period  two  thousand  fifteen  through  two  thousand
  thirty-four,  in  addition  to  the  amount  of  credit  established  in
  paragraph  two of this subdivision, a taxpayer shall be allowed a credit
  equal to (i) the product (or pro rata share of the product, in the  case
  of  a member of a partnership) of ten percent and the wages, salaries or
  other compensation constituting qualified production costs as defined in
  paragraph two of subdivision (b) of this section,  paid  to  individuals
  directly  employed by a qualified film production company or a qualified
  independent film production company  for  services  performed  by  those
  individuals  in  one  of  the  counties  specified  in this paragraph in
  connection with a qualified film with a minimum budget of  five  hundred
  thousand  dollars,  and  (ii)  the  product  (or  pro  rata share of the
  product, in the case of a member of a partnership) of  ten  percent  and
  the  qualified  production  costs  (excluding  wages,  salaries or other
  compensation) paid or incurred in the production  of  a  qualified  film
  where  the  property  constituting  such  qualified production costs was
  used, and the services constituting such qualified production costs were
  performed in  any  of  the  counties  specified  in  this  paragraph  in
  connection  with  a qualified film with a minimum budget of five hundred
  thousand dollars where the majority of  principal  photography  shooting


 days  in  the  production  of such film were shot in any of the counties
  specified in this paragraph. Provided, however, that the aggregate total
  eligible qualified production  costs  constituting  wages,  salaries  or
  other  compensation,  for  writers, directors, composers, producers, and
  performers shall not exceed forty percent of the aggregate sum total  of
  all  other  qualified  production costs. For purposes of the credit, the
  services must be performed and the property must be used in one or  more
  of  the  following  counties:  Albany,  Allegany,  Broome,  Cattaraugus,
  Cayuga, Chautauqua,  Chemung,  Chenango,  Clinton,  Columbia,  Cortland,
  Delaware,  Dutchess,  Erie,  Essex,  Franklin,  Fulton, Genesee, Greene,
  Hamilton,  Herkimer,  Jefferson,  Lewis,  Livingston,  Madison,  Monroe,
  Montgomery, Niagara, Oneida, Onondaga, Ontario, Orange, Orleans, Oswego,
  Otsego,  Putnam, Rensselaer, Saratoga, Schenectady, Schoharie, Schuyler,
  Seneca,  St.  Lawrence,  Steuben,  Sullivan,  Tioga,  Tompkins,  Ulster,
  Warren, Washington, Wayne, Wyoming, or Yates.
    (b)  Definitions.  As  used in this section, the following terms shall
  have the following meanings:
    (1) "Qualified production costs" means production costs  only  to  the
  extent  such  costs  are attributable to the use of tangible property or
  the performance of services within the state directly and  predominantly
  in  the  production  (including pre-production and post production) of a
  qualified film. In the case of an eligible relocated television  series,
  the term "qualified production costs" shall include, in the first season
  that  the  eligible  relocated television series is produced in New York
  after relocation, qualified relocation costs.  Provided,  however,  that
  the  aggregate  total eligible qualified production costs for producers,
  writers, directors, performers (other than  background  actors  with  no
  scripted  lines),  and  composers  shall not exceed forty percent of the
  aggregate sum total of all other qualified production costs.
    (2) "Production costs" means any costs for tangible property used  and
  services   performed   directly  and  predominantly  in  the  production
  (including pre-production and post  production)  of  a  qualified  film.
  "Production  costs"  shall  not include (i) costs for a story, script or
  scenario to be used for a qualified film and (ii) wages or  salaries  or
  other  compensation  for  writers,  directors, composers, and performers
  (other than background actors with no  scripted  lines)  to  the  extent
  those  wages  or  salaries  or  other  compensation  exceed five hundred
  thousand dollars per individual. "Production  costs"  generally  include
  technical  and  crew  production  costs,  such  as expenditures for film
  production facilities, or any part  thereof,  props,  makeup,  wardrobe,
  film  processing,  camera,  sound recording, set construction, lighting,
  shooting, editing and meals, and shall include the  wages,  salaries  or
  other compensation of no more than two producers per qualified film, not
  to  exceed five hundred thousand dollars per producer, where only one of
  whom is the principal individual responsible for overseeing the creative
  and managerial process of production of the qualified film and only  one
  of  whom  is  the  principal  individual  responsible for the day-to-day
  operational management of production of the  qualified  film;  provided,
  however,  that such producers are not compensated for any other position
  on the qualified film by  a  qualified  film  production  company  or  a
  qualified independent film production company for services performed.
    (3)  "Qualified  film"  means  a feature-length film, television film,
  relocated television production, television pilot or television  series,
  regardless  of the medium by means of which the film, pilot or series is
  created or conveyed. For the purposes of the  credit  provided  by  this
  section only, a "qualified film" whose majority of principal photography
  shooting  days  in  the  production  of  the  qualified film are shot in
  Westchester, Rockland, Nassau, or Suffolk county or any of the five  New


 York City boroughs shall have a minimum budget of one million dollars. A
  "qualified  film", whose majority of principal photography shooting days
  in the production of the qualified film are shot in any other county  of
  the  state  than  those  listed  in  the preceding sentence shall have a
  minimum budget of two hundred fifty thousand dollars.  "Qualified  film"
  shall  not  include:  (i)  a  documentary  film, news or current affairs
  program, interview or talk program, "how-to" (i.e., instructional)  film
  or  program,  film  or  program  consisting  primarily of stock footage,
  sporting event or sporting program, game show, award ceremony,  film  or
  program  intended  primarily  for industrial, corporate or institutional
  end-users, fundraising film or program,  daytime  drama  (i.e.,  daytime
  "soap  opera"),  commercials,  music videos or "reality" program; (ii) a
  production for which records are required under section  2257  of  title
  18,  United  States code, to be maintained with respect to any performer
  in such production (reporting of books,  films,  etc.  with  respect  to
  sexually  explicit  conduct); or (iii) other than a relocated television
  production, a television series commonly known as variety entertainment,
  variety sketch and variety talk, i.e.,  a  program  with  components  of
  improvisational  or scripted content (monologues, sketches, interviews),
  either exclusively or in combination with other  entertainment  elements
  such  as musical performances, dancing, cooking, crafts, pranks, stunts,
  and games and which  may  be  further  defined  in  regulations  of  the
  commissioner  of  economic  development. However, a qualified film shall
  include a television series as described in subparagraph (iii)  of  this
  paragraph  only  if  an  application  for  such  series  has been deemed
  conditionally eligible for the tax credit under this  section  prior  to
  April  first,  two  thousand  twenty,  such series remains in continuous
  production for each season, and an annual application for each season of
  such series is continually submitted for such series after April  first,
  two  thousand  twenty. A series that changes either or both the title of
  the series or the  principal  cast  prior  to  March  thirty-first,  two
  thousand  twenty-three,  shall  be  considered  to  remain in continuous
  production for each season,  provided  the  series  films  at  the  same
  location  as  prior seasons, is produced by the same entity, and retains
  at least eighty percent of the staff from the prior season.
    (4) "Film production facility" shall mean a building and/or complex of
  buildings and their improvements and associated back-lot  facilities  in
  which  films  are  or  are  intended  to be regularly produced and which
  contain at least one sound stage,  provided,  however,  that  an  armory
  owned  by  the state or city of New York located in the city of New York
  shall not be considered to be a "film  production  facility"  unless  it
  meets  the  criteria  contained in paragraph five of this subdivision or
  unless such facility is used by a qualified independent film  production
  company.
    (5)  "Qualified film production facility" shall mean a film production
  facility in the state, which contains at least one sound stage having  a
  minimum  of  seven  thousand square feet of contiguous production space,
  provided,  however,  that  except  with  respect  to  a  qualified  film
  production   facility   being  used  by  a  qualified  independent  film
  production company: (i) a film production facility in the  city  of  New
  York  must  contain  at  least one sound stage having a minimum of seven
  thousand square feet of contiguous production space that is sound  proof
  with a Noise Criteria ("NC") of 30 or better, has sufficient heating and
  air  conditioning  for shooting without the need for supplemental units,
  incorporates a permanent grid and sufficient built-in  electric  service
  for  shooting without the need for generators, and is column-free with a
  clear height of at least sixteen  feet  under  the  permanent  grid  for
  facilities constructed on or after January first, two thousand nineteen,


 and  at  least  twelve  feet  under  the  permanent  grid for facilities
  constructed before January first, two thousand  nineteen;  and  (ii)  an
  armory owned by the state or city of New York located in the city of New
  York  that  does  not  satisfy  the criteria of subparagraph (i) of this
  paragraph shall be treated as a qualified film production facility  upon
  certification  by the governor's office of motion picture and television
  development of a petition submitted to that office by a  qualified  film
  production  company  establishing  that  no  qualified  film  production
  facility is available in the city of  New  York  that  has  stage  space
  available  for  shooting  such  company's  film.  Such petition shall be
  submitted no later than ninety days prior  to  the  start  of  principal
  photography  for  the qualified film and the governor's office of motion
  picture and television development shall have ten  days  to  certify  or
  reject the petition. A stage will be deemed unavailable if consideration
  has  been paid for its use or such stage is currently under an agreement
  with an option for use and, in either circumstance, such period  of  use
  includes the petitioner's estimated start date of principal photography.
    (6) "Qualified film production company" is a corporation, partnership,
  limited  partnership,  or  other  entity  or  individual which or who is
  principally engaged in the production of a qualified film  and  controls
  the qualified film during production.
    (7)  "Qualified independent film production company" is a corporation,
  partnership, limited partnership, or other entity or individual, that or
  who (i) is principally engaged in the production  of  a  qualified  film
  with  a maximum budget of fifteen million dollars, and (ii) controls the
  qualified film during production, and (iii) either  is  not  a  publicly
  traded  entity, or no more than five percent of the beneficial ownership
  of which is owned, directly or indirectly, by a publicly traded entity.
    (8) "Relocated television production" shall mean, notwithstanding  the
  limitations  in subparagraph (i) of paragraph three of this subdivision,
  a television production that is a talk or variety program that filmed at
  least two seasons outside the state prior to its first relocated  season
  in  New  York,  the  episodes are filmed before a studio audience of two
  hundred or more, and the relocated television production incurs  (i)  at
  least thirty million dollars in annual production costs in the state, or
  (ii) at least ten million dollars in capital expenditures at a qualified
  production facility in the state.
    (9)  "Eligible  relocated  television series" shall mean the first two
  years of a regularly occurring production intended to run in its initial
  broadcast, regardless of the medium or mode of its  distribution,  in  a
  series  of narrative and/or thematically related episodes, each of which
  has a running time of at least thirty minutes in  length  (inclusive  of
  commercial  advertisement  and  interstitial programming, if any), which
  had filmed a minimum of six episodes of the  television  series  outside
  the  state  immediately  prior  to  relocating  to  the state, where the
  television series had a total minimum budget of  at  least  one  million
  dollars  per  episode.  For  the  purposes  of  this  definition only, a
  television series produced by and for media services providers described
  as  streaming  services  and/or   digital   platforms   (and   excluding
  network/cable)  shall  mean a regularly occurring production intended to
  run in its initial release in a series of narrative and/or  thematically
  related episodes, the aggregate length of which is at least seventy-five
  minutes,  although the episodes themselves may vary in duration from the
  thirty minutes specified for network/cable production.
    (10) "Qualified relocation costs" means the costs incurred,  excluding
  wages,  salaries  and  other  compensation,  in the first season that an
  eligible relocated television series relocates  to  New  York  including
  such  costs  incurred  to transport sets, props and wardrobe to New York


 and other costs as determined by the department of economic  development
  to the extent such costs do not exceed six million dollars.
    (c)  Cross-references.  For  application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) article 9-A: section 210-B: subdivision 20.
    (2) article 22: section 606: subsection (gg).
    (d) Notwithstanding any  provision  of  this  chapter,  employees  and
  officers  of  the  governor's  office  of  motion picture and television
  development and the department shall be  allowed  and  are  directed  to
  share  and  exchange  information  regarding  the  credits  applied for,
  allowed, or claimed pursuant to  this  section  and  taxpayers  who  are
  applying  for credits or who are claiming credits, including information
  contained in or  derived  from  credit  claim  forms  submitted  to  the
  department  and  applications  for  credit  submitted  to the governor's
  office of motion picture and television development.
    (e) Allocation of credit. (1) The  aggregate  amount  of  tax  credits
  allowed  under  this  section,  subdivision  thirty-six  of  section two
  hundred ten and subsection (gg) of  section  six  hundred  six  of  this
  chapter in any calendar year shall be twenty-five million dollars in two
  thousand  four  and  two  thousand  five,  sixty  million dollars in two
  thousand six and two thousand seven, sixty-five million dollars  in  two
  thousand  eight,  seventy-five  million  dollars  in  two thousand nine,
  eighty-five million dollars in two thousand ten, ninety million  dollars
  in  two  thousand  eleven  and  two thousand twelve, and one hundred ten
  million dollars in two  thousand  thirteen.  Such  aggregate  amount  of
  credits  shall  be allocated by the governor's office for motion picture
  and television development among taxpayers in order  of  priority  based
  upon the date of filing an application for allocation of film production
  credit  with  such  office.  If  the  total  amount of allocated credits
  applied for in any particular year exceeds the aggregate amount  of  tax
  credits  allowed  for such year under this section, such excess shall be
  treated as having been applied for on the first day  of  the  subsequent
  year.
    (2)  The  aggregate  amount  of  tax  credits  allowed pursuant to the
  authority of subdivision (b) of section twelve  hundred  one-a  of  this
  chapter  in  any  calendar  year  shall  be  twelve million five hundred
  thousand dollars in two thousand four and two thousand five  and  thirty
  million  dollars  in  two thousand six through two thousand eleven. Such
  aggregate amount of credits shall be allocated by the mayor's office  of
  film,  theater  and  broadcasting  among  taxpayers in order of priority
  based upon the date of filing an  application  for  allocation  of  film
  production  credit  with  such  office. If the total amount of allocated
  credits applied for in any particular year exceeds the aggregate  amount
  of  tax  credits  allowed  for such year under this section, such excess
  shall be treated as having been applied for on  the  first  day  of  the
  subsequent year.
    (3) Additional pool 1 - The aggregate amount of tax credits allowed in
  subdivision  (a)  of  this  section  shall be increased by an additional
  three  hundred  fifty  million  dollars  in  two  thousand  nine.   This
  additional amount shall be allocated by the governor's office for motion
  picture  and  television  development among taxpayers in accordance with
  subdivision (a) of this section.
    * (4) Additional pool 2 - The aggregate amount of tax credits  allowed
  in  subdivision  (a) of this section shall be increased by an additional
  four hundred twenty  million  dollars  in  each  year  starting  in  two
  thousand ten through two thousand twenty-three and seven hundred million
  dollars  in  each  year starting in two thousand twenty-four through two
  thousand thirty-four, provided however, seven  million  dollars  of  the


 annual  allocation  shall  be  available  for the empire state film post
  production credit pursuant to section thirty-one of this article in  two
  thousand thirteen and two thousand fourteen, twenty-five million dollars
  of  the  annual  allocation shall be available for the empire state film
  post production credit pursuant to section thirty-one of this article in
  each  year  starting  in  two  thousand  fifteen  through  two  thousand
  twenty-three,  and  forty-five  million dollars of the annual allocation
  shall be available for the empire  state  film  post  production  credit
  pursuant  to section thirty-one of this article in each year starting in
  two thousand twenty-four through two thousand thirty-four.  This  amount
  shall  be  allocated  by  the  department  of economic development among
  taxpayers in accordance with subdivision (a) of  this  section.  If  the
  commissioner  of  economic  development  determines  that  the aggregate
  amount of tax credits available from additional pool 2  for  the  empire
  state  film  production  tax  credit have been previously allocated, and
  determines that the pending applications from  eligible  applicants  for
  the  empire  state  film  post production tax credit pursuant to section
  thirty-one of this article is insufficient to  utilize  the  balance  of
  unallocated  empire  state  film  post  production tax credits from such
  pool, the remainder, after such  pending  applications  are  considered,
  shall  be  made  available  for  allocation in the empire state film tax
  credit pursuant to this  section,  subdivision  twenty  of  section  two
  hundred  ten-B  and  subsection  (gg) of section six hundred six of this
  chapter. Also, if the commissioner of  economic  development  determines
  that  the aggregate amount of tax credits available from additional pool
  2 for the empire  state  film  post  production  tax  credit  have  been
  previously  allocated, and determines that the pending applications from
  eligible applicants for the empire  state  film  production  tax  credit
  pursuant  to  this  section  is  insufficient  to utilize the balance of
  unallocated film production tax credits from such pool, then all or part
  of the remainder, after such pending applications are considered,  shall
  be  made  available  for  allocation  for  the  empire  state  film post
  production credit pursuant to this section,  subdivision  thirty-two  of
  section two hundred ten-B and subsection (qq) of section six hundred six
  of  this  chapter.  The  department  of economic development must notify
  taxpayers of their allocation year and include the  allocation  year  on
  the certificate of tax credit. Taxpayers eligible to claim a credit must
  report   the  allocation  year  directly  on  their  empire  state  film
  production credit tax form for each year a credit is claimed and include
  a copy of the certificate with their  tax  return.  In  the  case  of  a
  qualified  film  that  receives  funds  from additional pool 2 where the
  taxpayer filed an initial application before April first,  two  thousand
  twenty-three,  no  empire  state film production credit shall be claimed
  before the later of (1) the taxable year the production of the qualified
  film is complete, or (2) the  taxable  year  immediately  following  the
  allocation  year  for  which  the  film has been allocated credit by the
  department of economic development. In the case of a qualified film that
  receives funds from additional  pool  2  where  the  taxpayer  filed  an
  initial  application on or after April first, two thousand twenty-three,
  no empire state film production credit shall be claimed before the later
  of (1) the  taxable  year  the  production  of  the  qualified  film  is
  complete,  or  (2)  the  taxable  year that includes the last day of the
  allocation year for which the film has  been  allocated  credit  by  the
  department of economic development.
    * NB Effective until the first of January next succeeding the date the
  department  of  economic  development provides notice to the legislative
  bill drafting commission of a determination pursuant to § 7  of  chapter
  683 of 2019


   * (4)  Additional pool 2 - The aggregate amount of tax credits allowed
  in subdivision (a) of this section shall be increased by  an  additional
  four  hundred  twenty  million  dollars  in  each  year  starting in two
  thousand ten through two thousand twenty-three and seven hundred million
  dollars  each  year  starting  in  two  thousand twenty-four through two
  thousand thirty-four, provided however, seven  million  dollars  of  the
  annual  allocation  shall  be  available  for the empire state film post
  production credit pursuant to section thirty-one of this article in  two
  thousand thirteen and two thousand fourteen, twenty-five million dollars
  of  the  annual  allocation shall be available for the empire state film
  post production credit pursuant to section thirty-one of this article in
  each  year  starting  in  two  thousand  fifteen  through  two  thousand
  twenty-three,  and  forty-five  million dollars of the annual allocation
  shall be available for the empire  state  film  post  production  credit
  pursuant  to section thirty-one of this article in each year starting in
  two thousand twenty-four  through  two  thousand  thirty-four.  Provided
  further,  five  million  dollars  of the annual allocation shall be made
  available for the television writers' and directors' fees  and  salaries
  credit  pursuant  to  section twenty-four-b of this article in each year
  starting in two thousand twenty through two thousand  thirty-four.  This
  amount  shall  be  allocated  by  the department of economic development
  among taxpayers in accordance with subdivision (a) of this  section.  If
  the  commissioner  of economic development determines that the aggregate
  amount of tax credits available from additional pool 2  for  the  empire
  state  film  production  tax  credit have been previously allocated, and
  determines that the pending applications from  eligible  applicants  for
  the  empire  state  film  post production tax credit pursuant to section
  thirty-one of this article is insufficient to  utilize  the  balance  of
  unallocated  empire  state  film  post  production tax credits from such
  pool, the remainder, after such  pending  applications  are  considered,
  shall  be  made  available  for  allocation in the empire state film tax
  credit pursuant to this  section,  subdivision  twenty  of  section  two
  hundred  ten-B  and  subsection  (gg) of section six hundred six of this
  chapter. Also, if the commissioner of  economic  development  determines
  that  the aggregate amount of tax credits available from additional pool
  2 for the empire  state  film  post  production  tax  credit  have  been
  previously  allocated, and determines that the pending applications from
  eligible applicants for the empire  state  film  production  tax  credit
  pursuant  to  this  section  is  insufficient  to utilize the balance of
  unallocated film production tax credits from such pool, then all or part
  of the remainder, after such pending applications are considered,  shall
  be  made  available  for  allocation  for  the  empire  state  film post
  production credit pursuant to this section,  subdivision  thirty-two  of
  section two hundred ten-B and subsection (qq) of section six hundred six
  of  this  chapter.  The  department  of economic development must notify
  taxpayers of their allocation year and include the  allocation  year  on
  the certificate of tax credit. Taxpayers eligible to claim a credit must
  report   the  allocation  year  directly  on  their  empire  state  film
  production credit tax form for each year a credit is claimed and include
  a copy of the certificate with their  tax  return.  In  the  case  of  a
  qualified  film  that  receives  funds  from additional pool 2 where the
  taxpayer filed an initial application before April first,  two  thousand
  twenty-three,  no  empire  state film production credit shall be claimed
  before the later of (1) the taxable year the production of the qualified
  film is complete, or (2) the  taxable  year  immediately  following  the
  allocation  year  for  which  the  film has been allocated credit by the
  department of economic development. In the case of a qualified film that
  receives funds from additional  pool  2  where  the  taxpayer  filed  an


 initial  application on or after April first, two thousand twenty-three,
  no empire state film production credit shall be claimed before the later
  of (1) the  taxable  year  the  production  of  the  qualified  film  is
  complete,  or  (2)  the  taxable  year that includes the last day of the
  allocation year for which the film has  been  allocated  credit  by  the
  department of economic development.
    * NB  Effective  on  the first of January next succeeding the date the
  department of economic development provides notice  to  the  legislative
  bill  drafting  commission of a determination pursuant to § 7 of chapter
  683 of 2019
    (f) (1) With regard to certificates of tax credit issued on  or  after
  January  first,  two  thousand  twenty,  the  commissioner  of  economic
  development shall reduce by one-quarter of one  percent  the  amount  of
  credit  allowed  to a taxpayer and this reduced amount shall be reported
  on a certificate of tax credit issued pursuant to this section  and  the
  regulations  promulgated  by the commissioner of economic development to
  implement this credit program. Provided, however,  for  certificates  of
  tax  credit issued on or after January first, two thousand twenty-three,
  the amount of credit shall be reduced by one-half of one percent allowed
  to the taxpayer.
    (2) By January thirty-first of each year, the commissioner of economic
  development shall report to the comptroller the  total  amount  of  such
  reductions of tax credit during the immediately preceding calendar year.
  On  or  before  March  thirty-first  of each year, the comptroller shall
  transfer without appropriations from the  general  fund  to  the  empire
  state  entertainment diversity job training development fund established
  under section ninety-seven-ff of the state finance law an  amount  equal
  to  the  total amount of such reductions reported by the commissioner of
  economic development for the immediately preceding calendar year.
    (3) Notwithstanding paragraph two of this subdivision,  the  following
  provisions  shall  apply with respect to reductions of tax credit in two
  thousand twenty. (i) The  commissioner  of  economic  development  shall
  report  to  the comptroller by June first, two thousand twenty the total
  amount of such reductions of tax credit during  the  period  of  January
  first,  two  thousand twenty through May fifteenth, two thousand twenty.
  On or before July first, two  thousand  twenty,  the  comptroller  shall
  transfer  without  appropriations  from  the  general fund to the empire
  state entertainment diversity job training development  fund  an  amount
  equal   to   the  total  amount  of  such  reductions  reported  by  the
  commissioner of economic development for the period  of  January  first,
  two  thousand twenty through May fifteenth, two thousand twenty. (ii) By
  January thirty-first,  two  thousand  twenty-one,  the  commissioner  of
  economic development shall report to the comptroller the total amount of
  such  reductions  of  tax credit during the period of May sixteenth, two
  thousand twenty through December thirty-first, two thousand  twenty.  On
  or  before  March thirty-first, two thousand twenty-one, the comptroller
  shall transfer without appropriations  from  the  general  fund  to  the
  empire  state  entertainment  diversity job training development fund an
  amount equal to the total amount of  such  reductions  reported  by  the
  commissioner  of  economic  development for the period of May sixteenth,
  two thousand twenty through December thirty-first, two thousand twenty.




   §  24.  Empire  state  film  production  credit.  (a) (1) Allowance of
  credit. A taxpayer which is a qualified film production  company,  or  a
  qualified  independent  film  production  company,  or  which  is a sole
  proprietor of or a member of a partnership which  is  a  qualified  film
  production  company  or a qualified independent film production company,
  and which is subject to tax under articles nine-A or twenty-two of  this
  chapter,  shall  be  allowed  a credit against such tax, pursuant to the
  provisions referenced in subdivision (c) of this section, to be computed
  as hereinafter provided.
    (2) The amount of the credit shall be the product (or pro  rata  share
  of  the  product,  in  the  case of a member of a partnership) of thirty
  percent and the qualified production  costs  paid  or  incurred  in  the
  production  of  a  qualified  film,  provided  that:  (i)  the qualified
  production costs (excluding post  production  costs)  paid  or  incurred
  which   are  attributable  to  the  use  of  tangible  property  or  the
  performance of services at a qualified film production facility  in  the
  production  of  such qualified film equal or exceed seventy-five percent
  of the production  costs  (excluding  post  production  costs)  paid  or
  incurred  which  are attributable to the use of tangible property or the
  performance of services at  any  film  production  facility  within  and
  without  the  state  in  the production of such qualified film, and (ii)
  except with respect to a qualified independent film  production  company
  or  pilot,  at  least  ten  percent  of  the total principal photography
  shooting days spent in the production of such  qualified  film  must  be
  spent at a qualified film production facility. However, if the qualified
  production   costs   (excluding   post   production   costs)  which  are
  attributable to the use of  tangible  property  or  the  performance  of
  services  at  a  qualified film production facility in the production of
  such qualified film is less than three million dollars, then the portion
  of the qualified production costs attributable to the  use  of  tangible
  property  or  the  performance  of  services  in  the production of such
  qualified film outside of a qualified film production facility shall  be
  allowed  only  if  the shooting days spent in New York outside of a film
  production facility in the production of such qualified  film  equal  or
  exceed  seventy-five percent of the total shooting days spent within and
  without New York outside of a film production facility in the production
  of such qualified film. The credit shall be allowed for the taxable year
  in which the production of such qualified film is completed. However, in
  the case of a qualified film that receives funds from additional pool 2,
  no credit shall be claimed before the later of (1) the taxable year  the
  production  of  the  qualified film is complete, or (2) the taxable year
  that includes the last day of the allocation year for which the film has
  been allocated credit by the department of economic development. If  the
  amount  of the credit is at least one million dollars but less than five
  million dollars, the credit shall be claimed  over  a  two  year  period
  beginning  in  the first taxable year in which the credit may be claimed
  and in the next succeeding taxable year, with one-half of the amount  of
  credit  allowed  being claimed in each year. If the amount of the credit
  is at least five million dollars, the credit shall  be  claimed  over  a
  three  year  period  beginning  in  the  first taxable year in which the
  credit may be claimed and in the next two succeeding taxable years, with
  one-third of the amount of the credit  allowed  being  claimed  in  each
  year.
    (3)  No  qualified  production  costs used by a taxpayer either as the
  basis for the allowance of the credit provided for under this section or
  used in the calculation of the credit provided for  under  this  section
  shall  be  used  by  such  taxpayer  to  claim  any other credit allowed
  pursuant to this chapter.


   (4) (i) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this  subdivision,
  a  qualified  film  production  company  or  qualified  independent film
  production company, that has applied for credit under the provisions  of
  this  section, agrees as a condition for the granting of the credit: (A)
  to include in each qualified film distributed by DVD, or other media for
  the  secondary  market,  a  New  York  promotional video approved by the
  governor's office of motion picture and  television  development  or  to
  include  in  the  end  credits  of  each qualified film "Filmed With the
  Support of the New York State Governor's Office of  Motion  Picture  and
  Television  Development" and a logo provided by the governor's office of
  motion picture and television development, and (B) to  certify  that  it
  will  purchase  taxable  tangible  property  and  services,  defined  as
  qualified production costs pursuant to paragraph one of subdivision  (b)
  of  this  section,  only  from companies registered to collect and remit
  state and local sales and use taxes pursuant  to  articles  twenty-eight
  and twenty-nine of this chapter.
    (ii) On or after January first, two thousand twenty-three, a qualified
  film production company or qualified independent film production company
  that  has applied for credit under the provisions of this section shall,
  as a condition for the granting of the credit,  file  a  diversity  plan
  with the governor's office for motion picture and television development
  outlining   specific   goals   for   hiring  a  diverse  workforce.  The
  commissioner  of  economic  development  shall  promulgate   regulations
  implementing  the requirements of this paragraph, which, notwithstanding
  any provisions to the contrary in  the  state  administrative  procedure
  act, may be adopted on an emergency basis, to ensure compliance with the
  provisions  of  this paragraph. The governor's office for motion picture
  and television development  shall  review  each  submitted  plan  as  to
  whether  it  meets  the  requirements established by the commissioner of
  economic development, and shall verify that the  applicant  has  met  or
  made  good-faith  efforts  in  achieving these goals. The diversity plan
  also shall indicate whether the qualified  film  production  company  or
  qualified  independent  film  production  company  that  has applied for
  credit under the provisions of this section intends  to  participate  in
  training,  education,  and  recruitment  programs  that  are designed to
  promote and encourage the training and hiring in the film and television
  industry of New York  residents  who  represent  the  diversity  of  the
  State's population.
    (5)   For  the  period  two  thousand  fifteen  through  two  thousand
  thirty-four,  in  addition  to  the  amount  of  credit  established  in
  paragraph  two of this subdivision, a taxpayer shall be allowed a credit
  equal to (i) the product (or pro rata share of the product, in the  case
  of  a member of a partnership) of ten percent and the wages, salaries or
  other compensation constituting qualified production costs as defined in
  paragraph two of subdivision (b) of this section,  paid  to  individuals
  directly  employed by a qualified film production company or a qualified
  independent film production company  for  services  performed  by  those
  individuals  in  one  of  the  counties  specified  in this paragraph in
  connection with a qualified film with a minimum budget of  five  hundred
  thousand  dollars,  and  (ii)  the  product  (or  pro  rata share of the
  product, in the case of a member of a partnership) of  ten  percent  and
  the  qualified  production  costs  (excluding  wages,  salaries or other
  compensation) paid or incurred in the production  of  a  qualified  film
  where  the  property  constituting  such  qualified production costs was
  used, and the services constituting such qualified production costs were
  performed in  any  of  the  counties  specified  in  this  paragraph  in
  connection  with  a qualified film with a minimum budget of five hundred
  thousand dollars where the majority of  principal  photography  shooting


 days  in  the  production  of such film were shot in any of the counties
  specified in this paragraph. Provided, however, that the aggregate total
  eligible qualified production  costs  constituting  wages,  salaries  or
  other  compensation,  for  writers, directors, composers, producers, and
  performers shall not exceed forty percent of the aggregate sum total  of
  all  other  qualified  production costs. For purposes of the credit, the
  services must be performed and the property must be used in one or  more
  of  the  following  counties:  Albany,  Allegany,  Broome,  Cattaraugus,
  Cayuga, Chautauqua,  Chemung,  Chenango,  Clinton,  Columbia,  Cortland,
  Delaware,  Dutchess,  Erie,  Essex,  Franklin,  Fulton, Genesee, Greene,
  Hamilton,  Herkimer,  Jefferson,  Lewis,  Livingston,  Madison,  Monroe,
  Montgomery, Niagara, Oneida, Onondaga, Ontario, Orange, Orleans, Oswego,
  Otsego,  Putnam, Rensselaer, Saratoga, Schenectady, Schoharie, Schuyler,
  Seneca,  St.  Lawrence,  Steuben,  Sullivan,  Tioga,  Tompkins,  Ulster,
  Warren, Washington, Wayne, Wyoming, or Yates.
    (b)  Definitions.  As  used in this section, the following terms shall
  have the following meanings:
    (1) "Qualified production costs" means production costs  only  to  the
  extent  such  costs  are attributable to the use of tangible property or
  the performance of services within the state directly and  predominantly
  in  the  production  (including pre-production and post production) of a
  qualified film. In the case of an eligible relocated television  series,
  the term "qualified production costs" shall include, in the first season
  that  the  eligible  relocated television series is produced in New York
  after relocation, qualified relocation costs.  Provided,  however,  that
  the  aggregate  total eligible qualified production costs for producers,
  writers, directors, performers (other than  background  actors  with  no
  scripted  lines),  and  composers  shall not exceed forty percent of the
  aggregate sum total of all other qualified production costs.
    (2) "Production costs" means any costs for tangible property used  and
  services   performed   directly  and  predominantly  in  the  production
  (including pre-production and post  production)  of  a  qualified  film.
  "Production  costs"  shall  not include (i) costs for a story, script or
  scenario to be used for a qualified film and (ii) wages or  salaries  or
  other  compensation  for  writers,  directors, composers, and performers
  (other than background actors with no  scripted  lines)  to  the  extent
  those  wages  or  salaries  or  other  compensation  exceed five hundred
  thousand dollars per individual. "Production  costs"  generally  include
  technical  and  crew  production  costs,  such  as expenditures for film
  production facilities, or any part  thereof,  props,  makeup,  wardrobe,
  film  processing,  camera,  sound recording, set construction, lighting,
  shooting, editing and meals, and shall include the  wages,  salaries  or
  other compensation of no more than two producers per qualified film, not
  to  exceed five hundred thousand dollars per producer, where only one of
  whom is the principal individual responsible for overseeing the creative
  and managerial process of production of the qualified film and only  one
  of  whom  is  the  principal  individual  responsible for the day-to-day
  operational management of production of the  qualified  film;  provided,
  however,  that such producers are not compensated for any other position
  on the qualified film by  a  qualified  film  production  company  or  a
  qualified independent film production company for services performed.
    (3)  "Qualified  film"  means  a feature-length film, television film,
  relocated television production, television pilot or television  series,
  regardless  of the medium by means of which the film, pilot or series is
  created or conveyed. For the purposes of the  credit  provided  by  this
  section only, a "qualified film" whose majority of principal photography
  shooting  days  in  the  production  of  the  qualified film are shot in
  Westchester, Rockland, Nassau, or Suffolk county or any of the five  New


 York City boroughs shall have a minimum budget of one million dollars. A
  "qualified  film", whose majority of principal photography shooting days
  in the production of the qualified film are shot in any other county  of
  the  state  than  those  listed  in  the preceding sentence shall have a
  minimum budget of two hundred fifty thousand dollars.  "Qualified  film"
  shall  not  include:  (i)  a  documentary  film, news or current affairs
  program, interview or talk program, "how-to" (i.e., instructional)  film
  or  program,  film  or  program  consisting  primarily of stock footage,
  sporting event or sporting program, game show, award ceremony,  film  or
  program  intended  primarily  for industrial, corporate or institutional
  end-users, fundraising film or program,  daytime  drama  (i.e.,  daytime
  "soap  opera"),  commercials,  music videos or "reality" program; (ii) a
  production for which records are required under section  2257  of  title
  18,  United  States code, to be maintained with respect to any performer
  in such production (reporting of books,  films,  etc.  with  respect  to
  sexually  explicit  conduct); or (iii) other than a relocated television
  production, a television series commonly known as variety entertainment,
  variety sketch and variety talk, i.e.,  a  program  with  components  of
  improvisational  or scripted content (monologues, sketches, interviews),
  either exclusively or in combination with other  entertainment  elements
  such  as musical performances, dancing, cooking, crafts, pranks, stunts,
  and games and which  may  be  further  defined  in  regulations  of  the
  commissioner  of  economic  development. However, a qualified film shall
  include a television series as described in subparagraph (iii)  of  this
  paragraph  only  if  an  application  for  such  series  has been deemed
  conditionally eligible for the tax credit under this  section  prior  to
  April  first,  two  thousand  twenty,  such series remains in continuous
  production for each season, and an annual application for each season of
  such series is continually submitted for such series after April  first,
  two  thousand  twenty. A series that changes either or both the title of
  the series or the  principal  cast  prior  to  March  thirty-first,  two
  thousand  twenty-three,  shall  be  considered  to  remain in continuous
  production for each season,  provided  the  series  films  at  the  same
  location  as  prior seasons, is produced by the same entity, and retains
  at least eighty percent of the staff from the prior season.
    (4) "Film production facility" shall mean a building and/or complex of
  buildings and their improvements and associated back-lot  facilities  in
  which  films  are  or  are  intended  to be regularly produced and which
  contain at least one sound stage,  provided,  however,  that  an  armory
  owned  by  the state or city of New York located in the city of New York
  shall not be considered to be a "film  production  facility"  unless  it
  meets  the  criteria  contained in paragraph five of this subdivision or
  unless such facility is used by a qualified independent film  production
  company.
    (5)  "Qualified film production facility" shall mean a film production
  facility in the state, which contains at least one sound stage having  a
  minimum  of  seven  thousand square feet of contiguous production space,
  provided,  however,  that  except  with  respect  to  a  qualified  film
  production   facility   being  used  by  a  qualified  independent  film
  production company: (i) a film production facility in the  city  of  New
  York  must  contain  at  least one sound stage having a minimum of seven
  thousand square feet of contiguous production space that is sound  proof
  with a Noise Criteria ("NC") of 30 or better, has sufficient heating and
  air  conditioning  for shooting without the need for supplemental units,
  incorporates a permanent grid and sufficient built-in  electric  service
  for  shooting without the need for generators, and is column-free with a
  clear height of at least sixteen  feet  under  the  permanent  grid  for
  facilities constructed on or after January first, two thousand nineteen,


 and  at  least  twelve  feet  under  the  permanent  grid for facilities
  constructed before January first, two thousand  nineteen;  and  (ii)  an
  armory owned by the state or city of New York located in the city of New
  York  that  does  not  satisfy  the criteria of subparagraph (i) of this
  paragraph shall be treated as a qualified film production facility  upon
  certification  by the governor's office of motion picture and television
  development of a petition submitted to that office by a  qualified  film
  production  company  establishing  that  no  qualified  film  production
  facility is available in the city of  New  York  that  has  stage  space
  available  for  shooting  such  company's  film.  Such petition shall be
  submitted no later than ninety days prior  to  the  start  of  principal
  photography  for  the qualified film and the governor's office of motion
  picture and television development shall have ten  days  to  certify  or
  reject the petition. A stage will be deemed unavailable if consideration
  has  been paid for its use or such stage is currently under an agreement
  with an option for use and, in either circumstance, such period  of  use
  includes the petitioner's estimated start date of principal photography.
    (6) "Qualified film production company" is a corporation, partnership,
  limited  partnership,  or  other  entity  or  individual which or who is
  principally engaged in the production of a qualified film  and  controls
  the qualified film during production.
    (7)  "Qualified independent film production company" is a corporation,
  partnership, limited partnership, or other entity or individual, that or
  who (i) is principally engaged in the production  of  a  qualified  film
  with  a maximum budget of fifteen million dollars, and (ii) controls the
  qualified film during production, and (iii) either  is  not  a  publicly
  traded  entity, or no more than five percent of the beneficial ownership
  of which is owned, directly or indirectly, by a publicly traded entity.
    (8) "Relocated television production" shall mean, notwithstanding  the
  limitations  in subparagraph (i) of paragraph three of this subdivision,
  a television production that is a talk or variety program that filmed at
  least two seasons outside the state prior to its first relocated  season
  in  New  York,  the  episodes are filmed before a studio audience of two
  hundred or more, and the relocated television production incurs  (i)  at
  least thirty million dollars in annual production costs in the state, or
  (ii) at least ten million dollars in capital expenditures at a qualified
  production facility in the state.
    (9)  "Eligible  relocated  television series" shall mean the first two
  years of a regularly occurring production intended to run in its initial
  broadcast, regardless of the medium or mode of its  distribution,  in  a
  series  of narrative and/or thematically related episodes, each of which
  has a running time of at least thirty minutes in  length  (inclusive  of
  commercial  advertisement  and  interstitial programming, if any), which
  had filmed a minimum of six episodes of the  television  series  outside
  the  state  immediately  prior  to  relocating  to  the state, where the
  television series had a total minimum budget of  at  least  one  million
  dollars  per  episode.  For  the  purposes  of  this  definition only, a
  television series produced by and for media services providers described
  as  streaming  services  and/or   digital   platforms   (and   excluding
  network/cable)  shall  mean a regularly occurring production intended to
  run in its initial release in a series of narrative and/or  thematically
  related episodes, the aggregate length of which is at least seventy-five
  minutes,  although the episodes themselves may vary in duration from the
  thirty minutes specified for network/cable production.
    (10) "Qualified relocation costs" means the costs incurred,  excluding
  wages,  salaries  and  other  compensation,  in the first season that an
  eligible relocated television series relocates  to  New  York  including
  such  costs  incurred  to transport sets, props and wardrobe to New York


 and other costs as determined by the department of economic  development
  to the extent such costs do not exceed six million dollars.
    (c)  Cross-references.  For  application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) article 9-A: section 210-B: subdivision 20.
    (2) article 22: section 606: subsection (gg).
    (d) Notwithstanding any  provision  of  this  chapter,  employees  and
  officers  of  the  governor's  office  of  motion picture and television
  development and the department shall be  allowed  and  are  directed  to
  share  and  exchange  information  regarding  the  credits  applied for,
  allowed, or claimed pursuant to  this  section  and  taxpayers  who  are
  applying  for credits or who are claiming credits, including information
  contained in or  derived  from  credit  claim  forms  submitted  to  the
  department  and  applications  for  credit  submitted  to the governor's
  office of motion picture and television development.
    (e) Allocation of credit. (1) The  aggregate  amount  of  tax  credits
  allowed  under  this  section,  subdivision  thirty-six  of  section two
  hundred ten and subsection (gg) of  section  six  hundred  six  of  this
  chapter in any calendar year shall be twenty-five million dollars in two
  thousand  four  and  two  thousand  five,  sixty  million dollars in two
  thousand six and two thousand seven, sixty-five million dollars  in  two
  thousand  eight,  seventy-five  million  dollars  in  two thousand nine,
  eighty-five million dollars in two thousand ten, ninety million  dollars
  in  two  thousand  eleven  and  two thousand twelve, and one hundred ten
  million dollars in two  thousand  thirteen.  Such  aggregate  amount  of
  credits  shall  be allocated by the governor's office for motion picture
  and television development among taxpayers in order  of  priority  based
  upon the date of filing an application for allocation of film production
  credit  with  such  office.  If  the  total  amount of allocated credits
  applied for in any particular year exceeds the aggregate amount  of  tax
  credits  allowed  for such year under this section, such excess shall be
  treated as having been applied for on the first day  of  the  subsequent
  year.
    (2)  The  aggregate  amount  of  tax  credits  allowed pursuant to the
  authority of subdivision (b) of section twelve  hundred  one-a  of  this
  chapter  in  any  calendar  year  shall  be  twelve million five hundred
  thousand dollars in two thousand four and two thousand five  and  thirty
  million  dollars  in  two thousand six through two thousand eleven. Such
  aggregate amount of credits shall be allocated by the mayor's office  of
  film,  theater  and  broadcasting  among  taxpayers in order of priority
  based upon the date of filing an  application  for  allocation  of  film
  production  credit  with  such  office. If the total amount of allocated
  credits applied for in any particular year exceeds the aggregate  amount
  of  tax  credits  allowed  for such year under this section, such excess
  shall be treated as having been applied for on  the  first  day  of  the
  subsequent year.
    (3) Additional pool 1 - The aggregate amount of tax credits allowed in
  subdivision  (a)  of  this  section  shall be increased by an additional
  three  hundred  fifty  million  dollars  in  two  thousand  nine.   This
  additional amount shall be allocated by the governor's office for motion
  picture  and  television  development among taxpayers in accordance with
  subdivision (a) of this section.
    * (4) Additional pool 2 - The aggregate amount of tax credits  allowed
  in  subdivision  (a) of this section shall be increased by an additional
  four hundred twenty  million  dollars  in  each  year  starting  in  two
  thousand ten through two thousand twenty-three and seven hundred million
  dollars  in  each  year starting in two thousand twenty-four through two
  thousand thirty-four, provided however, seven  million  dollars  of  the


 annual  allocation  shall  be  available  for the empire state film post
  production credit pursuant to section thirty-one of this article in  two
  thousand thirteen and two thousand fourteen, twenty-five million dollars
  of  the  annual  allocation shall be available for the empire state film
  post production credit pursuant to section thirty-one of this article in
  each  year  starting  in  two  thousand  fifteen  through  two  thousand
  twenty-three,  and  forty-five  million dollars of the annual allocation
  shall be available for the empire  state  film  post  production  credit
  pursuant  to section thirty-one of this article in each year starting in
  two thousand twenty-four through two thousand thirty-four.  This  amount
  shall  be  allocated  by  the  department  of economic development among
  taxpayers in accordance with subdivision (a) of  this  section.  If  the
  commissioner  of  economic  development  determines  that  the aggregate
  amount of tax credits available from additional pool 2  for  the  empire
  state  film  production  tax  credit have been previously allocated, and
  determines that the pending applications from  eligible  applicants  for
  the  empire  state  film  post production tax credit pursuant to section
  thirty-one of this article is insufficient to  utilize  the  balance  of
  unallocated  empire  state  film  post  production tax credits from such
  pool, the remainder, after such  pending  applications  are  considered,
  shall  be  made  available  for  allocation in the empire state film tax
  credit pursuant to this  section,  subdivision  twenty  of  section  two
  hundred  ten-B  and  subsection  (gg) of section six hundred six of this
  chapter. Also, if the commissioner of  economic  development  determines
  that  the aggregate amount of tax credits available from additional pool
  2 for the empire  state  film  post  production  tax  credit  have  been
  previously  allocated, and determines that the pending applications from
  eligible applicants for the empire  state  film  production  tax  credit
  pursuant  to  this  section  is  insufficient  to utilize the balance of
  unallocated film production tax credits from such pool, then all or part
  of the remainder, after such pending applications are considered,  shall
  be  made  available  for  allocation  for  the  empire  state  film post
  production credit pursuant to this section,  subdivision  thirty-two  of
  section two hundred ten-B and subsection (qq) of section six hundred six
  of  this  chapter.  The  department  of economic development must notify
  taxpayers of their allocation year and include the  allocation  year  on
  the certificate of tax credit. Taxpayers eligible to claim a credit must
  report   the  allocation  year  directly  on  their  empire  state  film
  production credit tax form for each year a credit is claimed and include
  a copy of the certificate with their  tax  return.  In  the  case  of  a
  qualified  film  that  receives  funds  from additional pool 2 where the
  taxpayer filed an initial application before April first,  two  thousand
  twenty-three,  no  empire  state film production credit shall be claimed
  before the later of (1) the taxable year the production of the qualified
  film is complete, or (2) the  taxable  year  immediately  following  the
  allocation  year  for  which  the  film has been allocated credit by the
  department of economic development. In the case of a qualified film that
  receives funds from additional  pool  2  where  the  taxpayer  filed  an
  initial  application on or after April first, two thousand twenty-three,
  no empire state film production credit shall be claimed before the later
  of (1) the  taxable  year  the  production  of  the  qualified  film  is
  complete,  or  (2)  the  taxable  year that includes the last day of the
  allocation year for which the film has  been  allocated  credit  by  the
  department of economic development.
    * NB Effective until the first of January next succeeding the date the
  department  of  economic  development provides notice to the legislative
  bill drafting commission of a determination pursuant to § 7  of  chapter
  683 of 2019


   * (4)  Additional pool 2 - The aggregate amount of tax credits allowed
  in subdivision (a) of this section shall be increased by  an  additional
  four  hundred  twenty  million  dollars  in  each  year  starting in two
  thousand ten through two thousand twenty-three and seven hundred million
  dollars  each  year  starting  in  two  thousand twenty-four through two
  thousand thirty-four, provided however, seven  million  dollars  of  the
  annual  allocation  shall  be  available  for the empire state film post
  production credit pursuant to section thirty-one of this article in  two
  thousand thirteen and two thousand fourteen, twenty-five million dollars
  of  the  annual  allocation shall be available for the empire state film
  post production credit pursuant to section thirty-one of this article in
  each  year  starting  in  two  thousand  fifteen  through  two  thousand
  twenty-three,  and  forty-five  million dollars of the annual allocation
  shall be available for the empire  state  film  post  production  credit
  pursuant  to section thirty-one of this article in each year starting in
  two thousand twenty-four  through  two  thousand  thirty-four.  Provided
  further,  five  million  dollars  of the annual allocation shall be made
  available for the television writers' and directors' fees  and  salaries
  credit  pursuant  to  section twenty-four-b of this article in each year
  starting in two thousand twenty through two thousand  thirty-four.  This
  amount  shall  be  allocated  by  the department of economic development
  among taxpayers in accordance with subdivision (a) of this  section.  If
  the  commissioner  of economic development determines that the aggregate
  amount of tax credits available from additional pool 2  for  the  empire
  state  film  production  tax  credit have been previously allocated, and
  determines that the pending applications from  eligible  applicants  for
  the  empire  state  film  post production tax credit pursuant to section
  thirty-one of this article is insufficient to  utilize  the  balance  of
  unallocated  empire  state  film  post  production tax credits from such
  pool, the remainder, after such  pending  applications  are  considered,
  shall  be  made  available  for  allocation in the empire state film tax
  credit pursuant to this  section,  subdivision  twenty  of  section  two
  hundred  ten-B  and  subsection  (gg) of section six hundred six of this
  chapter. Also, if the commissioner of  economic  development  determines
  that  the aggregate amount of tax credits available from additional pool
  2 for the empire  state  film  post  production  tax  credit  have  been
  previously  allocated, and determines that the pending applications from
  eligible applicants for the empire  state  film  production  tax  credit
  pursuant  to  this  section  is  insufficient  to utilize the balance of
  unallocated film production tax credits from such pool, then all or part
  of the remainder, after such pending applications are considered,  shall
  be  made  available  for  allocation  for  the  empire  state  film post
  production credit pursuant to this section,  subdivision  thirty-two  of
  section two hundred ten-B and subsection (qq) of section six hundred six
  of  this  chapter.  The  department  of economic development must notify
  taxpayers of their allocation year and include the  allocation  year  on
  the certificate of tax credit. Taxpayers eligible to claim a credit must
  report   the  allocation  year  directly  on  their  empire  state  film
  production credit tax form for each year a credit is claimed and include
  a copy of the certificate with their  tax  return.  In  the  case  of  a
  qualified  film  that  receives  funds  from additional pool 2 where the
  taxpayer filed an initial application before April first,  two  thousand
  twenty-three,  no  empire  state film production credit shall be claimed
  before the later of (1) the taxable year the production of the qualified
  film is complete, or (2) the  taxable  year  immediately  following  the
  allocation  year  for  which  the  film has been allocated credit by the
  department of economic development. In the case of a qualified film that
  receives funds from additional  pool  2  where  the  taxpayer  filed  an


 initial  application on or after April first, two thousand twenty-three,
  no empire state film production credit shall be claimed before the later
  of (1) the  taxable  year  the  production  of  the  qualified  film  is
  complete,  or  (2)  the  taxable  year that includes the last day of the
  allocation year for which the film has  been  allocated  credit  by  the
  department of economic development.
    * NB  Effective  on  the first of January next succeeding the date the
  department of economic development provides notice  to  the  legislative
  bill  drafting  commission of a determination pursuant to § 7 of chapter
  683 of 2019
    (f) (1) With regard to certificates of tax credit issued on  or  after
  January  first,  two  thousand  twenty,  the  commissioner  of  economic
  development shall reduce by one-quarter of one  percent  the  amount  of
  credit  allowed  to a taxpayer and this reduced amount shall be reported
  on a certificate of tax credit issued pursuant to this section  and  the
  regulations  promulgated  by the commissioner of economic development to
  implement this credit program. Provided, however,  for  certificates  of
  tax  credit issued on or after January first, two thousand twenty-three,
  the amount of credit shall be reduced by one-half of one percent allowed
  to the taxpayer.
    (2) By January thirty-first of each year, the commissioner of economic
  development shall report to the comptroller the  total  amount  of  such
  reductions of tax credit during the immediately preceding calendar year.
  On  or  before  March  thirty-first  of each year, the comptroller shall
  transfer without appropriations from the  general  fund  to  the  empire
  state  entertainment diversity job training development fund established
  under section ninety-seven-ff of the state finance law an  amount  equal
  to  the  total amount of such reductions reported by the commissioner of
  economic development for the immediately preceding calendar year.
    (3) Notwithstanding paragraph two of this subdivision,  the  following
  provisions  shall  apply with respect to reductions of tax credit in two
  thousand twenty. (i) The  commissioner  of  economic  development  shall
  report  to  the comptroller by June first, two thousand twenty the total
  amount of such reductions of tax credit during  the  period  of  January
  first,  two  thousand twenty through May fifteenth, two thousand twenty.
  On or before July first, two  thousand  twenty,  the  comptroller  shall
  transfer  without  appropriations  from  the  general fund to the empire
  state entertainment diversity job training development  fund  an  amount
  equal   to   the  total  amount  of  such  reductions  reported  by  the
  commissioner of economic development for the period  of  January  first,
  two  thousand twenty through May fifteenth, two thousand twenty. (ii) By
  January thirty-first,  two  thousand  twenty-one,  the  commissioner  of
  economic development shall report to the comptroller the total amount of
  such  reductions  of  tax credit during the period of May sixteenth, two
  thousand twenty through December thirty-first, two thousand  twenty.  On
  or  before  March thirty-first, two thousand twenty-one, the comptroller
  shall transfer without appropriations  from  the  general  fund  to  the
  empire  state  entertainment  diversity job training development fund an
  amount equal to the total amount of  such  reductions  reported  by  the
  commissioner  of  economic  development for the period of May sixteenth,
  two thousand twenty through December thirty-first, two thousand twenty.




   * § 24-b. Television writers' and directors' fees and salaries credit.
  (a)(1)  A  taxpayer  which  is a qualified film production company, or a
  qualified independent film  production  company,  or  which  is  a  sole
  proprietor  of  or  a  member of a partnership which is a qualified film
  production company or a qualified independent film  production  company,
  and  which is subject to tax under articles nine-A or twenty-two of this
  chapter, shall be allowed a credit against such  tax,  pursuant  to  the
  provisions referenced in subdivision (c) of this section, to be computed
  as hereinafter provided.
    (2)  The  amount of the credit shall be the product (or pro rata share
  of the product, in the case of a member  of  a  partnership)  of  thirty
  percent  and  the  qualified television writers' and directors' fees and
  salaries costs paid or incurred in the production of a  qualified  film,
  provided  that:  (i)  the  credit amount shall not exceed fifty thousand
  dollars for  qualified  television  writers'  and  directors'  fees  and
  salaries  claimed  for  such expenses incurred for the employment of any
  one  specific  writer  or  director  for  the  production  of  a  single
  television  pilot  or  a single episode of a television series, and (ii)
  the credit amount shall not exceed one hundred  fifty  thousand  dollars
  for  qualified  television  writers'  and  directors'  fees and salaries
  claimed for such  expenses  incurred  for  the  employment  of  any  one
  specific  writer  or director. In addition, under no circumstances shall
  the credit amount include fees or salaries for more  than  one  director
  per  episode.  The credit shall be allowed for the taxable year in which
  the production of such qualified film is completed.
    (3) No qualified television writers' and directors' fees and  salaries
  used  by  a taxpayer either as the basis for the allowance of the credit
  provided for pursuant to this section or used in the calculation of  the
  credit  provided pursuant to this section shall be used by such taxpayer
  to claim any other credit allowed pursuant to this chapter.
    (b) Definitions. As used in this section, the  following  terms  shall
  have the following meanings:
    (1) "Qualified film production company" is a corporation, partnership,
  limited  partnership,  or  other  entity  or individual whose project is
  conditionally eligible to receive a tax credit under section twenty-four
  of this article which or who is principally engaged in the production of
  a qualified film and controls the qualified film during production.
    (2) "Qualified independent film production company" is a  corporation,
  partnership,  limited  partnership,  or other entity or individual whose
  project is conditionally eligible to receive a tax credit under  section
  twenty-four  of  this article, that or who (i) is principally engaged in
  the production of a qualified film with  a  maximum  budget  of  fifteen
  million dollars, (ii) controls the qualified film during production, and
  (iii)  either  is  not  a  publicly  traded entity, or no more than five
  percent of the beneficial ownership  of  which  is  owned,  directly  or
  indirectly, by a publicly traded entity.
    (3)  "Qualified film" means a television film, television pilot and/or
  each episode of a television series, regardless of the medium  by  means
  of which the film, pilot or episode is created or conveyed.
    (4)  "Qualified  television writers' and directors' fees and salaries"
  means salaries or fees paid to a writer  or  director  who  receives  an
  on-air  credit, provided that in each case, such writer or director is a
  minority group member, as defined in subdivision eight of section  three
  hundred  ten  of  the  executive law, or a woman, and provided, further,
  that salaries or fees paid to any writer or director  who  is  a  profit
  participant in the qualified film shall not be eligible. Such fees shall
  not  include  relocation fees or hotel costs and per diems. In addition,
  such fees shall  not  include  salaries  or  fees  paid  to  writers  or


 directors  for  work  done  on  episodes  of television series that were
  deemed  conditionally  eligible  for  the  tax  credit   under   section
  twenty-four  of  this article prior to the tax year for which the credit
  is first available.
    (5)  "Writer"  means  a  person  who  is  engaged  by a qualified film
  production company or a qualified independent film production company to
  write television scripts, outlines, rewrites, stories, or teleplays  for
  television  series  and  who reports to work regularly in a writers room
  located in the state. For the  purposes  of  this  definition,  "writer"
  shall not include showrunners or executive producers.
    (6)  "Writers  room"  means  a  room or physical location in the state
  where writers  employed  by  a  qualified  film  production  company  or
  qualified  independent film production company write television scripts,
  outlines, rewrites, stories, or teleplays for television series utilized
  in a qualified film. A writers room is located in the state only  if  it
  is  in  use  in  the  state at least eighty percent of the time it is in
  existence.
    (7) "Director" means an individual employed or retained to direct  the
  production,  as the word "direct" is commonly used in the motion picture
  industry, who  would  be  classified  as  a  director  under  the  basic
  agreement  in  place  between  the  Association  of  Motion  Picture and
  Television Producers and the Director's Guild of America  and  who  must
  meet  the minimum criteria for work on qualified productions in New York
  state as established by the  commissioner  of  economic  development  by
  regulation.
    (8)  "Profit  participant"  is  an individual who has negotiated for a
  percentage  of  profits  generated   by   a   qualified   film.   Profit
  participation   does   not  include  monies  contractually  required  by
  collectively bargained agreements for  reuse  of  a  qualified  film  on
  different platforms over time.
    (c)  Cross-references.  For  application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) article 9-A: section 210-B: subdivision 54.
    (2) article 22: section 606: subsection (v).
    (d) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, (1)  employees  and
  officers  of  the  department of economic development and the department
  shall be allowed and are directed  to  share  and  exchange  information
  regarding  the credits applied for, allowed, or claimed pursuant to this
  section and taxpayers who are applying for credits or who  are  claiming
  credits, including information contained in or derived from credit claim
  forms  submitted  to  the  department and applications for certification
  submitted to  the  department  of  economic  development,  and  (2)  the
  commissioner   and  the  commissioner  of  the  department  of  economic
  development may release the names and addresses of any taxpayer claiming
  this credit and the  amount  of  the  credit  earned  by  the  taxpayer.
  Provided,  however,  if  a  taxpayer  claims this credit because it is a
  member of a limited liability company or a  partner  in  a  partnership,
  only  the  amount  of  credit earned by the entity and not the amount of
  credit claimed by the taxpayer may be released.
    (e) Maximum amount of credits. (1) The aggregate amount of tax credits
  allowed under  this  section,  subdivision  fifty-four  of  section  two
  hundred  ten-B  and  subsection  (v)  of section six hundred six of this
  chapter in any  calendar  year  shall  be  five  million  dollars.  Such
  aggregate  amount  of  credits  shall  be allocated by the department of
  economic development among taxpayers in order of priority based upon the
  date of filing an application for allocation of television writers'  and
  directors'  fees  and salaries credit with such department. If the total
  amount of allocated credits applied for in any particular  year  exceeds


 the  aggregate  amount  of  tax credits allowed for such year under this
  section, such excess shall be treated as having been applied for on  the
  first day of the subsequent year.
    (2)  The  commissioner  of economic development, after consulting with
  the commissioner, shall promulgate regulations to  establish  procedures
  for the allocation of tax credits as required by subdivision (a) of this
  section.  Such rules and regulations shall include provisions describing
  the application process,  the  due  dates  for  such  applications,  the
  standards  which  shall  be  used  to  evaluate  the  applications,  the
  documentation that will be provided to taxpayers to substantiate to  the
  department  the  amount  of tax credits allocated to such taxpayers, and
  such   other   provisions   as   deemed   necessary   and   appropriate.
  Notwithstanding  any  other  provisions  to  the  contrary  in the state
  administrative procedure act, such rules and regulations may be  adopted
  on an emergency basis.
    (f)  The  department  of  economic  development  shall  submit  to the
  governor, the temporary president of the senate, and the speaker of  the
  assembly,  an  annual  report  to be submitted on February first of each
  year  evaluating  the  effectiveness  of  the  television  writers'  and
  directors'  fees  and  salaries  tax  credit provided by this section in
  stimulating the growth of diversity in the film industry in  the  state.
  Such  report  shall  include,  but need not be limited to, the number of
  qualified film production companies and/or  qualified  independent  film
  production companies which received a television writers' and directors'
  fees  and  salaries credit, the credit amounts claimed by each qualified
  film production company and/or  qualified  independent  film  production
  company,  as  well  as  the  impact on employment and the economy of the
  state. Such report shall be based on data available from the application
  filed with the department of  economic  development  for  allocation  of
  television   writers'   and   directors'   fees  and  salaries  credits.
  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the  contrary,  the  information
  contained in the report shall be public information. The report may also
  include   any   recommendations   of   changes  in  the  calculation  or
  administration of the  credit,  and  any  other  recommendation  of  the
  commissioner   of  the  department  of  economic  development  regarding
  continuing modification, repeal of such act, and such other  information
  regarding  the  act  as  the  commissioner of the department of economic
  development may feel useful and appropriate.
    * NB Effective on the first of January next succeeding  the  date  the
  department  of  economic  development provides notice to the legislative
  bill drafting commission of a determination pursuant to § 6 sb 2 (b)  of
  chapter 683 of 2019




   * §  24-c. New York city musical and theatrical production tax credit.
  (a) (1) Allowance of credit. A taxpayer that is  a  qualified  New  York
  city  musical and theatrical production company, or is a sole proprietor
  of or a member of a partnership  that  is  a  qualified  New  York  city
  musical  and  theatrical  production company, and that is subject to tax
  under article nine-A or twenty-two of this chapter, shall be  allowed  a
  credit  against  such  tax,  pursuant  to  the provisions referred to in
  subdivision (d) of this section, and to be computed as provided in  this
  section.
    (2)  The  amount of the credit shall be the product (or pro rata share
  of the product, in the case of a member of a partnership) of twenty-five
  percent and the sum of the qualified production  expenditures  paid  for
  during  the  qualified New York city musical and theatrical production's
  credit period. Provided however that the amount  of  the  credit  cannot
  exceed  three hundred fifty thousand dollars per qualified New York city
  musical and theatrical production in a level two qualified New York city
  production facility and three million dollars  per  qualified  New  York
  city musical and theatrical production in a level one qualified New York
  city  production  facility.  In no event shall a qualified New York city
  musical and theatrical production be eligible for more than  one  credit
  under this program.
    (3)  No qualified production expenditures used by a taxpayer either as
  the basis for the allowance of the  credit  provided  pursuant  to  this
  section  or  used  in the calculation of the credit provided pursuant to
  this section shall be used by such taxpayer to claim  any  other  credit
  allowed pursuant to this chapter.
    (b)  Definitions.  As  used in this section, the following terms shall
  have the following meanings:
    (1) "Qualified New York city musical and theatrical production"  means
  a  for-profit live, dramatic stage presentation that, in its original or
  adaptive version, is performed in a level one or level two qualified New
  York city production  facility,  whether  or  not  such  production  was
  performed in a level one or level two qualified New York city production
  facility  prior  to  the  state disaster emergency pursuant to executive
  order two hundred two of two thousand twenty,  provided,  however,  that
  productions performing in a level two qualified New York city production
  facility  shall  have a production budget greater than or equal to seven
  hundred  fifty  thousand  dollars   and   incur   qualified   production
  expenditures  greater  than  or  equal  to  seven hundred fifty thousand
  dollars.
    (2) "Qualified production expenditure" means any  costs  for  tangible
  property  used  and services performed directly and predominantly in the
  production of a qualified musical and theatrical production  within  the
  state  of New York, including: (i) expenditures for design, construction
  and operation, including sets, special  and  visual  effects,  costumes,
  wardrobes,   make-up,  accessories  and  costs  associated  with  sound,
  lighting, and  staging;  (ii)  all  salaries,  wages,  fees,  and  other
  compensation  including related benefits for services performed of which
  the total allowable  expense  shall  not  exceed  two  hundred  thousand
  dollars per week; and (iii) technical and crew production costs, such as
  expenditures  for  a  level  one  or  level  two qualified New York city
  production facility, or any  part  thereof,  props,  make-up,  wardrobe,
  costumes,   equipment   used  for  special  and  visual  effects,  sound
  recording,  set  construction,  and   lighting.   Qualified   production
  expenditure  does  not  include  any  costs incurred prior to the credit
  period of a qualified New York city musical  and  theatrical  production
  company.


   (3)  (i) "Level one qualified New York city production facility" means
  a facility located within the (A) borough of Manhattan, bounded  by  and
  including  forty-first  street and fifty-fourth street and between sixth
  avenue and ninth avenue in which live theatrical productions are or  are
  intended  to  be  primarily  presented,  (B)  that contains at least one
  stage, a seating capacity of five hundred or more  seats,  and  dressing
  rooms,  storage  areas,  and other ancillary amenities necessary for the
  qualified musical and theatrical production, and (C) for which  receipts
  attributable  to  live  theatrical  productions  constitute seventy-five
  percent or more of gross receipts of the facility.
    (ii) "Level two qualified New York city production facility"  means  a
  facility  located  within  the  borough  of  Manhattan (A) in which live
  theatrical productions are or are intended to  be  primarily  presented,
  (B)  that contains at least one stage, a seating capacity of one hundred
  or more seats, and dressing rooms, storage areas,  and  other  ancillary
  amenities necessary for the qualified musical and theatrical production,
  and  (C)  for which receipts attributable to live theatrical productions
  constitute seventy-five  percent  or  more  of  gross  receipts  of  the
  facility.
    (4)  "Qualified  New  York  city  musical  and  theatrical  production
  company" is a corporation, partnership, limited  partnership,  or  other
  entity  or  individual  which  or  who  is  principally  engaged  in the
  production of a qualified musical or theatrical production that is to be
  performed in a level one or level two qualified New York city production
  facility.
    (5) (i) "The credit period of a qualified New York  city  musical  and
  theatrical  production company" is the period starting on the production
  start date and ending on the earlier of the date the  qualified  musical
  and  theatrical  production has expended sufficient qualified production
  expenditures to reach its credit cap, September thirtieth, two  thousand
  twenty-five  or the date the qualified musical and theatrical production
  closes.
    (ii) "The production start date" is the date  that  is  up  to  twelve
  weeks  prior  to  the  first  performance  of  the qualified musical and
  theatrical production.
    (6) "Production budget" means all estimated costs to  be  incurred  or
  paid before the first public appearance.
    (c)  The  credit shall be allowed for the taxable year beginning on or
  after January first, two thousand twenty-one but before  January  first,
  two   thousand  twenty-six.  A  qualified  New  York  city  musical  and
  theatrical production company shall claim the  credit  in  the  year  in
  which its credit period ends.
    (d)  Cross-references.  For  application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) article 9-A: section 210-B: subdivision 57;
    (2) article 22: section 606: subsection (mmm).
    (e) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, (i)  employees  and
  officers  of  the  department of economic development and the department
  shall be allowed and are directed  to  share  and  exchange  information
  regarding  the credits applied for, allowed, or claimed pursuant to this
  section and taxpayers who are applying for credits or who  are  claiming
  credits, including information contained in or derived from credit claim
  forms  submitted  to  the  department and applications for certification
  submitted to the  department  of  economic  development,  and  (ii)  the
  commissioner   and  the  commissioner  of  the  department  of  economic
  development may release the names and addresses  of  any  qualified  New
  York  city  musical  and theatrical production company entitled to claim
  this credit and the amount of the credit earned by such company.


   (f) Maximum amount of credits.    (1)  The  aggregate  amount  of  tax
  credits  allowed  under this section, subdivision fifty-seven of section
  two hundred ten-B and subsection (mmm) of section  six  hundred  six  of
  this  chapter  shall  be  three  hundred million dollars. Such aggregate
  amount  of  credits  shall  be  allocated  by the department of economic
  development among taxpayers based on the date of  first  performance  of
  the qualified musical and theatrical production.
    (2)  The  commissioner  of economic development, after consulting with
  the commissioner, shall promulgate regulations to  establish  procedures
  for  the  allocation  of  tax  credits as required by this section. Such
  rules  and  regulations  shall   include   provisions   describing   the
  application  process, the due dates for such applications, the standards
  that will be used to evaluate the applications, the  documentation  that
  will  be  provided  by  applicants to substantiate to the department the
  amount of qualified production expenditures of such applicants, and such
  other provisions as deemed necessary  and  appropriate.  Notwithstanding
  any  other  provisions  to  the  contrary  in  the  state administrative
  procedure act, such rules and regulations may be adopted on an emergency
  basis. In  no  event  shall  a  qualified  New  York  city  musical  and
  theatrical  production submit an application for this program after June
  thirtieth, two thousand twenty-five.
    (g) Any qualified New York  city  musical  and  theatrical  production
  company  that  performs  in  a level one or level two qualified New York
  city production facility and applies to  receive  a  credit  under  this
  section  shall  be  required  to:  (1)  participate  in a New York state
  diversity and arts job training program; (2) create and implement a plan
  to ensure that their production is available and accessible  for  low-or
  no-cost  to  low  income New Yorkers; and (3) contribute to the New York
  state council on the arts, cultural program fund an amount up  to  fifty
  percent  of  the  total credits received if its production earns ongoing
  revenue prospectively after the end of the  credit  period  that  is  at
  least equal to two hundred percent of its ongoing production costs, with
  such  amount  payable from twenty-five percent of net operating profits,
  such amounts payable on a monthly basis, up until such fifty percent  of
  the total credit amount is reached. Any funds deposited pursuant to this
  subdivision  may be used for arts and cultural grant programs of the New
  York state council on the arts  as  specified  in  subdivision  five  of
  section ninety-nine-ll of the state finance law.
    * NB Repealed January 1, 2026




   * §  25.  Disclosure  of certain transactions and related information.
  (a) (1) Every taxpayer, or person as defined in section  seven  thousand
  seven  hundred  one  of  the  internal  revenue code, required to file a
  disclosure statement with  the  internal  revenue  service  pursuant  to
  section  six  thousand  eleven  of  the  internal  revenue  code, or the
  regulations promulgated thereunder, related to a reportable  transaction
  or  a  listed transaction, as those terms are defined in such section or
  regulations, must attach a duplicate of such disclosure statement to the
  return or report required to be filed by such taxpayer or person for the
  taxable year under article nine, nine-A, twenty-two or  thirty-three  of
  this  chapter,  and  provide  such  other  information  related  to such
  disclosure as prescribed by the commissioner. Such disclosure  shall  be
  made  notwithstanding that one member of an affiliated group, as defined
  by section fifteen hundred four of the internal revenue code,  may  file
  such disclosure statement with the internal revenue service on behalf of
  its affiliates including such taxpayer or person.
    (2)  Every  taxpayer  or  such  person  who participates in a New York
  reportable  transaction  for  a  taxable   year   must   disclose   such
  participation  with  its  return  or  report  required to be filed under
  article nine, nine-A, twenty-two or thirty-three of this chapter for the
  taxable year in a form prescribed by the commissioner, and provide  such
  other  information  related  to  such  transaction  as prescribed by the
  commissioner. A New York reportable transaction is  a  transaction  that
  has the potential to be a tax avoidance transaction as determined by the
  commissioner.
    (3)  The  commissioner may in his discretion prescribe, by regulation,
  New York reportable transactions.
    (4) Provided the commissioner has prescribed regulations  pursuant  to
  paragraph  three  of  this subdivision the commissioner is authorized to
  designate specific transactions that are the same as,  or  substantially
  similar  to, transactions that the commissioner has determined to be tax
  avoidance transactions. The provisions  of  article  two  of  the  state
  administrative  procedure  act  shall  not apply to the designation of a
  specific transaction as a tax avoidance transaction; provided,  however,
  that  the commissioner shall designate any such transaction by notice or
  other form of published guidance.
    (b)(1) Every person required to make and file a  statement  or  return
  pursuant  to  section  six  thousand  one hundred eleven of the internal
  revenue code  must  file  a  duplicate  of  such  statement  or  return,
  including all documentation submitted to the internal revenue service in
  connection  with  such statement or return, with the commissioner if any
  of the following conditions apply:
    (A) the person is organized in this state,
    (B) the person is doing business in this state,
    (C) the person is deriving income in this state, or
    (D) (i) the list required to be maintained by such person pursuant  to
  section  six  thousand  one  hundred twelve of the internal revenue code
  identifies or is required to identify a taxpayer subject  to  tax  under
  article nine, nine-A, twenty-two or thirty-three of this chapter, and
    (ii)  such  person  is  a  material advisor, as defined in section six
  thousand one hundred eleven of the internal revenue code,  who  provides
  any  material  aid,  assistance,  or  advice with respect to organizing,
  managing,  promoting,  selling,  implementing,  or  carrying   out   any
  reportable transaction.
    (2) Such duplicate statement or return must be filed within sixty days
  of the later of:
    (A)  the  date  required  for  filing the statement or return with the
  internal revenue service,


   (B) the date that any of the conditions described in paragraph (1)  of
  this subdivision first applies, or
    (C) ninety days after the enactment of this section.
    (c)  Every  person  who  is  required  to  maintain  a list of persons
  pursuant to section six thousand one  hundred  twelve  of  the  internal
  revenue code, or the regulations promulgated thereunder, must maintain a
  duplicate  of  such list if any of the conditions described in paragraph
  one of subdivision (b) of this section applies to such person  and  must
  furnish  a  copy  thereof  to  the commissioner within twenty days after
  written request is made for such list by the commissioner.
    (d) Every person required by this section to disclose any transaction,
  file any duplicate  return,  or  maintain  any  list  shall  retain  all
  relevant  correspondence,  memoranda,  notes, valuation studies, meeting
  minutes, spreadsheets, models, opinions, records required to be retained
  pursuant to section six thousand eleven of the internal revenue code, or
  the  regulations  promulgated  thereunder,  and  all  other  records  or
  documents  related  to  the  disclosure,  filing  and  list  maintenance
  requirements  of  this  section  for  six  years  and  must  make   such
  information  available  for inspection by the commissioner in connection
  with any examination.
    (e) The filing, disclosure and retention requirements of this  section
  shall  be  in  addition  to  any  other  filing, disclosure or retention
  requirements, general or specific, provided by law. The commissioner may
  require electronic filing  or  disclosure  of  any  or  all  submissions
  required  under  this  section,  shall  have  the authority to prescribe
  whether a signature, including an electronic signature, is  required  on
  any  or  all filings or disclosures under this section. If an electronic
  signature is so required, it shall be in  a  form  consistent  with  the
  provisions  of  the  electronic  signatures and records act of the state
  technology law.
    (f)(1) The penalties imposed for a violation  of  subdivision  (a)  of
  this  section  are  contained  in  subsection (x) of section six hundred
  eighty-five and subsection (p) of section one  thousand  eighty-five  of
  this chapter.
    (2)  The  penalties imposed for a violation of subdivision (b) of this
  section  are  contained  in  subsection  (y)  of  section  six   hundred
  eighty-five  and  subsection  (q) of section one thousand eighty-five of
  this chapter.
    (3) The penalties imposed for a violation of subdivision (c)  of  this
  section   are  contained  in  subsection  (z)  of  section  six  hundred
  eighty-five and subsection (r) of section one  thousand  eighty-five  of
  this chapter.
    * NB Repealed July 1, 2024




   §  26.  Security  training  tax  credit.    (a) Allowance of credit. A
  taxpayer, which is subject to tax under article nine, nine-A, twenty-two
  or thirty-three of this chapter and which is a qualified building owner,
  shall be allowed a credit against such tax. The  amount  of  the  credit
  allowed  under  this  section  shall  equal  the  sum  of  the number of
  qualified security  officers  providing  protection  to  a  building  or
  buildings  owned  by  the taxpayer multiplied by three thousand dollars.
  Provided, however, that in the case of a worker not so  employed  for  a
  full  year,  such amount shall be prorated to reflect the length of such
  employment under regulations of the commissioner.
    (b) Definitions. As used in this section, the  following  terms  shall
  have the following meanings:
    (1)  "Qualified  building owner" means a building owner whose building
  entrances, exits and common areas are protected by  security  personnel,
  licensed  under  article seven-A of the general business law, whether or
  not such security personnel are employed directly by the building  owner
  or indirectly through a contractor.
    (2)   "Qualified  security  training  program"  means  a  program  for
  residential and commercial building security officers which is  designed
  to:   improve  observation,  detection  and  reporting  skills,  improve
  coordination with local police, fire and emergency services; provide and
  improve skills and working knowledge  of  advanced  security  technology
  including surveillance systems and access control procedures; require at
  least  forty hours of training including three hours of training devoted
  to terrorism awareness; and has been certified as  a  qualified  program
  and  approved  by  the  state  office  of  homeland security pursuant to
  section seven hundred nine of the executive law.
    (3) "Security officers"  means  security  officers,  registered  under
  article  seven-A of the general business law, responsible for the safety
  and security of tenants and occupants of commercial buildings over  five
  hundred  thousand  square  feet  whether employed directly by a building
  owner or indirectly through a contractor.
    (4) "Qualified security officers" are security officers who:  (i)  are
  employed  in  positions  which  are  under  a  legally  binding  written
  agreement, including  a  service  contract  between  qualified  building
  owners and security contractors, enforceable by employees, that provides
  for  a minimum hourly wage rate of at least nine dollars fifty cents for
  the calendar year two thousand five; nine dollars eighty-five cents  for
  the  calendar  year  two thousand six; and ten dollars eighty-five cents
  for the calendar year two thousand seven and thereafter; and  (ii)  have
  completed  a  qualified  security  training program as set forth in this
  section.
    (c) Scope of credit. The credit provided for  in  subdivision  (a)  of
  this  section  shall  be  allowed  for  any  taxable year in which costs
  relating to security personnel are paid or incurred.
    (d) Credit certification. Upon application by a  taxpayer,  the  state
  office  of  homeland security may issue a credit certification where the
  taxpayers meet the  standards  established  in  paragraph  two  of  this
  subdivision   and   have   demonstrated  that  they  have  provided  the
  appropriate training, or, within the year, will provide the  appropriate
  training to all employees for whom they will claim the credit.
    (e)  The  director  of the office of homeland security in consultation
  with the commissioner of taxation and finance,  shall  promulgate  rules
  and regulations necessary to implement this program.
    (f)  Cross-references.  For  application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) article 9: section 187-n.
    (2) article 9-A: section 210-B: subdivision 21.


   (3) article 22: section 606: subsection (ii).
    (4) article 33: section 1511: subdivision (x).




   §  27.  Suspension of tax-exempt status of terrorist organizations. 1.
  An organization that is removed from the tax-exempt  organizations  list
  by  the  internal  revenue service pursuant to subsection (p) of section
  501 of title 26 of the United States Code shall not be exempt  from  any
  tax,  fee  or  other imposition administered by the commissioner, and it
  shall also not be an exempt  organization  with  respect  to  any  sale,
  transfer or assignment, beginning on the later of November eleventh, two
  thousand  three, or the date that the internal revenue service publishes
  revocation of the organization's tax-exempt status. In the case  of  any
  personal  income or corporate franchise tax imposed under or pursuant to
  the authority of this chapter, such revocation of  exempt  status  shall
  apply  with  respect  to  the  entire  taxable year in which the date of
  revocation occurs and to subsequent taxable years.
    2. An organization whose tax-exempt status has been  revoked  pursuant
  to  subdivision one of this section and whose tax-exempt status is later
  restored by the internal revenue service shall be required to  submit  a
  new  application  or applications and be approved before any such status
  shall be restored with respect to any such tax, fee or other  imposition
  administered by the commissioner.
    3.  An  organization  whose tax-exempt status is suspended pursuant to
  subdivision one of this section shall  have  the  right  to  appeal  the
  determination  using  the  procedure prescribed by article forty of this
  chapter or otherwise prescribed pursuant to this chapter, provided  that
  the  organization  cannot challenge the merits of the determination made
  by the internal revenue service.
    4. If an organization makes a sale of property or services on or after
  the date its exempt status has been revoked  under  subdivision  one  of
  this  section, such sale shall be taxable; and the organization shall be
  required to collect, pay or pay over any tax due on any such sale on  or
  after  such  date. If such organization fails to collect tax on any such
  sale, the purchaser shall owe any tax due and shall pay it  directly  to
  the  commissioner  in accordance with applicable law; provided, however,
  that, if such purchaser does not have knowledge that such organization's
  exempt status has been revoked, then such purchaser shall not be  liable
  for  any penalty or interest for failing to file a return or to pay such
  tax if such purchaser files such a return and pays such tax  due  within
  thirty  days of the date that such purchaser learns that the tax is owed
  on such purchase.




   * §  28.  Empire  state commercial production credit. (a) Allowance of
  credit.   (1) A taxpayer which  is  a  qualified  commercial  production
  company,  or  which  is  a  sole  proprietor  of  a qualified commercial
  production company, and which is subject to tax under article nine-A  or
  twenty-two  of this chapter, shall be allowed a credit against such tax,
  pursuant to  the  provisions  referenced  in  subdivision  (c)  of  this
  section,  to be computed as provided in this section. Provided, however,
  to be eligible for such credit, at least  seventy-five  percent  of  the
  production  costs  (excluding  post  production  costs) paid or incurred
  directly and predominantly in the actual filming  or  recording  of  the
  qualified  commercial  must be costs incurred in New York state. The tax
  credit allowed pursuant to this section shall  apply  to  taxable  years
  beginning before January first, two thousand twenty-nine.
    (2)  The state has annually seven million dollars in total tax credits
  to disburse to all eligible commercial production companies.  The  seven
  million  dollars  in  total  tax credits shall be allocated according to
  subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this paragraph:
    (i) The state annually will disburse four million of the  total  seven
  million  in tax credits to all eligible production companies who film or
  record  qualified   commercials   within   the   metropolitan   commuter
  transportation  district  as defined in section twelve hundred sixty-two
  of the public authorities law. The amount of the  credit  shall  be  the
  product  (or pro rata share of the product, in the case of a member of a
  partnership) of twenty percent of the qualified production costs paid or
  incurred in the production of a qualified commercial, provided that  the
  qualified  production costs paid or incurred are attributable to the use
  of tangible property or the performance of services within the state  in
  the  production  of  such  qualified commercial. To be eligible for said
  credit the total qualified production costs of  a  qualified  production
  company  must  be  greater  than  five  hundred  thousand dollars in the
  aggregate during the calendar year.  Such  credit  will  be  applied  to
  qualified  production costs exceeding five hundred thousand dollars in a
  calendar year.
    (ii) The state annually will disburse three million of the total seven
  million in tax credits to all eligible production companies who film  or
  record  a  qualified  commercial  outside  of  the metropolitan commuter
  transportation district as defined in section twelve  hundred  sixty-two
  of  the  public  authorities law; provided, however, that if, after July
  thirty-first the state reviews all applications from eligible production
  companies who film or record  a  qualified  commercial  outside  of  the
  metropolitan  commuter  district  for  a  given year, tax credits remain
  unallocated under this subparagraph, those credits shall be allotted  to
  the  credits  set  forth  in  subparagraph (i) of this paragraph for use
  consistent with the purposes of such subparagraph.  The  amount  of  the
  credit  shall  be  the product (or pro rata share of the product, in the
  case of a member of a partnership) of thirty percent  of  the  qualified
  production  costs  paid  or  incurred  in  the production of a qualified
  commercial,  provided  that  the  qualified  production  costs  paid  or
  incurred  are  attributable  to  the  use  of  tangible  property or the
  performance of services within the  state  in  the  production  of  such
  qualified commercial. To be eligible for said credit the total qualified
  production  costs of a qualified production company must be greater than
  one hundred thousand dollars in the aggregate during the calendar  year.
  Such  credit  will  be  applied  to  all qualified production costs in a
  calendar year.
    (3) No qualified production costs used by a  taxpayer  either  as  the
  basis for the allowance of the credit provided for under this section or
  used  in  the  calculation of the credit provided for under this section


 shall be used by  such  taxpayer  to  claim  any  other  credit  allowed
  pursuant to this chapter.
    (4)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section to the contrary, a
  corporation or partnership, which otherwise  qualifies  as  a  qualified
  commercial  production  company,  and  is  similar  in  operation and in
  ownership to a  business  entity  or  entities  taxable,  or  previously
  taxable,   under   section  one  hundred  eighty-three  or  one  hundred
  eighty-four or former section one hundred eighty-five of  article  nine;
  article  nine-A or thirty-three of this chapter or which would have been
  subject to tax under article  twenty-three  of  this  chapter  (as  such
  article  was  in  effect  on  January first, nineteen hundred eighty) or
  which would have been subject to tax under article  thirty-two  of  this
  chapter  (as  such  article  was in effect on December thirty-first, two
  thousand fourteen) or the income or losses of which is or was includable
  under article twenty-two of this chapter shall not be deemed  a  new  or
  separate  business, and therefore shall not be eligible for empire state
  commercial production benefits,  if  it  was  not  formed  for  a  valid
  business  purpose, as such term is defined in clause (D) of subparagraph
  one of paragraph (o) of subdivision nine of section two hundred eight of
  this chapter and was formed  solely  to  gain  empire  state  commercial
  production credit benefits.
    (b)  Definitions.  As  used in this section, the following terms shall
  have the following meanings:
    (1) "Qualified production costs" means production costs  only  to  the
  extent  such  costs  are attributable to the use of tangible property or
  the performance of services within the state directly and  predominantly
  in  the  production  (including pre-production and post-production) of a
  qualified commercial.
    (2) "Production costs" means any costs for tangible property used  and
  services   performed   directly  and  predominantly  in  the  production
  (including  pre-production   and   post-production)   of   a   qualified
  commercial.  "Production costs" shall not include (i) costs for a story,
  script or scenario to be used for a qualified commercial and (ii)  wages
  or  salaries  or  other  compensation  for writers, directors, including
  music directors, producers and performers (other than background  actors
  with  no  scripted  lines  who  are  employed by a qualified company and
  musicians). "Production costs"  generally  include  technical  and  crew
  production   costs,  such  as  expenditures  for  commercial  production
  facilities and/or location costs, or any part thereof, film,  audiotape,
  videotape   or  digital  medium,  props,  makeup,  wardrobe,  commercial
  processing,  camera,  sound  recording,   scoring,   set   construction,
  lighting,  shooting,  editing  and  meals. For purposes of this section,
  "post production costs" include the production of original content for a
  qualified  commercial  employing  techniques   traditionally   used   in
  post-production  for  visual  effects,  graphic  design,  animation, and
  musical composition. However,  where  the  commercial  consists  in  its
  entirety  of  techniques  such  as  visual  effects,  graphic design, or
  animation, such costs incurred in the production of the commercial, when
  occurring in New York, shall be deemed qualified  production  costs  for
  the  purposes  of  this  section.  Provided further, however, that "post
  production costs" shall not include the editing of  previously  produced
  content for a qualified commercial.
    (3)  "Qualified  commercial" means an advertisement of any length that
  is recorded on film, audiotape, videotape or digital medium in New  York
  for  multi-market  distribution  by  way  of radio, television networks,
  cable,  satellite,  motion  picture  theaters  or  internet.  "Qualified
  commercial"  shall  not  include  (i)  news  or current affairs program,
  interview or talk program, network promos, i.e.,  commercials  promoting


 television  series  or movies, "how-to" (i.e., instructional) commercial
  or program, commercial or program consisting entirely of stock  footage,
  trailers promoting theatrical films, sporting event or sporting program,
  game  show,  award ceremony, daytime drama (i.e., daytime "soap opera"),
  or "reality" program,  or  (ii)  a  production  for  which  records  are
  required  under  section  2257  of  title  18, United States code, to be
  maintained with respect to any performer in such  production  (reporting
  of books, commercials, etc. with respect to sexually explicit conduct).
    (4)  "Qualified  commercial  production  company"  is  a  corporation,
  partnership, limited partnership, or other entity or individual which or
  who is principally engaged in the production of a  qualified  commercial
  and  controls  the production of the qualified commercial and is not the
  distributor,  or  the  contracting  entity  for   production   of   such
  commercial,  nor  is  a  variable interest entity of such distributor or
  contracting entity.
    (c) The department of economic development shall submit, on or  before
  December  first  of  each  year,  to  the  governor, the director of the
  division of the budget, the temporary president of the senate,  and  the
  speaker  of the assembly an annual report including, but not limited to,
  the following information regarding the previous calendar year:
    (1) the total dollar amount of credits allocated, the name and address
  of each qualified commercial production company allocated credits  under
  this  section,  the  total amount of credits allocated to each qualified
  commercial production company, the total amount of qualified  production
  costs  and  production  costs  for  each qualified commercial production
  company, and the estimated  number  of  employees,  credit-eligible  man
  hours,   and   credit-eligible  wages  associated  with  each  qualified
  commercial production company allocated credits under this section;
    (2) for qualified commercial production companies that were  allocated
  credit  pursuant to subparagraph (i) of paragraph two of subdivision (a)
  of this section: the name  and  address  of  each  qualified  commercial
  production  company,  the  total dollar amount of credits allocated, the
  total  amount  of  credits  allocated  to  each   qualified   commercial
  production  company,  total  qualified  production  costs and production
  costs for each qualified production company, and the estimated number of
  employees,  credit-eligible  man  hours,   and   credit-eligible   wages
  associated with each qualified commercial production company that filmed
  or recorded a qualified commercial within the district;
    (3)  for qualified commercial production companies that were allocated
  credit pursuant to subparagraph (ii) of paragraph two of subdivision (a)
  of this section: the name  and  address  of  each  qualified  commercial
  production  company,  the  total dollar amount of credits allocated, the
  total  amount  of  credits  allocated  to  each   qualified   commercial
  production  company,  total  qualified  production  costs and production
  costs for each qualified production company, and the estimated number of
  employees,  credit-eligible  man  hours,   and   credit-eligible   wages
  associated with each qualified commercial production company that filmed
  or recorded a qualified commercial outside the district; and
    (4)  the  amount  of  credits  reallocated  to  all eligible qualified
  commercial  production  companies  pursuant  to  subparagraph  (ii)   of
  paragraph two of subdivision (a) of this section.
    (5) The report may also include any recommendations for changes in the
  calculation  or  administration of the credit, recommendations regarding
  continuing  modification  or  repeal  of  this  credit,  and  any  other
  information regarding this credit as may be useful and appropriate.
    (d)  Cross-references.  For  application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provision of this chapter:
    (1) article 9-A: section 210-B: subdivision 23.


   (2) article 22: section 606: subsection (jj).
    * NB There are 2 § 28's




   * §  28. Biofuel production credit. (a) General. A taxpayer subject to
  tax under article nine, nine-A or twenty-two of this  chapter  shall  be
  allowed  a credit against such tax pursuant to the provisions referenced
  in subdivision (d) of this section. The credit (or  pro  rata  share  of
  earned  credit  in the case of a partnership) for each gallon of biofuel
  produced at a biofuel plant on or after January first, two thousand  six
  shall  equal  fifteen cents per gallon after the production of the first
  forty thousand gallons per year presented to market.  The  credit  under
  this  section  shall  be  capped at two and one-half million dollars per
  taxpayer per taxable year for  up  to  no  more  than  four  consecutive
  taxable  years  per  biofuel  plant.  If  the taxpayer is a partner in a
  partnership or shareholder of a New York S  corporation,  then  the  cap
  imposed  by the preceding sentence shall be applied at the entity level,
  so that the aggregate credit allowed to all the partners or shareholders
  of each such entity in the taxable year does not exceed two and one-half
  million dollars. The tax credit allowed pursuant to this  section  shall
  apply  to  taxable  years  beginning  before January first, two thousand
  twenty.
    (b) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following  terms
  shall have the following meanings:
    (1)  "Biofuel"  means a fuel which includes biodiesel and ethanol. The
  term "biodiesel" shall mean a fuel comprised exclusively  of  mono-alkyl
  esters  of  long chain fatty acids derived from vegetable oils or animal
  fats, designated  B100,  which  meets  the  specifications  of  American
  Society  of  Testing  and  Materials  designation  D  6751-02.  The term
  "ethanol" shall mean ethyl alcohol manufactured in the United States and
  its territories and sold (i) for fuel use and which  has  been  rendered
  unfit  for  beverage use in a manner and which is produced at a facility
  approved by the federal bureau of alcohol, tobacco and firearms for  the
  production  of  ethanol  for  fuel, or (ii) as denatured ethanol used by
  blenders and refiners which has been rendered unfit  for  beverage  use.
  The  term  "biofuel" may also include any other standard approved by the
  New York state energy and research development authority.
    (2) "Biofuel plant" means a commercial facility located  in  New  York
  state at which one or more biofuels are produced.
    (c) Reporting requirements. A taxpayer wishing to claim a credit under
  this section shall annually certify to the commissioner (i) that biofuel
  produced  at the eligible biofuel plant meets all existing standards for
  biofuel and (ii) the amount of biofuel produced at the eligible  biofuel
  plant during a taxable year.
    (d)  Cross-references.  For  application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) Article 9: Section 187-c.
    (2) Article 9-A: Section 210-B, subdivision 24.
    (3) Article 22: Section 606, subsections (i) and (jj).
    * NB There are 2 § 28's




   * §  29.  Mandatory electronic filing and payment. (a) For purposes of
  this section, the following terms have the specified meanings:
    (1)  "Authorized  tax  document"  means  a  tax  document  which   the
  commissioner has authorized to be filed electronically, provided however
  that  any  return or report that includes one or more tax documents that
  cannot be filed electronically shall not be deemed to be  an  authorized
  tax document for purposes of this section.
    (2) "Electronic" means computer technology.
    (3)  "Original tax document" means a tax document that is filed during
  the calendar year for which that tax document is required  or  permitted
  to be filed.
    (4)   "Tax"  means  any  tax  or  other  matter  administered  by  the
  commissioner pursuant to this chapter or any other provision of law.
    (5) "Tax document" means  a  return,  report  or  any  other  document
  relating to a tax or other matter administered by the commissioner.
    (6)   "Tax   return  preparer"  means  any  person  who  prepares  for
  compensation, or who employs or engages one or more persons  to  prepare
  for  compensation,  any  authorized  tax  document. For purposes of this
  section, the term "tax return preparer" also includes a payroll service.
    (7) "Tax software" means any computer software  program  intended  for
  tax  return preparation purposes. For purposes of this section, the term
  "tax software"  includes,  but  is  not  limited  to,  an  off-the-shelf
  software  program  loaded  onto  a  tax  return preparer's or taxpayer's
  computer, an online tax preparation application, or  a  tax  preparation
  application hosted by the department.
    (b)  (1)  If  a  tax  return  preparer  prepared more than one hundred
  original tax documents during any calendar year beginning  on  or  after
  January  first,  two  thousand seven, and if, in any succeeding calendar
  year that tax return  preparer  prepares  one  or  more  authorized  tax
  documents  using  tax  software, then, for that succeeding calendar year
  and for each subsequent calendar year  thereafter,  all  authorized  tax
  documents   prepared   by   that  tax  return  preparer  must  be  filed
  electronically,  in  accordance  with  instructions  prescribed  by  the
  commissioner.
    (2)  If  a  tax  return preparer prepared authorized tax documents for
  more than ten different taxpayers during any calendar year beginning  on
  or  after  January  first, two thousand twelve, and if in any succeeding
  calendar year that tax return preparer prepares one or  more  authorized
  tax  documents  using  tax  software, then, for such succeeding calendar
  year and for each subsequent calendar year  thereafter,  all  authorized
  tax  documents  prepared  by  that  tax  return  preparer  must be filed
  electronically,  in  accordance  with  instructions  prescribed  by  the
  commissioner.
    (c) If a taxpayer does not utilize a tax return preparer to prepare an
  authorized tax document, but instead prepares that document itself using
  tax software, then all authorized tax documents prepared by the taxpayer
  using  tax  software  must  be  filed electronically, in accordance with
  instructions prescribed by the commissioner.
    (d) The commissioner may require tax liability  or  other  amount  due
  shown  on,  or  required  to  be  paid  with, an authorized tax document
  required to be filed electronically pursuant to subdivision (b)  or  (c)
  of this section to be paid by the taxpayer electronically, in accordance
  with instructions prescribed by the commissioner.
    (e) Failure to electronically file or electronically pay. (1) If a tax
  return   preparer   is   required   to  file  authorized  tax  documents
  electronically pursuant to subdivision (b) of  this  section,  and  that
  preparer  fails  to  file one or more of those documents electronically,
  then that preparer will be subject to a penalty  of  fifty  dollars  for


 each  failure  to electronically file an authorized tax document, unless
  it is shown that the failure is due to reasonable cause and not  due  to
  willful neglect.
    (2)  If  a  taxpayer is required to electronically file any authorized
  tax documents or electronically pay any tax liability  or  other  amount
  due  shown  on,  or required to be paid with, an authorized tax document
  required to be filed electronically pursuant to subdivision (b)  or  (c)
  of  this  section, and that taxpayer fails to electronically file one or
  more of those tax documents or electronically pay one or more  of  those
  liabilities  or other amounts due, then that taxpayer will be subject to
  a penalty of fifty dollars for each failure to electronically  file  any
  authorized  tax  document  or  electronically  pay any tax, unless it is
  shown that the failure is due to reasonable cause and not due to willful
  neglect. In addition, any taxpayer that fails to electronically file  an
  authorized  tax  document  for  any  tax  will be subject to the penalty
  imposed under the applicable article for the failure to file a return or
  report, whether a  paper  return  or  report  has  been  filed  or  not.
  Provided,   however,  that  this  subdivision  shall  not  apply  to  an
  individual taxpayer with respect to his or her  personal  tax  documents
  that are required by or pursuant to the authority of article twenty-two,
  thirty, thirty-A or thirty-B of this chapter.
    (3)  The  penalties provided for by this subdivision must be paid upon
  notice and demand, and will be assessed, collected and paid in the  same
  manner  as the tax to which the electronic transaction relates. However,
  if the electronic transaction relates to another matter administered  by
  the  commissioner, then the penalty will be assessed, collected and paid
  in the same  manner  as  prescribed  by  article  twenty-seven  of  this
  chapter.
    (4)  If a taxpayer or tax return preparer fails to electronically file
  an  authorized  tax  document  when  required  to  do  so  pursuant   to
  subdivision  (b)  or  (c)  of  this  section,  the taxpayer shall not be
  eligible to receive interest on any overpayment in accordance  with  the
  overpayment  provisions  of  this  chapter  until such document is filed
  electronically.   Provided, however, that  this  subdivision  shall  not
  apply  to an individual taxpayer with respect to his or her personal tax
  documents that are required by or pursuant to the authority  of  article
  twenty-two, thirty, thirty-A or thirty-B of this chapter.
    (f)  The  provisions  of sections nine and ten of this chapter are not
  affected by this section and will remain in full force and effect.
    (g) The commissioner  is  authorized  to  promulgate  any  regulations
  necessary to implement this section.
    * NB Effective until December 31, 2024
    * §  29.  Mandatory electronic filing and payment. (a) For purposes of
  this section, the following terms have the specified meanings:
    (1)  "Authorized  tax  document"  means  a  tax  document  which   the
  commissioner has authorized to be filed electronically.
    (2) "Electronic" means computer technology.
    (3)  "Original tax document" means a tax document that is filed during
  the calendar year for which that tax document is required  or  permitted
  to be filed.
    (4)   "Tax"  means  any  tax  or  other  matter  administered  by  the
  commissioner pursuant to this chapter or any  other  provision  of  law;
  provided,  however,  that  the  term  "tax"  does  not include the taxes
  imposed by, or  pursuant  to  the  authority  of,  articles  twenty-two,
  thirty, thirty-A or thirty-B of this chapter.
    (5)  "Tax  document"  means  a  return,  report  or any other document
  relating to a tax or other matter administered by the commissioner.


   (6)  "Tax  return  preparer"  means  any  person  who   prepares   for
  compensation,  or  who employs or engages one or more persons to prepare
  for compensation, any authorized tax  document.  For  purposes  of  this
  section, the term "tax return preparer" also includes a payroll service.
    (7)  "Tax  software"  means any computer software program intended for
  tax return preparation purposes. For purposes of this section, the  term
  "tax  software"  includes,  but  is  not  limited  to,  an off-the-shelf
  software program loaded onto  a  tax  return  preparer's  or  taxpayer's
  computer,  an  online  tax preparation application, or a tax preparation
  application hosted by the department.
    (b) If a tax return preparer prepared more than one  hundred  original
  tax  documents  during  any  calendar year beginning on or after January
  first, two thousand seven, and if, in any succeeding calendar year  that
  tax  return preparer prepares one or more authorized tax documents using
  tax software, then, for that  succeeding  calendar  year  and  for  each
  subsequent  calendar  year  thereafter,  all  authorized  tax  documents
  prepared by that tax return preparer must be  filed  electronically,  in
  accordance with instructions prescribed by the commissioner.
    (c) If a taxpayer does not utilize a tax return preparer to prepare an
  authorized  tax  document during any calendar year beginning on or after
  January first, two thousand eight, but instead  prepares  that  document
  itself  using  tax  software,  then, for that calendar year and for each
  subsequent  calendar  year  thereafter,  all  authorized  tax  documents
  prepared   by   the   taxpayer   using   tax   software  must  be  filed
  electronically,  in  accordance  with  instructions  prescribed  by  the
  commissioner.
    (d)  Any tax liability or other amount due shown on, or required to be
  paid  with,  an  authorized  tax   document   required   to   be   filed
  electronically  pursuant  to subdivision (b) or (c) of this section must
  be paid by the taxpayer electronically, in accordance with  instructions
  prescribed by the commissioner.
    (e) Failure to electronically file or electronically pay. (1) If a tax
  return   preparer   is   required   to  file  authorized  tax  documents
  electronically pursuant to subdivision (b) of  this  section,  and  that
  preparer  fails  to  file one or more of those documents electronically,
  then that preparer will be subject to a penalty  of  fifty  dollars  for
  each  failure  to electronically file an authorized tax document, unless
  it is shown that the failure is due to reasonable cause and not  due  to
  willful neglect.
    (2)  If a taxpayer is required to electronically pay any tax liability
  or other amount due shown on, or required to be paid with, an authorized
  tax document required to be filed electronically pursuant to subdivision
  (b) or (c) of this section, and that taxpayer  fails  to  electronically
  pay  one  or  more  of those liabilities or other amounts due, then that
  taxpayer will be subject to a penalty of fifty dollars for each  failure
  to electronically pay.
    (3)  The  penalties provided for by this subdivision must be paid upon
  notice and demand, and will be assessed, collected and paid in the  same
  manner  as the tax to which the electronic transaction relates. However,
  if the electronic transaction relates to another matter administered  by
  the  commissioner, then the penally will be assessed, collected and paid
  in the same  manner  as  prescribed  by  article  twenty-seven  of  this
  chapter.
    (f)  The  provisions  of sections nine and ten of this chapter are not
  affected by this section and will remain in full force and effect.
    (g) The commissioner  is  authorized  to  promulgate  any  regulations
  necessary to implement this section.
    * NB Effective December 31, 2024






	   §  30.  Bad  check  or  failed electronic funds withdrawal fee. If, in
  payment of any amount due under a tax, fee, special assessment or  other
  imposition administered by the commissioner, a person tenders a check or
  money  order to the department, or the department, with the consent of a
  person, originates an electronic funds withdrawal against the designated
  bank account, and the check, money order or electronic funds withdrawal,
  as applicable, is returned without payment, the person must pay a fee to
  the commissioner of fifty dollars; provided, however, that in  the  case
  of  an  electronic  funds  withdrawal,  the  fee will not be paid if the
  reason for return of  the  payment  is  attributable  to  error  of  the
  department  or its originating depository financial institution. The fee
  must be paid upon notice and demand, and will be assessed, collected and
  paid in the same manner as the tax, fee,  special  assessment  or  other
  imposition  to  which  the  payment  relates.  All fees collected by the
  commissioner pursuant to this subdivision must be deposited monthly,  to
  the  credit  of  the  general  fund  of the state. The commissioner will
  maintain a system of accounts showing the amount of money collected from
  the fee imposed by this section.




   * §  31.  Excelsior  jobs  program  credit.    (a) General. A taxpayer
  subject to tax under article nine-A, twenty-two or thirty-three of  this
  chapter  shall  be  allowed  a  credit against such tax, pursuant to the
  provisions referenced in subdivision (g) of this section. The amount  of
  the  credit,  allowable  for up to ten consecutive taxable years, is the
  sum of the following four credit components:
    (1) the excelsior jobs tax credit component;
    (2) the excelsior investment tax credit component;
    (2-a) the excelsior child care services tax credit component;
    (3) the excelsior research and development tax credit component; and
    (4) the excelsior real property tax credit component.
    (b) To be eligible for the excelsior jobs program credit, the taxpayer
  shall have been issued a "certificate of tax credit" by  the  department
  of  economic  development  pursuant to subdivision four of section three
  hundred fifty-four of the economic development  law,  which  certificate
  shall  set forth the amount of each credit component that may be claimed
  for the  taxable  year.  A  taxpayer  may  claim  such  credit  for  ten
  consecutive  taxable years commencing in the first taxable year that the
  taxpayer receives a certificate of tax credit or the first taxable  year
  listed  on  its  preliminary  schedule  of benefits, whichever is later,
  provided that no tax credits may be allowed for taxable years  beginning
  on  or  after  January  first, two thousand forty. The taxpayer shall be
  allowed to claim only the amount listed on the certificate of tax credit
  for that  taxable  year.  Such  certificate  must  be  attached  to  the
  taxpayer's  return.  No cost or expense paid or incurred by the taxpayer
  shall be the basis for more than one component of  this  credit  or  any
  other tax credit, except as provided in section three hundred fifty-five
  of the economic development law.
    (c)  Election of credit. A taxpayer who or which is qualified to claim
  the excelsior investment tax credit component and is also  qualified  to
  claim  the  investment  tax credit provided for under subdivision one of
  section two hundred ten-B or subsection (a) of section six  hundred  six
  of  this  chapter,  may claim either the excelsior investment tax credit
  component or the investment tax credit, but not both with  regard  to  a
  particular  piece  of  property. In addition, a taxpayer who or which is
  qualified to claim the excelsior investment tax credit component and  is
  also   qualified  to  claim  the  brownfield  tangible  property  credit
  component under section twenty-one of this article, as added by  chapter
  one  of  the  laws of two thousand three, may claim either the excelsior
  investment  tax  credit  component  or  such  tangible  property  credit
  component,  but  not both with regard to a particular piece of property.
  The election to claim the excelsior investment tax credit component, the
  investment  tax  credit  or  the  brownfield  tangible  property  credit
  component, with regard to the same property, is irrevocable.
    (d)   Information  sharing.  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  this
  chapter,  employees  and  officers  of  the   department   of   economic
  development  and  the  department  shall  be allowed and are directed to
  share and exchange:
    (1) information derived from tax returns or reports that  is  relevant
  to  a  taxpayer's  eligibility  to  participate  in  the  excelsior jobs
  program;
    (2) information regarding the component or components  of  the  credit
  applied  for, allowed, or claimed pursuant to this section and taxpayers
  who are applying for the credit or who are claiming the credit; and
    (3) information contained  in  or  derived  from  credit  claim  forms
  submitted  to  the  department  and  applications for admission into the
  excelsior jobs program.


   Other than the information required to  be  contained  in  the  report
  issued  pursuant  to  subdivision  (e)  of this section, all information
  exchanged  between  the  department  of  economic  development  and  the
  department  shall  not  be subject to disclosure or inspection under the
  state's freedom of information law.
    (e)  Excelsior  jobs  program credit report. (1) The commissioner must
  publish an excelsior jobs program tax credit  report  annually  by  June
  thirtieth.  The  first  report  must be published by June thirtieth, two
  thousand twelve.
    (2) The credit report must contain the following information about the
  excelsior jobs program tax credit claimed under this chapter during  the
  previous calendar year:
    (i)  the name of each taxpayer claiming a credit; provided however, if
  the taxpayer claims a credit because the  taxpayer  is  a  member  of  a
  limited  liability  company, a partner in a partnership or a shareholder
  in a subchapter S  corporation,  the  name  of  each  limited  liability
  company,  partnership  or  subchapter  S  corporation earning any of the
  credit must be included in the report instead of information  about  the
  taxpayer claiming the credit; and
    (ii)  the  amount  of  each  credit component earned by each taxpayer;
  provided however, if the taxpayer claims a credit because  the  taxpayer
  is  a  member of a limited liability company, a partner in a partnership
  or a shareholder in a subchapter S corporation,  the  amount  of  credit
  earned  by  each  entity  must  be  included  in  the  report instead of
  information about the taxpayer claiming the credit.
    (3) The credit report may also contain any other information  received
  by  the  commissioner  with  regard to the excelsior jobs program credit
  that the commissioner deems to be useful in evaluating the  use  of  the
  credit.   The information included in the credit report will be based on
  the information filed with the department during the  previous  calendar
  year, to the extent that it is practicable to use that information.
    (f) Credit recapture. If a certificate of eligibility or a certificate
  of  tax  credit  issued  by the department of economic development under
  article seventeen of the economic development law  is  revoked  by  such
  department   because   the   taxpayer  does  not  meet  the  eligibility
  requirement set forth  in  subdivision  six  of  section  three  hundred
  fifty-three  of  the  economic  development  law,  the  amount of credit
  described in this section and claimed by  the  taxpayer  prior  to  that
  revocation  shall  be added back to tax in the taxable year in which any
  such revocation becomes final.
    (f-1) Credit recapture for unrealized job creation. If, in  any  given
  year, a taxpayer who has satisfied the eligibility criteria specified in
  section  three  hundred  fifty-three  of  the  economic  development law
  realizes job  creation  less  than  the  estimated  amount,  the  credit
  described  in  this section allowed in that year shall be reduced by the
  proportion of actual job creation to the estimated amount, provided  the
  proportion is at least seventy-five percent of the jobs estimated.
    (g)  Cross-references.  For  application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (2) article 9-A: section 210-B: subdivision 31.
    (3) article 22: section 606: subsection (qq).
    (4) article 33: section 1511: subdivision (y).
    * NB There are 2 § 31's




   * §  31.  Empire  state  film post production credit. (a) Allowance of
  credit. (1) A taxpayer which is a qualified film production company, and
  which is subject to tax under  article  nine-A  or  twenty-two  of  this
  chapter,  unless  eligible  for  the credit under section twenty-four of
  this article with respect to the qualified  film,  shall  be  allowed  a
  credit  against  such  tax,  pursuant  to  the  provisions referenced in
  subdivision (c) of this section to  be  computed  as  provided  in  this
  subdivision.
    (2)  The  amount of the credit shall be the product (or pro rata share
  of the product, in the case of a member  of  a  partnership)  of  thirty
  percent  and  the qualified post production costs paid in the production
  of a qualified film at a  qualified  post  production  facility  located
  within  the  metropolitan commuter transportation district as defined in
  section twelve hundred  sixty-two  of  the  public  authorities  law  or
  thirty-five  percent and the qualified post production costs paid in the
  production of a qualified film at a qualified post  production  facility
  located elsewhere in the state.
    (3) (i) A taxpayer shall not be eligible for the credit established by
  this  section  for  qualified post production costs, excluding the costs
  for visual effects and animation, unless the qualified  post  production
  costs,  excluding  the  costs  for  visual  effects  and animation, at a
  qualified post production facility meet or exceed  seventy-five  percent
  of  the  total  post  production  costs,  excluding the costs for visual
  effects and animation, paid or incurred in the post  production  of  the
  qualified  film  at  any post production facility. (ii) A taxpayer shall
  not be eligible for the credit established by this section for qualified
  post production costs which are costs for visual  effects  or  animation
  unless  the  qualified  post  production  costs  for  visual  effects or
  animation at a qualified post production facility meet or  exceed  three
  million dollars or twenty percent of the total post production costs for
  visual effects or animation paid or incurred in the post production of a
  qualified film at any post production facility, whichever is less. (iii)
  A  taxpayer  may  claim  a  credit  for  qualified post production costs
  excluding the costs for visual effects and animation, and for  qualified
  post production costs of visual effects and animation, provided that the
  criteria  in  subparagraphs  (i)  and  (ii)  of  this paragraph are both
  satisfied. The credit shall be allowed for the taxable year in which the
  production of such qualified film is completed.
    (4) No qualified post production costs used by a  taxpayer  either  as
  the  basis  for  the  allowance  of  the  credit provided for under this
  section or used in the calculation of the credit provided for under this
  section shall be used by such taxpayer to claim any other credit allowed
  pursuant to this chapter.
    (5) If the amount of the credit is at least one  million  dollars  but
  less  than  five million dollars, the credit shall be claimed over a two
  year period beginning in the first taxable year in which the credit  may
  be claimed and in the next succeeding taxable year, with one-half of the
  amount  of  credit  allowed being claimed in each year. If the amount of
  the credit is at least five million dollars, the credit shall be claimed
  over a three year period beginning in the first taxable  year  in  which
  the  credit may be claimed and in the next two succeeding taxable years,
  with one-third of the amount of the credit allowed being claimed in each
  year.
    (6)  For  the  period  two  thousand  fifteen  through  two   thousand
  thirty-four,  in  addition  to  the  amount  of  credit  established  in
  paragraph two of this subdivision, a taxpayer shall be allowed a  credit
  equal to the product (or pro rata share of the product, in the case of a
  member  of  a  partnership)  of  ten  percent and the amount of wages or


 salaries paid to individuals directly employed (excluding those employed
  as writers, directors, composers, producers and performers,  other  than
  background  actors  with  no  scripted  lines) for services performed by
  those  individuals in one of the counties specified in this paragraph in
  connection with the post production work on  a  qualified  film  with  a
  minimum  budget  of  five  hundred  thousand dollars at a qualified post
  production facility in one of the counties listed in this paragraph. For
  purposes of this additional credit, the services must  be  performed  in
  one  or  more  of  the  following  counties:  Albany,  Allegany, Broome,
  Cattaraugus, Cayuga, Chautauqua, Chemung, Chenango,  Clinton,  Columbia,
  Cortland,  Delaware,  Dutchess,  Erie, Essex, Franklin, Fulton, Genesee,
  Greene,  Hamilton,  Herkimer,  Jefferson,  Lewis,  Livingston,  Madison,
  Monroe, Montgomery, Niagara, Oneida, Onondaga, Ontario, Orange, Orleans,
  Oswego,  Otsego,  Putnam,  Rensselaer, Saratoga, Schenectady, Schoharie,
  Schuyler, Seneca, St.  Lawrence,  Steuben,  Sullivan,  Tioga,  Tompkins,
  Ulster, Warren, Washington, Wayne, Wyoming, or Yates.
    (b)  Definitions.  As  used  in this section the following terms shall
  have the following meanings:
    (1) "Qualified film production company"  and  "qualified  film"  shall
  have  the  same  meaning  as  are  ascribed  to  such  terms  by section
  twenty-four of this article.
    (2) "Post production costs" means production of original content for a
  qualified  film  employing  traditional,  emerging  and   new   workflow
  techniques   used  in  post-production  for  picture,  sound  and  music
  editorial, rerecording  and  mixing,  visual  effects,  graphic  design,
  original  scoring,  animation,  and  musical  composition; but shall not
  include the editing of previously produced content for a qualified film.
    (3) "Post production facility" means  a  building  and/or  complex  of
  buildings  and  their improvements on which film are intended to be post
  produced.
    (4) "Qualified post  production  facility"  means  a  post  production
  facility located in the state, engaged in finishing a qualified film.
    (c)  Notwithstanding  any  other provision of law to the contrary, the
  aggregate amount of tax credits available under this section  shall  not
  exceed the amounts allowed pursuant to paragraph four of subdivision (e)
  of  section  twenty-four  of  this article and shall be allocated in the
  same manner as provided for in  paragraph  one  of  subdivision  (e)  of
  section twenty-four of this article.
    (d)  Cross-references.  For  application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) article 9-A: section 210-B: subdivision 32.
    (2) article 22: section 606: subsection (qq).
    (e) With regard to certificates of  tax  credit  issued  on  or  after
  January  first,  two  thousand  twenty,  the  commissioner  of  economic
  development shall reduce by one-quarter of one  percent  the  amount  of
  credit  allowed  to a taxpayer and this reduced amount shall be reported
  on a certificate of tax credit issued pursuant to this section  and  the
  regulations  promulgated  by the commissioner of economic development to
  implement this credit program. Such reductions in tax  credit  shall  be
  deposited  into  the  empire  state entertainment diversity job training
  development fund as provided in subdivision (f) of  section  twenty-four
  of this article.
    * NB There are 2 § 31's




   * §  31.  Empire  state  film post production credit. (a) Allowance of
  credit. (1) A taxpayer which is a qualified film production company, and
  which is subject to tax under  article  nine-A  or  twenty-two  of  this
  chapter,  unless  eligible  for  the credit under section twenty-four of
  this article with respect to the qualified  film,  shall  be  allowed  a
  credit  against  such  tax,  pursuant  to  the  provisions referenced in
  subdivision (c) of this section to  be  computed  as  provided  in  this
  subdivision.
    (2)  The  amount of the credit shall be the product (or pro rata share
  of the product, in the case of a member  of  a  partnership)  of  thirty
  percent  and  the qualified post production costs paid in the production
  of a qualified film at a  qualified  post  production  facility  located
  within  the  metropolitan commuter transportation district as defined in
  section twelve hundred  sixty-two  of  the  public  authorities  law  or
  thirty-five  percent and the qualified post production costs paid in the
  production of a qualified film at a qualified post  production  facility
  located elsewhere in the state.
    (3) (i) A taxpayer shall not be eligible for the credit established by
  this  section  for  qualified post production costs, excluding the costs
  for visual effects and animation, unless the qualified  post  production
  costs,  excluding  the  costs  for  visual  effects  and animation, at a
  qualified post production facility meet or exceed  seventy-five  percent
  of  the  total  post  production  costs,  excluding the costs for visual
  effects and animation, paid or incurred in the post  production  of  the
  qualified  film  at  any post production facility. (ii) A taxpayer shall
  not be eligible for the credit established by this section for qualified
  post production costs which are costs for visual  effects  or  animation
  unless  the  qualified  post  production  costs  for  visual  effects or
  animation at a qualified post production facility meet or  exceed  three
  million dollars or twenty percent of the total post production costs for
  visual effects or animation paid or incurred in the post production of a
  qualified film at any post production facility, whichever is less. (iii)
  A  taxpayer  may  claim  a  credit  for  qualified post production costs
  excluding the costs for visual effects and animation, and for  qualified
  post production costs of visual effects and animation, provided that the
  criteria  in  subparagraphs  (i)  and  (ii)  of  this paragraph are both
  satisfied. The credit shall be allowed for the taxable year in which the
  production of such qualified film is completed.
    (4) No qualified post production costs used by a  taxpayer  either  as
  the  basis  for  the  allowance  of  the  credit provided for under this
  section or used in the calculation of the credit provided for under this
  section shall be used by such taxpayer to claim any other credit allowed
  pursuant to this chapter.
    (5) If the amount of the credit is at least one  million  dollars  but
  less  than  five million dollars, the credit shall be claimed over a two
  year period beginning in the first taxable year in which the credit  may
  be claimed and in the next succeeding taxable year, with one-half of the
  amount  of  credit  allowed being claimed in each year. If the amount of
  the credit is at least five million dollars, the credit shall be claimed
  over a three year period beginning in the first taxable  year  in  which
  the  credit may be claimed and in the next two succeeding taxable years,
  with one-third of the amount of the credit allowed being claimed in each
  year.
    (6)  For  the  period  two  thousand  fifteen  through  two   thousand
  thirty-four,  in  addition  to  the  amount  of  credit  established  in
  paragraph two of this subdivision, a taxpayer shall be allowed a  credit
  equal to the product (or pro rata share of the product, in the case of a
  member  of  a  partnership)  of  ten  percent and the amount of wages or


 salaries paid to individuals directly employed (excluding those employed
  as writers, directors, composers, producers and performers,  other  than
  background  actors  with  no  scripted  lines) for services performed by
  those  individuals in one of the counties specified in this paragraph in
  connection with the post production work on  a  qualified  film  with  a
  minimum  budget  of  five  hundred  thousand dollars at a qualified post
  production facility in one of the counties listed in this paragraph. For
  purposes of this additional credit, the services must  be  performed  in
  one  or  more  of  the  following  counties:  Albany,  Allegany, Broome,
  Cattaraugus, Cayuga, Chautauqua, Chemung, Chenango,  Clinton,  Columbia,
  Cortland,  Delaware,  Dutchess,  Erie, Essex, Franklin, Fulton, Genesee,
  Greene,  Hamilton,  Herkimer,  Jefferson,  Lewis,  Livingston,  Madison,
  Monroe, Montgomery, Niagara, Oneida, Onondaga, Ontario, Orange, Orleans,
  Oswego,  Otsego,  Putnam,  Rensselaer, Saratoga, Schenectady, Schoharie,
  Schuyler, Seneca, St.  Lawrence,  Steuben,  Sullivan,  Tioga,  Tompkins,
  Ulster, Warren, Washington, Wayne, Wyoming, or Yates.
    (b)  Definitions.  As  used  in this section the following terms shall
  have the following meanings:
    (1) "Qualified film production company"  and  "qualified  film"  shall
  have  the  same  meaning  as  are  ascribed  to  such  terms  by section
  twenty-four of this article.
    (2) "Post production costs" means production of original content for a
  qualified  film  employing  traditional,  emerging  and   new   workflow
  techniques   used  in  post-production  for  picture,  sound  and  music
  editorial, rerecording  and  mixing,  visual  effects,  graphic  design,
  original  scoring,  animation,  and  musical  composition; but shall not
  include the editing of previously produced content for a qualified film.
    (3) "Post production facility" means  a  building  and/or  complex  of
  buildings  and  their improvements on which film are intended to be post
  produced.
    (4) "Qualified post  production  facility"  means  a  post  production
  facility located in the state, engaged in finishing a qualified film.
    (c)  Notwithstanding  any  other provision of law to the contrary, the
  aggregate amount of tax credits available under this section  shall  not
  exceed the amounts allowed pursuant to paragraph four of subdivision (e)
  of  section  twenty-four  of  this article and shall be allocated in the
  same manner as provided for in  paragraph  one  of  subdivision  (e)  of
  section twenty-four of this article.
    (d)  Cross-references.  For  application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) article 9-A: section 210-B: subdivision 32.
    (2) article 22: section 606: subsection (qq).
    (e) With regard to certificates of  tax  credit  issued  on  or  after
  January  first,  two  thousand  twenty,  the  commissioner  of  economic
  development shall reduce by one-quarter of one  percent  the  amount  of
  credit  allowed  to a taxpayer and this reduced amount shall be reported
  on a certificate of tax credit issued pursuant to this section  and  the
  regulations  promulgated  by the commissioner of economic development to
  implement this credit program. Such reductions in tax  credit  shall  be
  deposited  into  the  empire  state entertainment diversity job training
  development fund as provided in subdivision (f) of  section  twenty-four
  of this article.
    * NB There are 2 § 31's






	   §  32.  Registration of tax return preparers. (a) For purposes of this
  section, the following terms have the specified meanings:
    (1) "Attorney" means an attorney admitted to practice law in New  York
  state  or one or more of the other states or jurisdictions of the United
  States.
    (2)  "Certified  public  accountant"  means  an  accountant   licensed
  pursuant  to section seventy-four hundred four of the education law or a
  similar law of one or more of the other states or jurisdictions  of  the
  United States.
    (3) "Commercial tax return preparer" means a tax return preparer who:
    (A)  prepared  ten  or  more returns for compensation in the preceding
  calendar year and will prepare at  least  one  return  for  compensation
  during the current calendar year; or (B) prepared fewer than ten returns
  in  the preceding calendar year but will prepare ten or more returns for
  the current calendar year.
    (4) "Commercial tax return preparation business" means an entity  that
  employs   individuals  who  prepare  tax  returns  and  that  meets  the
  thresholds described in paragraph three of this subdivision.
    (5) "Creditor" means any person who makes a refund  anticipation  loan
  or who takes an assignment of a refund anticipation loan.
    (6) "Facilitator" means a person who individually or in conjunction or
  cooperation   with  another  person:  (a)  solicits  the  execution  of,
  processes, receives, or accepts an application or agreement for a refund
  anticipation loan or refund anticipation check, (b) serves  or  collects
  upon  a refund anticipation loan or refund anticipation check; or (c) in
  any other manner facilitates the making of a refund anticipation loan or
  refund anticipation  check.  This  term  excludes  any  employees  of  a
  facilitator  who  provide  only  clerical  or  other  comparable support
  services to such facilitator.
    (7) "Electronic" means computer technology.
    (8) "Enrolled agent" means an agent enrolled to  practice  before  the
  internal  revenue  service pursuant to section 10.4 of subpart A of part
  ten of title thirty-one of the code of federal regulations.
    (9) "Public accountant"  means  an  accountant  licensed  pursuant  to
  section  seventy-four hundred five of the education law or a similar law
  of one or more of the  other  states  or  jurisdictions  of  the  United
  States.
    (10)  "Refund anticipation check" means a check, stored value card, or
  other payment mechanism which: (a) represents  the  proceeds  of  a  tax
  refund;  (b) was issued by a depository institution or other person that
  received a direct deposit of the tax refund or tax credits;  and  (c)  a
  fee or other consideration is paid for such payment mechanism.
    (11)  "Refund  anticipation  loan"  means a loan that is secured by or
  that the creditor arranges to be repaid directly or indirectly from  the
  proceeds  of  an income tax refund or tax credits. A refund anticipation
  loan also includes any sale, assignment, or purchase of tax refund at  a
  discount  or  for  a  fee,  whether  or not the amount is required to be
  repaid to the buyer or assignee if the internal revenue service  or  the
  department denies or reduces the amount of the tax refund.
    (12)  "Return" means a return or report relating to a tax administered
  by the commissioner.
    (13) "Tax" means any tax, fee, special assessment or other  imposition
  administered by the commissioner.
    (14)  "Tax  return  preparer"  means  an  individual  who  prepares  a
  substantial portion of any return for compensation. Employees of  a  tax
  return  preparer  or  a  commercial  tax return preparation business who
  prepare returns for clients of that preparer or preparation business, as
  applicable,  and  partners  who  prepare  returns  for  clients   of   a


 partnership engaged in a commercial tax return preparation business, are
  all  "tax  return preparers" for purposes of this section. Excluded from
  the  definition  of  "tax  return  preparer"   are   attorneys,   public
  accountants,  enrolled  agents,  and  certified  public accountants, and
  employees of an attorney, public accountant, enrolled  agent,  certified
  public   accountant,   or  firm  thereof  preparing  returns  under  the
  supervision of such  attorneys,  public  accountants,  certified  public
  accountants  and  enrolled  agents  or  firms thereof. Also excluded are
  volunteer tax preparers, employees  of  a  business  or  partners  in  a
  partnership  whose  job responsibilities include preparation of only the
  business' or partnership's  returns,  and  employees  of  a  tax  return
  preparer  or  a  commercial tax return preparation business who provides
  only clerical or other comparable services.
    (b)(1) Each tax return preparer, who will prepare at least one  return
  in a calendar year, and each facilitator, who will facilitate the making
  of  a  refund  anticipation  loan  or  refund  anticipation  check, must
  register electronically with the department for that calendar  year,  in
  accordance with instructions prescribed by the commissioner.
    (2)(A)  Upon  completion  of the registration process, each tax return
  preparer and facilitator will be issued a tax  preparer  or  facilitator
  registration  certificate.  If  an  individual acts as both a tax return
  preparer and a facilitator, one registration certificate shall  indicate
  both activities.
    (B)  In  accordance  with instructions prescribed by the commissioner,
  each tax return preparer and facilitator will also be assigned a  unique
  identification  number  by the department, which must be used by the tax
  return preparer and facilitator on each  return  which  the  tax  return
  preparer  is  required  to  sign  and  each refund anticipation loan and
  refund anticipation check the facilitator is required to sign.
    (C) If a  tax  return  preparer  or  facilitator  is  an  employee  or
  prospective  employee  of a tax return preparer, a commercial tax return
  preparation  business,  or  a  facilitator,  the  tax  return  preparer,
  commercial  tax  return  preparation business or facilitator must ensure
  that the employee or prospective employee is  properly  registered  with
  the  department  and  possesses  a  valid  tax  preparer  or facilitator
  registration certificate. If an individual acts as  both  a  tax  return
  preparer  and  a facilitator one registration certificate shall indicate
  both activities.
    (3)  Each  registered  tax  return  preparer  and   facilitator   must
  electronically  re-register  with the department annually, in accordance
  with instructions prescribed by the commissioner. If, at any time during
  the year following registration or re-registration, as  applicable,  any
  information  provided  by  the  tax  return preparer or facilitator upon
  registration or re-registration is no longer  correct,  the  tax  return
  preparer or facilitator must update his or her information in accordance
  with instructions prescribed by the commissioner.
    (4)  Each  tax  return  preparer  preparing  any  return must sign the
  document and include  the  unique  identification  number  specified  in
  paragraph  two  of  this  subdivision,  in  accordance with instructions
  prescribed by the commissioner.
    (c)(1) Each commercial tax return preparer must electronically pay  an
  annual  fee of one hundred dollars to the department, in accordance with
  instructions  prescribed  by  the  commissioner.   Registration   of   a
  commercial  tax return preparer is not complete until payment of the fee
  is made.
    (2)  All  fees  received  by  the  commissioner   pursuant   to   this
  subdivision,  reduced  by  those amounts the commissioner determines are
  necessary to cover administrative costs to administer  the  registration


 program  prescribed  by this section and the costs of any reimbursements
  to  commercial  tax  return  preparers  that  may  be  required  due  to
  duplicative  fee  payments  under  this  subdivision,  must be deposited
  monthly to the credit of the general fund of the state. The commissioner
  will maintain a system of accounts showing the amount of money collected
  and disbursed from the fee imposed by this subdivision.
    (d)  The  issuance  of  a  tax  preparer  or  facilitator registration
  certificate to provide tax preparation services or  refund  anticipation
  loan  services  is not, and must not be advertised as, an endorsement by
  the department of the tax return preparer or the facilitator, or his  or
  her qualifications or the services rendered by him or her.
    (e)  A tax return preparer who has not registered with the department,
  or a commercial tax return  preparer  who  has  not  paid  the  required
  registration  fee,  will  not be allowed to represent his or her clients
  before the division of taxation or the division  of  tax  appeals.  This
  sanction  is  in addition to any penalties which may be imposed pursuant
  to subdivision (f) of this section.
    (f) (1) A tax return preparer or facilitator shall not: (A) charge  or
  impose  any  fee,  charge  or  other  consideration  in  the  making  or
  facilitating of a refund anticipation loan or refund anticipation  check
  apart  from  the  fee  charged by the creditor or bank that provided the
  loan or check;
    (B)  Engage  in  unfair  or  deceptive  acts  or  practices   in   the
  facilitating  of  a  refund  anticipation check or a refund anticipation
  loan, including making any oral  statements  contradicting  any  of  the
  information  required  to be disclosed under the Taxpayer Bill of Rights
  as set forth in sections three hundred seventy-one through three hundred
  seventy-three of the general business law;
    (C) Directly or indirectly arrange for a third  party  to  charge  any
  interest,  fee or charge related to a refund anticipation loan or refund
  anticipation check;
    (D) Include any of the following provisions in any documents  provided
  or  signed  to  obtain a refund anticipation loan or refund anticipation
  check, including the loan application or agreement: (i) a hold  harmless
  clause;  (ii)  a  confession  of  judgment clause; (iii) a waiver of the
  right to a jury trial; (iv) any assignment of or order  for  payment  of
  wages  or other compensation for services; (v) a waiver of any provision
  of the Taxpayer Bill of Rights, as set forth in sections  three  hundred
  seventy-one  through three hundred seventy-three of the general business
  law; or (vi) a waiver of the right  to  injunctive,  declaratory,  other
  equitable  relief,  or  relief  on a classwide basis. Any aforementioned
  waivers shall be deemed null, void and of no effect;
    (E) Take or arrange for a creditor to take a security interest in  any
  property  interest  of  the  taxpayer other than the proceeds of the tax
  refund to secure payment of a refund anticipation loan;
    (F)  Directly  or  indirectly,  individually  or  in  conjunction   or
  cooperation  with  another  person,  engage  in  the  collection  of  an
  outstanding or delinquent refund anticipation loan for any  creditor  or
  assignee;
    (G)  Make  a  misrepresentation  of fact in obtaining or attempting to
  obtain a registration; or
    (H) Engage in any other action prohibited by rules promulgated by  the
  commissioner.
    (2)  If  a  tax  return  preparer  violates  any one of the provisions
  provided for in this subdivision, then the tax return preparer must  pay
  a  penalty  of five hundred dollars for each such violation, in addition
  to any other penalties provided for in this section.


   (g) (1) The department shall issue a notice to a tax  return  preparer
  or   facilitator  for  failure  to  register  or  re-register  with  the
  department pursuant to paragraph one or three of subdivision (b) of this
  section, which shall set forth a fifteen day period to cure the  failure
  to  register or re-register. The commissioner is authorized to send such
  notice electronically to the  tax  return  preparer's  or  facilitator's
  online  services account. A tax return preparer or facilitator who fails
  to register or re-register in accordance with such  notice  must  pay  a
  penalty of two hundred fifty dollars. The penalty can be waived only for
  good cause shown by the tax return preparer or facilitator.
    (2)  The  department  shall  issue a notice to a commercial tax return
  preparer who fails to pay the  fee  as  required  in  paragraph  one  of
  subdivision  (c)  of  this section, for a calendar year, which shall set
  forth a fifteen day period to cure the  failure  to  pay  the  fee.  The
  commissioner  is  authorized  to  send such notice electronically to the
  commercial tax return preparer's online services account.  A  commercial
  tax  return  preparer  who  fails to pay the fee in accordance with such
  notice must  pay  a  penalty  of  fifty  dollars  for  each  return  the
  commercial  tax  return  preparer  has filed with the department in that
  calendar year. The maximum  penalty  that  may  be  imposed  under  this
  paragraph on any commercial tax return preparer during any calendar year
  must  not  exceed  five thousand dollars. The penalty can be waived only
  for good cause shown by the commercial tax return preparer.
    (3) If a tax return preparer fails to sign his  or  her  name  to  any
  return   that  requires  the  tax  return  preparer's  signature,  or  a
  facilitator fails to sign his or her name  to  any  refund  anticipation
  loan  or  refund anticipation check facilitation documentation, then the
  tax return preparer or facilitator must pay a penalty in the  amount  of
  two  hundred  fifty  dollars  for  each  failure  to  so sign. Provided,
  however, that this penalty can be waived only for good  cause  shown  by
  the tax return preparer or facilitator.
    The  maximum  penalty  imposed  under this paragraph on any tax return
  preparer with respect to returns filed during any calendar year  by  the
  tax  return  preparer,  or on any facilitator with respect to any refund
  anticipation   loan   or   refund   anticipation   check    facilitation
  documentation completed during any calendar year by the facilitator must
  not exceed ten thousand dollars. Provided, however, that if a tax return
  preparer  or  facilitator  has been penalized under this paragraph for a
  preceding calendar year and again fails to sign his or her name  on  any
  return  that requires the tax return preparer's signature or again fails
  to sign his or her name  on  any  refund  anticipation  loan  or  refund
  anticipation   check  facilitation  documentation  during  a  subsequent
  calendar year, then the penalty under this paragraph  for  each  failure
  will be five hundred dollars, and no annual cap will apply.
    (4)  If  a  tax  return preparer or a facilitator fails to include the
  unique identification number assigned  by  the  department  pursuant  to
  subparagraph  (B) of paragraph two of subdivision (b) of this section on
  any return, or any return anticipation loan or return anticipation check
  facilitation documentation that requires his or her signature, then  the
  tax  return  preparer  or  facilitator must pay a penalty of one hundred
  dollars for each failure to include his  or  her  unique  identification
  number. Provided, however, that this penalty can be waived only for good
  cause  shown  by  the  tax  return  preparer or facilitator. The maximum
  penalty imposed under this paragraph  on  any  tax  return  preparer  or
  facilitator  with respect to returns filed during any calendar year must
  not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars; provided, however, that if
  a tax return preparer or  facilitator  has  been  penalized  under  this
  paragraph  for  a preceding calendar year and again fails to include the


 unique identification number on one or more returns during a  subsequent
  calendar  year,  then  the penalty under this paragraph for each failure
  will be two hundred fifty dollars, and no annual cap will apply.
    (5)  If  a tax return preparer, facilitator or a commercial tax return
  preparation business employs an individual to prepare tax returns who is
  not registered with the department and does  not  possess  a  valid  tax
  preparer  or  facilitator  registration certificate, then the tax return
  preparer, facilitator or commercial tax return preparation business,  as
  applicable,  will  be  subject  to a penalty of five hundred dollars per
  occurrence. This penalty can be waived only for good cause shown.
    (6) The penalties provided for by this subdivision must be  paid  upon
  notice  and  demand and will be assessed, collected and paid in the same
  manner as taxes under article twenty-seven of this chapter.
    (h) (1) Tax return preparers and  facilitators  must  prominently  and
  conspicuously  display  a  copy of their registration certificate issued
  pursuant to this section, for the current registration period, at  their
  place  of  business  and  at  any  other location where they provide tax
  return preparation  and/or  facilitation  services,  in  an  area  where
  taxpayers  using  their  services  are  able  to  see  and  review  such
  registration certificate.
    (2)  Tax  return  preparers  and  facilitators  must  prominently  and
  conspicuously  display  at  their  place  of  business  and at any other
  location where they provide tax return preparation  and/or  facilitation
  services the following documents:
    (A)  a  current  price  list,  in  at  least fourteen-point type, that
  includes, but is not limited to, a list of all services offered  by  the
  tax return preparer and/or facilitator; the minimum fee charged for each
  service,  including the fee charged for each type of federal or New York
  state tax return to be prepared and facilitation service to be provided;
  and a list of each factor  that  may  increase  a  stated  fee  and  the
  specific  additional fees or range of possible additional fees when each
  factor applies; and
    (B) a copy of the most recent Consumer Bill of  Rights  Regarding  Tax
  Preparers  published by the department pursuant to section three hundred
  seventy-two of the general business law.
    (3) A tax return preparer or facilitator who fails to comply with  any
  of  the  requirements  of  this  subdivision  must pay a penalty of five
  hundred dollars for the first month of non-compliance and  five  hundred
  dollars  for  each  subsequent  month  of non-compliance thereafter. The
  maximum penalty that may be imposed under this subdivision  on  any  tax
  return  preparer or facilitator during any calendar year must not exceed
  ten thousand dollars. The penalty can be  waived  only  for  good  cause
  shown by the tax return preparer or facilitator.
    (i)  The  provisions  of  this  section  will apply exclusively to the
  registration  of  tax  return  preparers  and  facilitators   with   the
  department,  payment  of  the registration fee if required by commercial
  tax return preparers, the signing of  returns  and  use  of  the  unique
  identification  numbers  assigned  by  the department upon registration.
  Other  provisions  of  this  chapter  or  any  other  provision  of  law
  prescribing  additional  requirements applicable to tax return preparers
  or facilitators will not be affected by the provisions of  this  section
  except  as set forth expressly herein, and will remain in full force and
  effect.




   * §  33. Correction periods for electronic tax documents and payments.
  (a) For purposes of this section, the following terms have the specified
  meanings:
    (1) "Electronic funds withdrawal"  means  the  process  by  which  the
  department, with a taxpayer's permission, originates an electronic order
  from  its  bank  to  the  taxpayer's  bank  to  withdraw  funds from the
  taxpayer's bank account so that the taxpayer may  pay  a  tax  liability
  associated with a tax document.
    (2)  "Electronic  postmark"  means a record of the date and time (in a
  particular time zone) that an authorized electronic transmitter receives
  the transmission of a taxpayer's electronically filed  tax  document  on
  its host system.
    (3)  "Electronic  transmitter"  means  a  person  or  entity  that  is
  authorized to submit electronic tax documents directly to the department
  or directly to the  internal  revenue  service  for  forwarding  to  the
  department.
    (4)  "Reject"  or  "rejected"  means  that an electronically filed tax
  document or an authorization for an electronic funds withdrawal  is  not
  accepted for processing.
    (5)  "Submit" or "submitted" means the date of the electronic postmark
  assigned by an electronic transmitter to  an  electronically  filed  tax
  document  or  authorization for an electronic funds withdrawal. However,
  if an electronic transmitter does not  assign  an  electronic  postmark,
  then  an  electronically  filed  tax  document  or  authorization for an
  electronic funds withdrawal shall be deemed submitted on the earlier  of
  the  date the internal revenue service receives the electronically filed
  tax document or authorization for an electronic funds withdrawal, or the
  date the department receives the electronically filed  tax  document  or
  authorization  for  an  electronic  funds  withdrawal.  In  any  of  the
  aforementioned cases, if the taxpayer can establish  that  the  time  of
  submission,  adjusted for the taxpayer's time zone, was timely, the time
  of submission shall be based on the taxpayer's time zone.
    (6) "Tax" means any tax, fee, special assessment or  other  imposition
  administered by the commissioner.
    (7) "Tax document" means any return, report or other document relating
  to a tax.
    (b)  If  a  tax document is required or permitted to be filed with the
  department electronically (whether directly, directly through  a  return
  transmitter  or  through the internal revenue service), the tax document
  is submitted electronically on or before the due date for such  document
  (including  any  extension  of  time),  and the electronically filed tax
  document is rejected, then the commissioner may, by instruction, provide
  for a reasonable period of time during which the  tax  document  may  be
  corrected   and   re-submitted.   If   the  corrected  tax  document  is
  re-submitted on or before the  expiration  date  of  the  extended  time
  period,  and such document is accepted by the department for processing,
  then the re-submitted tax document shall be deemed to have  been  timely
  filed  even  though  the department receives it after the applicable due
  date (including any extension of time).
    (c) (1) If a taxpayer has submitted an authorization for an electronic
  funds withdrawal on or before the due date for  payment  (including  any
  extension   of   time),  and  such  authorization  is  rejected  by  the
  department, then the commissioner may, by  instruction,  provide  for  a
  reasonable  period  of  time, commencing from the date of rejection, for
  the taxpayer to re-submit the authorization  for  the  electronic  funds
  withdrawal.  If the authorization for the electronic funds withdrawal is
  re-submitted on or before the  expiration  date  of  the  extended  time
  period,  then  the  electronic  funds withdrawal shall be deemed to have


 been timely paid even  though  the  department  receives  it  after  the
  applicable due date (including any extension of time).
    (2) Any reasonable period of time provided for by the commissioner for
  re-submission of an authorization for an electronic funds withdrawal may
  differ  from  the  reasonable  time  period, if any, provided for by the
  commissioner with respect to the electronically filed tax document  with
  which the taxpayer's electronic funds withdrawal is associated.
    (3)  In lieu of re-submitting an authorization for an electronic funds
  withdrawal, the commissioner may permit a taxpayer  to  instead  pay  by
  substitute  means, as defined by instruction. Any such instruction shall
  address the timeliness of payment by substitute means.
    (d) The provisions of  this  section  shall  not  apply  to  taxpayers
  participating  in  the  electronic funds transfer programs prescribed by
  sections nine and ten of this article.
    * NB There are 2 § 33's




   * §  33. Temporary deferral of certain tax credits. 1. (a) For taxable
  years beginning on or after January first, two thousand ten  and  before
  January  first,  two  thousand  thirteen,  the  excess  over two million
  dollars of the total amount of the tax credits specified in  subdivision
  three  of  this  section  that  in  each  of  those  taxable years would
  otherwise be used to reduce the taxpayer's tax liability to  the  amount
  otherwise  specified  in  this  chapter or be refunded or credited as an
  overpayment will be deferred to and used or refunded  in  taxable  years
  beginning on or after January first, two thousand thirteen in accordance
  with  the  provisions  of  section thirty-four of this article. Interest
  shall not be paid on the amounts of credit deferred.
    (b) To determine the amount of each tax credit allowed for the taxable
  year to be used, refunded or credited as  an  overpayment  the  taxpayer
  shall  multiply the amount of each credit subject to deferral that would
  have been used, refunded or credited as an overpayment in the absence of
  this section by a fraction,  the  numerator  of  which  is  two  million
  dollars,  and  the  denominator  of  which  is  the  total amount of the
  taxpayer's credits subject to deferral pursuant to subdivision three  of
  this  section  that  would  have  been  used, refunded or credited as an
  overpayment for the taxable year in the absence  of  this  section.  The
  product is the amount of such credit that is not subject to deferral and
  thus  allowed to be used, refunded or credited as an overpayment for the
  taxable year.
    2. Taxpayers shall calculate  and  make  any  estimated  tax  payments
  required  to  be  made  by  taking  into account the deferral of credits
  required by this section. Taxpayers shall calculate any mandatory  first
  installment payments made on or after the effective date of this section
  as  if  the  deferral  of  credits  required by this section had been in
  effect for the taxable year upon which that  installment  is  based.  In
  addition,  for  taxable  years  beginning on or after January first, two
  thousand ten and before January  first,  two  thousand  eleven,  (a)  no
  addition  to tax under subsection (c) of section six hundred eighty-five
  of this chapter or subsection (c) of section one thousand eighty-five of
  this  chapter  shall  be  imposed  with  respect  to  any   underpayment
  attributable  to  the deferral required by this section of any estimated
  taxes that are required to be  paid  prior  to  the  enactment  of  this
  section,  provided that the taxpayer timely made those payments; and (b)
  the required installment of estimated tax described in  clause  (ii)  of
  subparagraph  (B)  of  paragraph  three of subsection (c) of section six
  hundred eighty-five of this chapter, and the exception to  addition  for
  underpayment  of  estimated  tax  described  in  paragraph one or two of
  subsection (d) of section one thousand eighty-five of this  chapter,  in
  relation  to  the preceding year's return, shall be calculated as if the
  deferral required by this section had been in  effect  for  that  entire
  preceding year.
    3.  (a)  This  section  shall  apply  to the credits allowed under the
  following  provisions  in  article  nine-a  of  this  chapter  and   any
  applicable   counterpart   provisions   in  articles  nine,  twenty-two,
  thirty-two and thirty-three of this chapter:
    Section 210(12) investment tax credit
    Section 210(12-B) empire zone investment tax credit
    Section 210(12-C) empire zone employment incentive credit
    Section 210(12-D) employment incentive credit
    Section 210(12-E) QETC employment credit
    Section 210(12-F) QETC capital tax credit
    Section 210(12-G) QETC facilities, operations, and training credit
    Section 210(17) special additional mortgage recording tax credit
    Section 210(19) empire zone wage tax credit


   Section 210(20) empire zone capital tax credit
    Section 210(21-a) credit for servicing certain mortgages
    Section 210(23) credit for employment of persons with disabilities
    Section 210(24) alternative fuels credit
    Section   210(25)   credit  for  purchase  of  an  automated  external
  defibrillator
    Section 210(27) QEZE credit for real property taxes
    Section 210(28) QEZE tax reduction credit
    Section 210(30) low income housing credit
    Section 210(31) green building credit
    Section 210(33) brownfield redevelopment tax credit
    Section 210(34) remediated brownfield credit for real  property  taxes
  for qualified sites
    Section 210(35) environmental remediation insurance credit
    Section 210(37) security training tax credit
    Section  210(37)  credit  for  fuel cell electric generating equipment
  expenditures
    Section 210(38) conservation easement tax credit
    Section 210(38) empire state commercial production credit
    Section 210(38) biofuel production credit
    Section 210(39) clean heating fuel credit
    Section 210(40) credit for rehabilitation of historic properties
    Section 210(40) credit for companies  who  provide  transportation  to
  individuals with disabilities
    (b)  This  section  shall  also  apply  to  the credits allowed by the
  following sections:
    Section 186-a(9) power for jobs credit
    Section 606(g-1) solar energy system equipment credit
    Section 606(pp) historic homeownership rehabilitation credit
    Section 1511(k) credit for certain investments  in  certified  capital
  companies
    * NB There are 2 § 33's




   * §  33. Temporary deferral of certain tax credits. 1. (a) For taxable
  years beginning on or after January first, two thousand ten  and  before
  January  first,  two  thousand  thirteen,  the  excess  over two million
  dollars of the total amount of the tax credits specified in  subdivision
  three  of  this  section  that  in  each  of  those  taxable years would
  otherwise be used to reduce the taxpayer's tax liability to  the  amount
  otherwise  specified  in  this  chapter or be refunded or credited as an
  overpayment will be deferred to and used or refunded  in  taxable  years
  beginning on or after January first, two thousand thirteen in accordance
  with  the  provisions  of  section thirty-four of this article. Interest
  shall not be paid on the amounts of credit deferred.
    (b) To determine the amount of each tax credit allowed for the taxable
  year to be used, refunded or credited as  an  overpayment  the  taxpayer
  shall  multiply the amount of each credit subject to deferral that would
  have been used, refunded or credited as an overpayment in the absence of
  this section by a fraction,  the  numerator  of  which  is  two  million
  dollars,  and  the  denominator  of  which  is  the  total amount of the
  taxpayer's credits subject to deferral pursuant to subdivision three  of
  this  section  that  would  have  been  used, refunded or credited as an
  overpayment for the taxable year in the absence  of  this  section.  The
  product is the amount of such credit that is not subject to deferral and
  thus  allowed to be used, refunded or credited as an overpayment for the
  taxable year.
    2. Taxpayers shall calculate  and  make  any  estimated  tax  payments
  required  to  be  made  by  taking  into account the deferral of credits
  required by this section. Taxpayers shall calculate any mandatory  first
  installment payments made on or after the effective date of this section
  as  if  the  deferral  of  credits  required by this section had been in
  effect for the taxable year upon which that  installment  is  based.  In
  addition,  for  taxable  years  beginning on or after January first, two
  thousand ten and before January  first,  two  thousand  eleven,  (a)  no
  addition  to tax under subsection (c) of section six hundred eighty-five
  of this chapter or subsection (c) of section one thousand eighty-five of
  this  chapter  shall  be  imposed  with  respect  to  any   underpayment
  attributable  to  the deferral required by this section of any estimated
  taxes that are required to be  paid  prior  to  the  enactment  of  this
  section,  provided that the taxpayer timely made those payments; and (b)
  the required installment of estimated tax described in  clause  (ii)  of
  subparagraph  (B)  of  paragraph  three of subsection (c) of section six
  hundred eighty-five of this chapter, and the exception to  addition  for
  underpayment  of  estimated  tax  described  in  paragraph one or two of
  subsection (d) of section one thousand eighty-five of this  chapter,  in
  relation  to  the preceding year's return, shall be calculated as if the
  deferral required by this section had been in  effect  for  that  entire
  preceding year.
    3.  (a)  This  section  shall  apply  to the credits allowed under the
  following  provisions  in  article  nine-a  of  this  chapter  and   any
  applicable   counterpart   provisions   in  articles  nine,  twenty-two,
  thirty-two and thirty-three of this chapter:
    Section 210(12) investment tax credit
    Section 210(12-B) empire zone investment tax credit
    Section 210(12-C) empire zone employment incentive credit
    Section 210(12-D) employment incentive credit
    Section 210(12-E) QETC employment credit
    Section 210(12-F) QETC capital tax credit
    Section 210(12-G) QETC facilities, operations, and training credit
    Section 210(17) special additional mortgage recording tax credit
    Section 210(19) empire zone wage tax credit


   Section 210(20) empire zone capital tax credit
    Section 210(21-a) credit for servicing certain mortgages
    Section 210(23) credit for employment of persons with disabilities
    Section 210(24) alternative fuels credit
    Section   210(25)   credit  for  purchase  of  an  automated  external
  defibrillator
    Section 210(27) QEZE credit for real property taxes
    Section 210(28) QEZE tax reduction credit
    Section 210(30) low income housing credit
    Section 210(31) green building credit
    Section 210(33) brownfield redevelopment tax credit
    Section 210(34) remediated brownfield credit for real  property  taxes
  for qualified sites
    Section 210(35) environmental remediation insurance credit
    Section 210(37) security training tax credit
    Section  210(37)  credit  for  fuel cell electric generating equipment
  expenditures
    Section 210(38) conservation easement tax credit
    Section 210(38) empire state commercial production credit
    Section 210(38) biofuel production credit
    Section 210(39) clean heating fuel credit
    Section 210(40) credit for rehabilitation of historic properties
    Section 210(40) credit for companies  who  provide  transportation  to
  individuals with disabilities
    (b)  This  section  shall  also  apply  to  the credits allowed by the
  following sections:
    Section 186-a(9) power for jobs credit
    Section 606(g-1) solar energy system equipment credit
    Section 606(pp) historic homeownership rehabilitation credit
    Section 1511(k) credit for certain investments  in  certified  capital
  companies
    * NB There are 2 § 33's




   * §  33. Temporary deferral of certain tax credits. 1. (a) For taxable
  years beginning on or after January first, two thousand ten  and  before
  January  first,  two  thousand  thirteen,  the  excess  over two million
  dollars of the total amount of the tax credits specified in  subdivision
  three  of  this  section  that  in  each  of  those  taxable years would
  otherwise be used to reduce the taxpayer's tax liability to  the  amount
  otherwise  specified  in  this  chapter or be refunded or credited as an
  overpayment will be deferred to and used or refunded  in  taxable  years
  beginning on or after January first, two thousand thirteen in accordance
  with  the  provisions  of  section thirty-four of this article. Interest
  shall not be paid on the amounts of credit deferred.
    (b) To determine the amount of each tax credit allowed for the taxable
  year to be used, refunded or credited as  an  overpayment  the  taxpayer
  shall  multiply the amount of each credit subject to deferral that would
  have been used, refunded or credited as an overpayment in the absence of
  this section by a fraction,  the  numerator  of  which  is  two  million
  dollars,  and  the  denominator  of  which  is  the  total amount of the
  taxpayer's credits subject to deferral pursuant to subdivision three  of
  this  section  that  would  have  been  used, refunded or credited as an
  overpayment for the taxable year in the absence  of  this  section.  The
  product is the amount of such credit that is not subject to deferral and
  thus  allowed to be used, refunded or credited as an overpayment for the
  taxable year.
    2. Taxpayers shall calculate  and  make  any  estimated  tax  payments
  required  to  be  made  by  taking  into account the deferral of credits
  required by this section. Taxpayers shall calculate any mandatory  first
  installment payments made on or after the effective date of this section
  as  if  the  deferral  of  credits  required by this section had been in
  effect for the taxable year upon which that  installment  is  based.  In
  addition,  for  taxable  years  beginning on or after January first, two
  thousand ten and before January  first,  two  thousand  eleven,  (a)  no
  addition  to tax under subsection (c) of section six hundred eighty-five
  of this chapter or subsection (c) of section one thousand eighty-five of
  this  chapter  shall  be  imposed  with  respect  to  any   underpayment
  attributable  to  the deferral required by this section of any estimated
  taxes that are required to be  paid  prior  to  the  enactment  of  this
  section,  provided that the taxpayer timely made those payments; and (b)
  the required installment of estimated tax described in  clause  (ii)  of
  subparagraph  (B)  of  paragraph  three of subsection (c) of section six
  hundred eighty-five of this chapter, and the exception to  addition  for
  underpayment  of  estimated  tax  described  in  paragraph one or two of
  subsection (d) of section one thousand eighty-five of this  chapter,  in
  relation  to  the preceding year's return, shall be calculated as if the
  deferral required by this section had been in  effect  for  that  entire
  preceding year.
    3.  (a)  This  section  shall  apply  to the credits allowed under the
  following  provisions  in  article  nine-a  of  this  chapter  and   any
  applicable   counterpart   provisions   in  articles  nine,  twenty-two,
  thirty-two and thirty-three of this chapter:
    Section 210(12) investment tax credit
    Section 210(12-B) empire zone investment tax credit
    Section 210(12-C) empire zone employment incentive credit
    Section 210(12-D) employment incentive credit
    Section 210(12-E) QETC employment credit
    Section 210(12-F) QETC capital tax credit
    Section 210(12-G) QETC facilities, operations, and training credit
    Section 210(17) special additional mortgage recording tax credit
    Section 210(19) empire zone wage tax credit


   Section 210(20) empire zone capital tax credit
    Section 210(21-a) credit for servicing certain mortgages
    Section 210(23) credit for employment of persons with disabilities
    Section 210(24) alternative fuels credit
    Section   210(25)   credit  for  purchase  of  an  automated  external
  defibrillator
    Section 210(27) QEZE credit for real property taxes
    Section 210(28) QEZE tax reduction credit
    Section 210(30) low income housing credit
    Section 210(31) green building credit
    Section 210(33) brownfield redevelopment tax credit
    Section 210(34) remediated brownfield credit for real  property  taxes
  for qualified sites
    Section 210(35) environmental remediation insurance credit
    Section 210(37) security training tax credit
    Section  210(37)  credit  for  fuel cell electric generating equipment
  expenditures
    Section 210(38) conservation easement tax credit
    Section 210(38) empire state commercial production credit
    Section 210(38) biofuel production credit
    Section 210(39) clean heating fuel credit
    Section 210(40) credit for rehabilitation of historic properties
    Section 210(40) credit for companies  who  provide  transportation  to
  individuals with disabilities
    (b)  This  section  shall  also  apply  to  the credits allowed by the
  following sections:
    Section 186-a(9) power for jobs credit
    Section 606(g-1) solar energy system equipment credit
    Section 606(pp) historic homeownership rehabilitation credit
    Section 1511(k) credit for certain investments  in  certified  capital
  companies
    * NB There are 2 § 33's




   * §  34.  Tax  return  preparers  and software companies not to charge
  separately for New York  e-file  services.  (a)  For  purposes  of  this
  section, the following terms have the specified meanings:
    (1)   "Authorized  tax  document"  means  a  tax  document  which  the
  commissioner has authorized to be filed electronically.
    (2) "Electronic" means computer technology.
    (3) "Software company" means a developer of tax software.
    (4)  "Tax"  means  any  tax  or  other  matter  administered  by   the
  commissioner pursuant to this chapter or any other provision of law.
    (5)  "Tax  document"  means  a  return,  report  or any other document
  relating to a tax or other matter administered by the commissioner.
    (6)  "Tax  return  preparer"  means  any  person  who   prepares   for
  compensation,  or  who employs or engages one or more persons to prepare
  for compensation, any authorized tax  document.  For  purposes  of  this
  section, the term "tax return preparer" also includes a payroll service.
    (7)  "Tax  software"  means any computer software program intended for
  tax return preparation purposes. For purposes of this section, the  term
  "tax  software"  includes,  but  is  not  limited  to,  an off-the-shelf
  software program loaded onto  a  tax  return  preparer's  or  taxpayer's
  computer, or an online tax preparation application.
    (b)  It  shall  be  unlawful  for  a tax return preparer or a software
  company to charge a separate fee for the electronic filing of authorized
  tax documents. It shall also be unlawful for a software company to offer
  a version of its tax software  that  charges  a  separate  fee  for  the
  electronic  filing  of  authorized  tax documents and one version of the
  same tax software that does not.
    (c) Any tax return preparer or software company violating this section
  will be liable for a civil penalty of five hundred dollars for the first
  violation and one thousand dollars for each  succeeding  violation.  The
  civil   penalties   imposed  by  this  section  shall  be  paid  to  the
  commissioner upon notice and demand, and will be assessed, collected and
  paid in the same manner as taxes  under  article  twenty-seven  of  this
  chapter.
    * NB There are 2 § 34's




   * §  34.    Temporary  deferral  payout  credits.  1.  The  amounts of
  nonrefundable credits that are deferred pursuant to section thirty-three
  of this article in taxable years beginning on or  after  January  first,
  two  thousand  ten and before January first, two thousand thirteen shall
  be  accumulated  and  constitute  the  taxpayer's   temporary   deferral
  nonrefundable payout credit. The taxpayer may first claim this credit in
  the  taxable  year  beginning  on  or  after January first, two thousand
  thirteen and before January first, two thousand fourteen.  The  taxpayer
  shall  be allowed to claim this credit until the accumulated amounts are
  exhausted. The credit shall be allowed against  the  taxpayer's  tax  as
  provided  in  the  provisions referenced in paragraph (a) of subdivision
  three of this section.
    2. The amounts of refundable credits that  are  deferred  pursuant  to
  section  thirty-three  of  this article in taxable years beginning on or
  after January first, two thousand ten  and  before  January  first,  two
  thousand  thirteen  shall  be  accumulated and constitute the taxpayer's
  temporary  deferral  refundable  payout  credit.  In  the  taxable  year
  beginning  on  or  after January first, two thousand thirteen and before
  January first, two thousand fourteen, the taxpayer shall be  allowed  to
  claim  a credit equal to fifty percent of the amount accumulated. In the
  taxable year beginning on or after January first, two thousand  fourteen
  and  before  January  first, two thousand fifteen, the taxpayer shall be
  allowed to claim a credit equal to seventy-five percent of  the  balance
  of  the  amount  accumulated.  In the taxable year beginning on or after
  January first, two  thousand  fifteen  and  before  January  first,  two
  thousand  sixteen, the taxpayer shall be allowed to claim a credit equal
  to the remaining balance of the amount accumulated. The credit shall  be
  allowed  against  the  taxpayer's  tax  as  provided  in  the provisions
  referenced in paragraph (b) of subdivision three of this section.
    3. (a) For application of the temporary deferral nonrefundable  payout
  credit, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) Article 9: section 187-o
    (2) Article 9-A: section 210-B(33)
    (3) Article 22: section 606(qq)
    (4) Article 33: section 1511(y)
    (b)  For  application  of  the  temporary  deferral  refundable payout
  credit, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) Article 9: section 187-p
    (2) Article 9-A: section 210-B(34)
    (3) Article 22: section 606(rr)
    (4) Article 33: section 1511(z)
    * NB There are 2 § 34's




   * §  35. Use of electronic means of communication. Notwithstanding any
  other provision of New York state law, where the department has obtained
  authorization of an online services account holder, in such form as  may
  be  prescribed  by  the  commissioner, the department may use electronic
  means of communication to furnish any document it is  required  to  mail
  per  law  or  regulation.  If  the department furnishes such document in
  accordance with this section, department  records  of  such  transaction
  shall  constitute  appropriate  and sufficient proof of delivery thereof
  and be admissible in any action or proceeding.
    * NB There are 2 § 35's




   * § 35. Economic transformation and facility redevelopment program tax
  credit.  (a) General. (1) A taxpayer which is a participant or the owner
  of  a  participant  in  the   economic   transformation   and   facility
  redevelopment program under article eighteen of the economic development
  law  that  is  subject  to  tax  under  article  nine-A,  twenty-two  or
  thirty-three of this chapter shall  be  allowed  the  sum  of  following
  components  against  such  tax, pursuant to the provisions referenced in
  subdivision (f) of this section.
    (A) the economic transformation  and  facility  redevelopment  program
  jobs tax credit component;
    (B)  the  economic  transformation  and facility redevelopment program
  investment tax credit component;
    (C) the economic transformation and facility redevelopment program job
  training credit component; and
    (D) the economic transformation  and  facility  redevelopment  program
  real property tax credit component.
    (2)  A  taxpayer which is a participant in the economic transformation
  and  facility  redevelopment  program  under  article  eighteen  of  the
  economic  development  law,  or  such participant's contractor, shall be
  allowed a sales tax refund as provided in subdivision (f) of section one
  thousand one hundred nineteen of this chapter.
    (3) To be  eligible  for  the  economic  transformation  and  facility
  redevelopment  program  tax  credit,  the  taxpayer  must  meet  all the
  following requirements.
    (A) The taxpayer must be a participant or the owner of  a  participant
  in  the  economic  transformation  and facility development program. The
  commissioner of economic development must have issued a  certificate  of
  eligibility  pursuant  to  section  four  hundred  two  of  the economic
  development law to the taxpayer or to an entity in which the taxpayer is
  an owner. A copy of the certificate shall be attached to the  taxpayer's
  report or return.
    (B)  The taxpayer or the entity in which the taxpayer is an owner must
  be a qualified new business  as  defined  in  subdivision  (e)  of  this
  section.
    (C)  The taxpayer or the entity in which the taxpayer is an owner must
  create and  maintain  at  least  five  net  new  jobs  in  the  economic
  transformation area.
    (4)  The  benefit  period  for  the  tax  credits under articles nine,
  nine-A, twenty-two, thirty-two and thirty-three of this chapter is  five
  consecutive  taxable  years,  beginning  with  the first taxable year in
  which the five net new jobs are created. However, in no event  may  that
  benefit  period  start  later  than  two  years after the certificate of
  eligibility is issued. If, in  any  year  of  the  benefit  period,  the
  taxpayer  fails  to  maintain  the  required  level of five net new jobs
  (measured quarterly), the taxpayer will not be allowed a credit for that
  year. Such failure to be allowed a credit will not extend the taxpayer's
  benefit period.
    (b) Election of credit. No cost or expense paid  or  incurred  by  the
  taxpayer  or  the  entity  in which the taxpayer is an owner that is the
  basis for any of the above named credits shall  be  the  basis  for  any
  other  tax  credit  under this chapter. If a taxpayer elects to claim an
  economic transformation and facility redevelopment program  tax  credit,
  the election is irrevocable.
    (c)  Information  sharing.  (1)  Notwithstanding any provision of this
  chapter,  employees  and  officers  of  the   department   of   economic
  development  and  the  department  shall  be allowed and are directed to
  share and exchange:


   (A) information derived from tax returns or reports that  is  relevant
  to   a   taxpayer's   eligibility   to   participate   in  the  economic
  transformation and facility redevelopment program;
    (B) information regarding the credits applied for, allowed, or claimed
  pursuant  to this section and taxpayers who are applying for the credits
  or who are claiming the credits; and
    (C) information contained  in  or  derived  from  credit  claim  forms
  submitted  to  the  department  and  applications for admission into the
  economic transformation and facility redevelopment program.
    (2) Other than the information required to be contained in the  report
  issued  pursuant  to  subdivision  (d)  of this section, all information
  exchanged  between  the  department  of  economic  development  and  the
  department  shall  not  be subject to disclosure or inspection under the
  state's freedom of information law.
    (d) Economic transformation and  facility  redevelopment  program  tax
  credits   report.   (1)   The  commissioner  must  publish  an  economic
  transformation and facility redevelopment  program  tax  credits  report
  annually  by  July  thirty-first.  The  first  report  shall be due July
  thirty-first, two thousand thirteen.
    (2) The credits report shall contain the following  information  about
  the  economic  transformation  program  and  facility  redevelopment tax
  credits claimed under this chapter during the previous calendar year:
    (A) the name of each taxpayer claiming a credit; provided however,  if
  the  taxpayer  claims  a  credit  because  the taxpayer is a member of a
  limited liability company, a partner in a partnership or  a  shareholder
  in  a  New  York  subchapter  S  corporation,  the  name of each limited
  liability company, partnership or  New  York  subchapter  S  corporation
  earning  any  of  the  credit  must be included in the report instead of
  information about the taxpayer claiming the credit; and
    (B) the amount of  each  credit  earned  by  each  taxpayer;  provided
  however,  if  the  taxpayer  claims  a  credit because the taxpayer is a
  member of a limited liability company, a partner in a partnership  or  a
  shareholder in a New York subchapter S corporation, the amount of credit
  earned  by  each  entity  must  be  included  in  the  report instead of
  information about the taxpayer claiming the credit.
    (3) The credit report may also contain any other information  received
  by  the  commissioner  with  regard  to  the economic transformation and
  facility redevelopment program tax credits that the  commissioner  deems
  to  be  useful  in  evaluating  the  use of the credits. The information
  included in the credit report will be based  on  the  information  filed
  with  the  department  during  the previous calendar year, to the extent
  that it is practicable to use that information.
    (e)  Definitions.  (1)  The  terms  "participant",  "net  new   jobs",
  "economic   transformation  area",  "related  person",  "certificate  of
  eligibility", "benefit-cost ratio",  and  "qualified  investment"  shall
  have the same meaning as those terms have in section four hundred of the
  economic development law.
    (2)  The  term  "qualified  new business" means a business entity that
  satisfies all of the following tests:
    (A) the business entity must not be  currently  operating  or  located
  within  the  economic  transformation  area  in which it is applying for
  certification under article eighteen of the economic development law;
    (B) the business entity must not be  moving  existing  jobs  into  the
  economic  transformation  area in which it is applying for certification
  under article eighteen of the economic development law from another area
  of the state;
    (C) the business entity must not be substantially similar in ownership
  and operation to another taxpayer taxable or  previously  taxable  under


 section  one  hundred  eighty-three or one hundred eighty-four or former
  section one hundred eighty-five of  article  nine,  former  section  one
  hundred  eighty-six  of  this  chapter  or article nine-A, twenty-two or
  thirty-three  of  this  chapter  or  former  article  thirty-two of this
  chapter or the income or losses of which  is  or  was  includable  under
  article twenty-two of this chapter;
    (D)  the  business entity must not have caused individuals to transfer
  from existing employment in New York with another business  entity  with
  similar ownership to similar employment with the business entity;
    (E)  the business entity must not have acquired, purchased, leased, or
  had  transferred  to  it  real  property   located   in   the   economic
  transformation  area  in  which it is applying for certification if that
  real property was previously owned by an entity with similar  ownership,
  regardless of form of incorporation or organization; and
    (F) the business entity must not be substantially similar in operation
  to  a  business  entity  from  which  it  has  acquired real or tangible
  personal property that is located in the economic transformation area in
  which it is applying for certification under  article  eighteen  of  the
  economic development law.
    (3)  The  term "entity in which the taxpayer is an owner" shall mean a
  limited  liability  company  in  which  the  taxpayer  is  a  member,  a
  partnership in which the taxpayer is a partner and a New York subchapter
  S corporation in which the taxpayer is a shareholder.
    (f)  Cross-references.  For application of the credits provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (2) article 9-A: section 210-B(35).
    (3) article 22: section 606 (ss).
    (4) article 33: section 1511 (aa).
    (g) Economic transformation and facility  redevelopment  program  jobs
  tax  credit.  A  taxpayer  which  meets the requirements in this section
  shall be eligible to claim a credit  for  each  net  new  job  that  the
  taxpayer creates in the economic transformation area with respect to the
  project  for  which the certificate of eligibility is issued. The amount
  of such credit per job shall be equal to the product of the gross  wages
  paid and 6.85 percent.
    (h)   Economic   transformation  and  facility  redevelopment  program
  investment tax credit. (1) A taxpayer which meets  the  requirements  in
  this   section  shall  be  eligible  to  claim  a  credit  on  qualified
  investments with respect to the project for  which  the  certificate  of
  eligibility  is  issued. The credit shall be equal to ten percent of the
  cost or other basis for federal income tax  purposes  of  the  qualified
  investment at a closed facility.  Provided however, for purposes of this
  credit only, a taxpayer that is the owner of a closed facility described
  in  paragraph  (d)  of subdivision eleven of section four hundred of the
  economic development law, shall be allowed to include  in  its  cost  or
  other  basis  of  the  qualified  investment at the closed facility, any
  demolition costs incurred at  such  closed  facility.  Those  demolition
  costs  shall  be  limited  to  the following costs: (i) asbestos removal
  costs, (ii) rental of demolition equipment,  (iii)  personnel  costs  to
  operate  the  demolition  equipment, (iv) costs to remove and dispose of
  demolition debris, (v) the costs of any permits, licenses and  insurance
  necessary  for the demolition. The total amount of investment tax credit
  allowed  for  all  eligible  participants  under  this  subdivision  for
  qualified  investments  located at each closed facility shall not exceed
  eight million dollars. The credit shall be equal to six percent  of  the
  cost  or  other  basis  for  federal  income  tax purposes for all other
  qualified investments, but the credit allowed  to  a  taxpayer  may  not
  exceed four million dollars.


   (2) Costs incurred prior to the date the certificate of eligibility is
  issued are not eligible to be included in the calculation of the credit.
  A  taxpayer  which  is  a participant in the economic transformation and
  redevelopment program or is an owner of an entity that is a  participant
  is  not eligible for any other investment tax credit provided under this
  chapter.
    (3) If the taxpayer is a partner in a partnership, member of a limited
  liability company or shareholder of a New York S corporation,  then  the
  four million dollar limit imposed above by the preceding sentences shall
  be  applied at the entity level, so that the aggregate credit allowed to
  all the partners, members or shareholders of each  such  entity  in  the
  taxable  year  does  not  exceed  the  four  million  dollar limitation.
  Further, in order to properly administer the  limitation  of  investment
  tax credit at a closed facility, the department may disclose information
  about  the calculation and the amounts of the credits claimed under this
  subdivision for qualified investments at a particular closed facility to
  other taxpayers claiming investment tax credits under  this  subdivision
  at that same closed facility.
    (i)   Economic   transformation  and  facility  redevelopment  program
  training tax credit. (1) A taxpayer which meets the requirements of this
  section shall be allowed a credit for  qualified  training  expenditures
  paid  by  the  taxpayer  with  respect  to  the  project  for  which the
  certificate of eligibility is issued. The amount of the credit shall  be
  fifty percent of the qualified training expenses paid during the taxable
  year,  subject to a limitation of no more than four thousand dollars per
  employee per year for such training expenses. This credit  applies  only
  to  qualified  training  provided to employees who were hired after they
  lost their jobs at a closed facility as a result of the closure of  that
  facility  as  described in subdivision eleven of section four hundred of
  the economic development law.
    (2) Qualified training shall include a course  or  courses  taken  and
  satisfactorily   completed   by  an  employee  of  the  taxpayer  at  an
  accredited, degree granting, post-secondary college or university in New
  York state that (A) directly relates to the  duties  that  the  employee
  performs  for  the taxpayer within the economic transformation area; and
  (B) is intended to upgrade,  retrain  or  improve  the  productivity  or
  theoretical  awareness of the employee. Such course or courses shall not
  include classes in the disciplines of management, accounting or the  law
  or any class designed to fulfill the discipline specific requirements of
  a   degree   program   at  the  associate,  baccalaureate,  graduate  or
  professional level of these disciplines. Satisfactory  completion  of  a
  course  or  courses  shall  mean  the  earning and granting of credit or
  equivalent unit, with the attainment of a grade of "B" or  higher  in  a
  graduate  level  course  or  courses,  a  grade  of  "C" or higher in an
  undergraduate  level  course  or  courses,  or  a  similar  measure   of
  competency  for  a  course  that is not measured according to a standard
  grade formula.
    (3) Qualified training expenditures shall include expenses for tuition
  and mandatory fees, software  required  by  the  institution,  fees  for
  textbooks  or  other literature required by the institution offering the
  course or courses, minus applicable  scholarships  and  tuition  or  fee
  waivers not granted by the taxpayer or any related person, that are paid
  or  reimbursed  by  the taxpayer. Qualified training expenditures do not
  include room and board, computer hardware or software  not  specifically
  assigned  for  such course or courses, late-charges, fines or membership
  dues and similar expenses. Such qualified  training  expenditures  shall
  not  be  eligible  for  the  credit  provided by this section unless the
  employee  for  whom  the  expenditures  are  disbursed  is  continuously


 employed  by  the  taxpayer in a full-time, full-year position primarily
  located at a site in an economic transformation area during  the  period
  of  such coursework and lasting through at least one hundred eighty days
  after   the  satisfactory  completion  of  the  qualifying  course-work.
  Qualified training expenditures shall not include expenses for  in-house
  or  shared  training  outside  of  a  New  York  state  higher education
  institution or  the  use  of  consultants  outside  of  credit  granting
  courses,  whether  such  consultants  function  inside  of  such  higher
  education institution or not.
    (j) Economic transformation and facility  redevelopment  program  real
  property tax credit. (1) A taxpayer which meets the requirements of this
  section shall be allowed a credit measured by the real property taxes on
  the  real  property  located  in  the  economic transformation area with
  respect to the project for  which  the  certificate  of  eligibility  is
  issued.  In  the  first  taxable  year  that the taxpayer may claim this
  credit, the credit shall be equal to twenty-five  percent  of  the  real
  property  taxes assessed and paid during that year by the participant on
  the real property located in the economic transformation area outside of
  the closed facility. If the real property is located entirely within the
  grounds of a closed facility, the  credit  in  the  first  year  of  the
  benefit  period  shall  be  equal  to fifty percent of the real property
  taxes assessed and paid by the participant  during  that  year  on  that
  property.  In  the following years of the benefit period, the percentage
  decreases by five percentage points each year for real property  located
  in  the economic transformation area outside of the closed facility, and
  ten percentage points for real property located at the closed facility.
    (2) (A) For purposes of this credit, "real  property  taxes"  means  a
  charge  imposed  upon  real  property by or on behalf of a county, city,
  town, village or  school  district  for  municipal  or  school  district
  purposes,  provided  that  the  charge  is levied for the general public
  welfare by the proper taxing authorities at  a  like  rate  against  all
  property in the territory over which such authorities have jurisdiction,
  and provided that where taxes are levied pursuant to article eighteen or
  article  nineteen  of  the real property tax law, the property must have
  been taxed at  the  rate  determined  for  the  class  in  which  it  is
  contained,  as  provided by such article eighteen or nineteen, whichever
  is applicable.
    (B) The term "real property taxes" does not include a charge for local
  benefits,  including  any  portion  of  that  charge  that  is  properly
  allocated to the costs attributable to maintenance or interest, when (i)
  the  property  subject  to  the  charge  is limited to the property that
  benefits from the charge, or (ii) the amount of the charge is determined
  by the benefit to the property assessed, or (iii)  the  improvement  for
  which the charge is assessed tends to increase the property value.
    (C)  The term "real property taxes" includes payments in lieu of taxes
  made by the participant which  is  the  beneficial  owner  of  the  real
  property  to  the  state,  a  municipal  corporation or a public benefit
  corporation pursuant to a written agreement  entered  into  between  the
  participant  and  the  state,  municipal  corporation, or public benefit
  corporation. Provided, however, a payment in lieu of taxes made  by  the
  participant  pursuant  to  a written agreement shall not constitute real
  property taxes in any taxable year  to  the  extent  that  such  payment
  exceeds  the product of (i) the basis for federal income tax purposes of
  the real property  located  in  the  economic  transformation  area  and
  subject to that agreement, calculated without regard to depreciation, on
  the  last day of the taxable year, and (ii) the estimated effective full
  value tax rate within the county in which such property is  located,  as
  most  recently  calculated  by  the commissioner. The commissioner shall


 annually calculate estimated effective full value tax rates within  each
  county  for  this  purpose  based  upon  the  most  current  information
  available to him or her in relation to county, city, town,  village  and
  school district taxes.
    (k) Recapture of credits. If the participant at the end of its benefit
  period  has  not  created  sufficient  net  new jobs and made sufficient
  qualified investments to achieve a benefit-cost ratio of at least ten to
  one, the taxpayer shall be required to add back as tax in the last  year
  of  its  benefit  period  the portion of the economic transformation and
  facility redevelopment tax credits claimed in the years of  its  benefit
  period necessary to achieve a cost benefit ratio of ten to one.
    * NB Repealed December 31, 2026
    * NB There are 2 § 35's




   * § 35. Economic transformation and facility redevelopment program tax
  credit.  (a) General. (1) A taxpayer which is a participant or the owner
  of  a  participant  in  the   economic   transformation   and   facility
  redevelopment program under article eighteen of the economic development
  law  that  is  subject  to  tax  under  article  nine-A,  twenty-two  or
  thirty-three of this chapter shall  be  allowed  the  sum  of  following
  components  against  such  tax, pursuant to the provisions referenced in
  subdivision (f) of this section.
    (A) the economic transformation  and  facility  redevelopment  program
  jobs tax credit component;
    (B)  the  economic  transformation  and facility redevelopment program
  investment tax credit component;
    (C) the economic transformation and facility redevelopment program job
  training credit component; and
    (D) the economic transformation  and  facility  redevelopment  program
  real property tax credit component.
    (2)  A  taxpayer which is a participant in the economic transformation
  and  facility  redevelopment  program  under  article  eighteen  of  the
  economic  development  law,  or  such participant's contractor, shall be
  allowed a sales tax refund as provided in subdivision (f) of section one
  thousand one hundred nineteen of this chapter.
    (3) To be  eligible  for  the  economic  transformation  and  facility
  redevelopment  program  tax  credit,  the  taxpayer  must  meet  all the
  following requirements.
    (A) The taxpayer must be a participant or the owner of  a  participant
  in  the  economic  transformation  and facility development program. The
  commissioner of economic development must have issued a  certificate  of
  eligibility  pursuant  to  section  four  hundred  two  of  the economic
  development law to the taxpayer or to an entity in which the taxpayer is
  an owner. A copy of the certificate shall be attached to the  taxpayer's
  report or return.
    (B)  The taxpayer or the entity in which the taxpayer is an owner must
  be a qualified new business  as  defined  in  subdivision  (e)  of  this
  section.
    (C)  The taxpayer or the entity in which the taxpayer is an owner must
  create and  maintain  at  least  five  net  new  jobs  in  the  economic
  transformation area.
    (4)  The  benefit  period  for  the  tax  credits under articles nine,
  nine-A, twenty-two, thirty-two and thirty-three of this chapter is  five
  consecutive  taxable  years,  beginning  with  the first taxable year in
  which the five net new jobs are created. However, in no event  may  that
  benefit  period  start  later  than  two  years after the certificate of
  eligibility is issued. If, in  any  year  of  the  benefit  period,  the
  taxpayer  fails  to  maintain  the  required  level of five net new jobs
  (measured quarterly), the taxpayer will not be allowed a credit for that
  year. Such failure to be allowed a credit will not extend the taxpayer's
  benefit period.
    (b) Election of credit. No cost or expense paid  or  incurred  by  the
  taxpayer  or  the  entity  in which the taxpayer is an owner that is the
  basis for any of the above named credits shall  be  the  basis  for  any
  other  tax  credit  under this chapter. If a taxpayer elects to claim an
  economic transformation and facility redevelopment program  tax  credit,
  the election is irrevocable.
    (c)  Information  sharing.  (1)  Notwithstanding any provision of this
  chapter,  employees  and  officers  of  the   department   of   economic
  development  and  the  department  shall  be allowed and are directed to
  share and exchange:


   (A) information derived from tax returns or reports that  is  relevant
  to   a   taxpayer's   eligibility   to   participate   in  the  economic
  transformation and facility redevelopment program;
    (B) information regarding the credits applied for, allowed, or claimed
  pursuant  to this section and taxpayers who are applying for the credits
  or who are claiming the credits; and
    (C) information contained  in  or  derived  from  credit  claim  forms
  submitted  to  the  department  and  applications for admission into the
  economic transformation and facility redevelopment program.
    (2) Other than the information required to be contained in the  report
  issued  pursuant  to  subdivision  (d)  of this section, all information
  exchanged  between  the  department  of  economic  development  and  the
  department  shall  not  be subject to disclosure or inspection under the
  state's freedom of information law.
    (d) Economic transformation and  facility  redevelopment  program  tax
  credits   report.   (1)   The  commissioner  must  publish  an  economic
  transformation and facility redevelopment  program  tax  credits  report
  annually  by  July  thirty-first.  The  first  report  shall be due July
  thirty-first, two thousand thirteen.
    (2) The credits report shall contain the following  information  about
  the  economic  transformation  program  and  facility  redevelopment tax
  credits claimed under this chapter during the previous calendar year:
    (A) the name of each taxpayer claiming a credit; provided however,  if
  the  taxpayer  claims  a  credit  because  the taxpayer is a member of a
  limited liability company, a partner in a partnership or  a  shareholder
  in  a  New  York  subchapter  S  corporation,  the  name of each limited
  liability company, partnership or  New  York  subchapter  S  corporation
  earning  any  of  the  credit  must be included in the report instead of
  information about the taxpayer claiming the credit; and
    (B) the amount of  each  credit  earned  by  each  taxpayer;  provided
  however,  if  the  taxpayer  claims  a  credit because the taxpayer is a
  member of a limited liability company, a partner in a partnership  or  a
  shareholder in a New York subchapter S corporation, the amount of credit
  earned  by  each  entity  must  be  included  in  the  report instead of
  information about the taxpayer claiming the credit.
    (3) The credit report may also contain any other information  received
  by  the  commissioner  with  regard  to  the economic transformation and
  facility redevelopment program tax credits that the  commissioner  deems
  to  be  useful  in  evaluating  the  use of the credits. The information
  included in the credit report will be based  on  the  information  filed
  with  the  department  during  the previous calendar year, to the extent
  that it is practicable to use that information.
    (e)  Definitions.  (1)  The  terms  "participant",  "net  new   jobs",
  "economic   transformation  area",  "related  person",  "certificate  of
  eligibility", "benefit-cost ratio",  and  "qualified  investment"  shall
  have the same meaning as those terms have in section four hundred of the
  economic development law.
    (2)  The  term  "qualified  new business" means a business entity that
  satisfies all of the following tests:
    (A) the business entity must not be  currently  operating  or  located
  within  the  economic  transformation  area  in which it is applying for
  certification under article eighteen of the economic development law;
    (B) the business entity must not be  moving  existing  jobs  into  the
  economic  transformation  area in which it is applying for certification
  under article eighteen of the economic development law from another area
  of the state;
    (C) the business entity must not be substantially similar in ownership
  and operation to another taxpayer taxable or  previously  taxable  under


 section  one  hundred  eighty-three or one hundred eighty-four or former
  section one hundred eighty-five of  article  nine,  former  section  one
  hundred  eighty-six  of  this  chapter  or article nine-A, twenty-two or
  thirty-three  of  this  chapter  or  former  article  thirty-two of this
  chapter or the income or losses of which  is  or  was  includable  under
  article twenty-two of this chapter;
    (D)  the  business entity must not have caused individuals to transfer
  from existing employment in New York with another business  entity  with
  similar ownership to similar employment with the business entity;
    (E)  the business entity must not have acquired, purchased, leased, or
  had  transferred  to  it  real  property   located   in   the   economic
  transformation  area  in  which it is applying for certification if that
  real property was previously owned by an entity with similar  ownership,
  regardless of form of incorporation or organization; and
    (F) the business entity must not be substantially similar in operation
  to  a  business  entity  from  which  it  has  acquired real or tangible
  personal property that is located in the economic transformation area in
  which it is applying for certification under  article  eighteen  of  the
  economic development law.
    (3)  The  term "entity in which the taxpayer is an owner" shall mean a
  limited  liability  company  in  which  the  taxpayer  is  a  member,  a
  partnership in which the taxpayer is a partner and a New York subchapter
  S corporation in which the taxpayer is a shareholder.
    (f)  Cross-references.  For application of the credits provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (2) article 9-A: section 210-B(35).
    (3) article 22: section 606 (ss).
    (4) article 33: section 1511 (aa).
    (g) Economic transformation and facility  redevelopment  program  jobs
  tax  credit.  A  taxpayer  which  meets the requirements in this section
  shall be eligible to claim a credit  for  each  net  new  job  that  the
  taxpayer creates in the economic transformation area with respect to the
  project  for  which the certificate of eligibility is issued. The amount
  of such credit per job shall be equal to the product of the gross  wages
  paid and 6.85 percent.
    (h)   Economic   transformation  and  facility  redevelopment  program
  investment tax credit. (1) A taxpayer which meets  the  requirements  in
  this   section  shall  be  eligible  to  claim  a  credit  on  qualified
  investments with respect to the project for  which  the  certificate  of
  eligibility  is  issued. The credit shall be equal to ten percent of the
  cost or other basis for federal income tax  purposes  of  the  qualified
  investment at a closed facility.  Provided however, for purposes of this
  credit only, a taxpayer that is the owner of a closed facility described
  in  paragraph  (d)  of subdivision eleven of section four hundred of the
  economic development law, shall be allowed to include  in  its  cost  or
  other  basis  of  the  qualified  investment at the closed facility, any
  demolition costs incurred at  such  closed  facility.  Those  demolition
  costs  shall  be  limited  to  the following costs: (i) asbestos removal
  costs, (ii) rental of demolition equipment,  (iii)  personnel  costs  to
  operate  the  demolition  equipment, (iv) costs to remove and dispose of
  demolition debris, (v) the costs of any permits, licenses and  insurance
  necessary  for the demolition. The total amount of investment tax credit
  allowed  for  all  eligible  participants  under  this  subdivision  for
  qualified  investments  located at each closed facility shall not exceed
  eight million dollars. The credit shall be equal to six percent  of  the
  cost  or  other  basis  for  federal  income  tax purposes for all other
  qualified investments, but the credit allowed  to  a  taxpayer  may  not
  exceed four million dollars.


   (2) Costs incurred prior to the date the certificate of eligibility is
  issued are not eligible to be included in the calculation of the credit.
  A  taxpayer  which  is  a participant in the economic transformation and
  redevelopment program or is an owner of an entity that is a  participant
  is  not eligible for any other investment tax credit provided under this
  chapter.
    (3) If the taxpayer is a partner in a partnership, member of a limited
  liability company or shareholder of a New York S corporation,  then  the
  four million dollar limit imposed above by the preceding sentences shall
  be  applied at the entity level, so that the aggregate credit allowed to
  all the partners, members or shareholders of each  such  entity  in  the
  taxable  year  does  not  exceed  the  four  million  dollar limitation.
  Further, in order to properly administer the  limitation  of  investment
  tax credit at a closed facility, the department may disclose information
  about  the calculation and the amounts of the credits claimed under this
  subdivision for qualified investments at a particular closed facility to
  other taxpayers claiming investment tax credits under  this  subdivision
  at that same closed facility.
    (i)   Economic   transformation  and  facility  redevelopment  program
  training tax credit. (1) A taxpayer which meets the requirements of this
  section shall be allowed a credit for  qualified  training  expenditures
  paid  by  the  taxpayer  with  respect  to  the  project  for  which the
  certificate of eligibility is issued. The amount of the credit shall  be
  fifty percent of the qualified training expenses paid during the taxable
  year,  subject to a limitation of no more than four thousand dollars per
  employee per year for such training expenses. This credit  applies  only
  to  qualified  training  provided to employees who were hired after they
  lost their jobs at a closed facility as a result of the closure of  that
  facility  as  described in subdivision eleven of section four hundred of
  the economic development law.
    (2) Qualified training shall include a course  or  courses  taken  and
  satisfactorily   completed   by  an  employee  of  the  taxpayer  at  an
  accredited, degree granting, post-secondary college or university in New
  York state that (A) directly relates to the  duties  that  the  employee
  performs  for  the taxpayer within the economic transformation area; and
  (B) is intended to upgrade,  retrain  or  improve  the  productivity  or
  theoretical  awareness of the employee. Such course or courses shall not
  include classes in the disciplines of management, accounting or the  law
  or any class designed to fulfill the discipline specific requirements of
  a   degree   program   at  the  associate,  baccalaureate,  graduate  or
  professional level of these disciplines. Satisfactory  completion  of  a
  course  or  courses  shall  mean  the  earning and granting of credit or
  equivalent unit, with the attainment of a grade of "B" or  higher  in  a
  graduate  level  course  or  courses,  a  grade  of  "C" or higher in an
  undergraduate  level  course  or  courses,  or  a  similar  measure   of
  competency  for  a  course  that is not measured according to a standard
  grade formula.
    (3) Qualified training expenditures shall include expenses for tuition
  and mandatory fees, software  required  by  the  institution,  fees  for
  textbooks  or  other literature required by the institution offering the
  course or courses, minus applicable  scholarships  and  tuition  or  fee
  waivers not granted by the taxpayer or any related person, that are paid
  or  reimbursed  by  the taxpayer. Qualified training expenditures do not
  include room and board, computer hardware or software  not  specifically
  assigned  for  such course or courses, late-charges, fines or membership
  dues and similar expenses. Such qualified  training  expenditures  shall
  not  be  eligible  for  the  credit  provided by this section unless the
  employee  for  whom  the  expenditures  are  disbursed  is  continuously


 employed  by  the  taxpayer in a full-time, full-year position primarily
  located at a site in an economic transformation area during  the  period
  of  such coursework and lasting through at least one hundred eighty days
  after   the  satisfactory  completion  of  the  qualifying  course-work.
  Qualified training expenditures shall not include expenses for  in-house
  or  shared  training  outside  of  a  New  York  state  higher education
  institution or  the  use  of  consultants  outside  of  credit  granting
  courses,  whether  such  consultants  function  inside  of  such  higher
  education institution or not.
    (j) Economic transformation and facility  redevelopment  program  real
  property tax credit. (1) A taxpayer which meets the requirements of this
  section shall be allowed a credit measured by the real property taxes on
  the  real  property  located  in  the  economic transformation area with
  respect to the project for  which  the  certificate  of  eligibility  is
  issued.  In  the  first  taxable  year  that the taxpayer may claim this
  credit, the credit shall be equal to twenty-five  percent  of  the  real
  property  taxes assessed and paid during that year by the participant on
  the real property located in the economic transformation area outside of
  the closed facility. If the real property is located entirely within the
  grounds of a closed facility, the  credit  in  the  first  year  of  the
  benefit  period  shall  be  equal  to fifty percent of the real property
  taxes assessed and paid by the participant  during  that  year  on  that
  property.  In  the following years of the benefit period, the percentage
  decreases by five percentage points each year for real property  located
  in  the economic transformation area outside of the closed facility, and
  ten percentage points for real property located at the closed facility.
    (2) (A) For purposes of this credit, "real  property  taxes"  means  a
  charge  imposed  upon  real  property by or on behalf of a county, city,
  town, village or  school  district  for  municipal  or  school  district
  purposes,  provided  that  the  charge  is levied for the general public
  welfare by the proper taxing authorities at  a  like  rate  against  all
  property in the territory over which such authorities have jurisdiction,
  and provided that where taxes are levied pursuant to article eighteen or
  article  nineteen  of  the real property tax law, the property must have
  been taxed at  the  rate  determined  for  the  class  in  which  it  is
  contained,  as  provided by such article eighteen or nineteen, whichever
  is applicable.
    (B) The term "real property taxes" does not include a charge for local
  benefits,  including  any  portion  of  that  charge  that  is  properly
  allocated to the costs attributable to maintenance or interest, when (i)
  the  property  subject  to  the  charge  is limited to the property that
  benefits from the charge, or (ii) the amount of the charge is determined
  by the benefit to the property assessed, or (iii)  the  improvement  for
  which the charge is assessed tends to increase the property value.
    (C)  The term "real property taxes" includes payments in lieu of taxes
  made by the participant which  is  the  beneficial  owner  of  the  real
  property  to  the  state,  a  municipal  corporation or a public benefit
  corporation pursuant to a written agreement  entered  into  between  the
  participant  and  the  state,  municipal  corporation, or public benefit
  corporation. Provided, however, a payment in lieu of taxes made  by  the
  participant  pursuant  to  a written agreement shall not constitute real
  property taxes in any taxable year  to  the  extent  that  such  payment
  exceeds  the product of (i) the basis for federal income tax purposes of
  the real property  located  in  the  economic  transformation  area  and
  subject to that agreement, calculated without regard to depreciation, on
  the  last day of the taxable year, and (ii) the estimated effective full
  value tax rate within the county in which such property is  located,  as
  most  recently  calculated  by  the commissioner. The commissioner shall


 annually calculate estimated effective full value tax rates within  each
  county  for  this  purpose  based  upon  the  most  current  information
  available to him or her in relation to county, city, town,  village  and
  school district taxes.
    (k) Recapture of credits. If the participant at the end of its benefit
  period  has  not  created  sufficient  net  new jobs and made sufficient
  qualified investments to achieve a benefit-cost ratio of at least ten to
  one, the taxpayer shall be required to add back as tax in the last  year
  of  its  benefit  period  the portion of the economic transformation and
  facility redevelopment tax credits claimed in the years of  its  benefit
  period necessary to achieve a cost benefit ratio of ten to one.
    * NB Repealed December 31, 2026
    * NB There are 2 § 35's
   §  36.  Empire  state jobs retention program credit.  (a) Allowance of
  credit. A taxpayer subject to tax under article  nine-A,  twenty-two  or
  thirty-three of this chapter shall be allowed a credit against such tax,
  pursuant  to  the  provisions  referenced  in  subdivision  (e)  of this
  section. The amount of the credit, allowable  for  ten  consecutive  tax
  years,  is  equal  to  the  amount  determined  pursuant to section four
  hundred twenty-five of the economic development law.
    (b) Eligibility. To be eligible for the empire  state  jobs  retention
  credit,  the taxpayer shall have been issued a certificate of tax credit
  by the department of economic development pursuant to  subdivision  four
  of  section  four  hundred  twenty-four of the economic development law,
  which certificate shall set forth the amount of the credit that  may  be
  claimed for the taxable year. A taxpayer may claim such credit for up to
  ten  consecutive taxable years commencing in the first taxable year that
  the taxpayer receives a certificate of tax credit or the  first  taxable
  year listed on its preliminary schedule of benefits, whichever is later.
  However,  a  taxpayer  shall not be allowed to claim the credit prior to
  the tax year commencing on or after January first, two  thousand  twelve
  and  before  January first, two thousand thirteen. The taxpayer shall be
  allowed to claim only the amount listed on the certificate of tax credit
  for  that  taxable  year.  Such  certificate,   if   required   by   the
  commissioner,  shall  be  attached  to the taxpayer's return. No cost or
  expense paid or incurred by the taxpayer which is included  as  part  of
  the  calculation  of  this  credit  shall  be the basis of any other tax
  credit.
    (c) Information sharing. (1) Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  this
  chapter,   employees   and   officers  of  the  department  of  economic
  development and the department shall be  allowed  and  are  directed  to
  share and exchange:
    (A)  information  derived from tax returns or reports that is relevant
  to a taxpayer's eligibility to participate  in  the  empire  state  jobs
  retention program;
    (B)  information  regarding the credit applied for, allowed or claimed
  pursuant to this section and taxpayers who are applying for  the  credit
  or who are claiming the credit; and
    (C)  information  contained  in  or  derived  from  credit claim forms
  submitted to the department and  applications  for  admission  into  the
  empire state jobs retention program.
    Except   as  provided  in  paragraph  two  of  this  subdivision,  all
  information exchanged between the department of economic development and
  the department shall not be subject to disclosure  or  inspection  under
  the state's freedom of information law.
    (2) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, the commissioner or
  the  commissioner's  designee  is authorized to release the name of each
  taxpayer claiming the credit and the amount of the credit earned by each
  taxpayer. However, if the taxpayer claims a credit because the  taxpayer
  is  a  member of a limited liability company, a partner in a partnership
  or a shareholder in a subchapter S  corporation,  only  the  name  of  a
  limited  liability  company,  partnership  or  subchapter  S corporation
  participating in the empire state jobs retention program and the  amount
  of credit earned by that entity may be released.
    (d) Credit recapture. If a certificate of eligibility or a certificate
  of  tax  credit  issued  by the department of economic development under
  article twenty of the  economic  development  law  is  revoked  by  such
  department,  the  amount of credit described in this section and claimed
  by the taxpayer prior to that revocation shall be added back to  tax  in
  the taxable year in which any such revocation becomes final.


   (e)  Cross-references.  For  application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) article 9-A: section 210-B, subdivision 37;
    (2) article 22: section 606, subsection (tt);
    (3) article 33, section 1511, subdivision (bb).






	   §  37.  Alcoholic  beverage production credit. (a) General. A taxpayer
  subject to tax under article nine-A or twenty-two of this chapter,  that
  is  registered  as a distributor under article eighteen of this chapter,
  and that produces sixty million or  fewer  gallons  of  beer  or  cider,
  twenty  million  or  fewer gallons of wine, or eight hundred thousand or
  fewer gallons of liquor in this state in  the  taxable  year,  shall  be
  allowed  a  credit  against  such  taxes  in  the  amount  specified  in
  subdivision  (b)  of  this  section  and  pursuant  to  the   provisions
  referenced  in  subdivision (c) of this section. Provided, however, that
  no credit shall be allowed for any beer, cider, wine or liquor  produced
  in  excess  of  fifteen  million  five  hundred  thousand gallons in the
  taxable year.  If  the  taxpayer  is  a  partner  in  a  partnership  or
  shareholder  of  a  New  York S corporation, then the cap imposed by the
  preceding sentence shall be applied at the entity  level,  so  that  the
  aggregate  credit  allowed  to  all the partners or shareholders of each
  such entity in the taxable year does not exceed that cap.
    (b) The amount of the credit per taxpayer per  taxable  year  (or  pro
  rata  share  of  earned  credit  in  the case of a partnership) for each
  gallon of beer, cider, wine or liquor produced in this  state  shall  be
  determined as follows:
    (1) for the first five hundred thousand gallons of:
    i.  beer  produced in this state in the taxable year, the credit shall
  equal fourteen cents per gallon;
    ii.  cider,  artificially  carbonated  sparkling  cider,  and  natural
  sparkling cider, containing more than three and two-tenths per centum of
  alcohol by volume produced in this state in the taxable year, the credit
  shall equal fourteen cents per gallon;
    iii.  still  wine, artificially carbonated sparkling wine, and natural
  sparkling wine produced in this state in the taxable  year,  the  credit
  shall equal thirty cents per gallon;
    iv. liquors containing not more than twenty-four per centum of alcohol
  by  volume, but more than two per centum of alcohol per volume, produced
  in this state in the taxable year, the credit shall  equal  two  dollars
  and fifty-four cents per gallon;
    v.  liquors containing more than zero per centum of alcohol by volume,
  but not more than two per centum of alcohol by volume, produced in  this
  state in the taxable year, the credit shall equal zero;
    vi.  all other liquors produced in this state in the taxable year, the
  credit shall equal six dollars and forty-four cents per gallon; and
    (2) for each gallon of beer, cider, wine or liquor  produced  in  this
  state  in  the  taxable year in excess of five hundred thousand gallons,
  the credit shall equal four and one-half cents per gallon.
    (c) Cross-references. For application of the credit  provided  for  in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) Article 9-A: Section 210-B, subdivision 39.
    (2) Article 22: Section 606, subsections (i) and (uu).




   * § 38. New York innovation hot spot program tax benefits. (a) As used
  in  this  chapter,  the  terms  "New York state innovation hot spot" and
  "qualified  entity"  shall  have  the  same  meaning  as  under  section
  sixteen-v of the New York state urban development corporation act.
    (b)  A  taxpayer  under  article  nine-A  of  this  chapter  that is a
  qualified entity of a New  York  state  innovation  hot  spot  shall  be
  subject  only  to  the fixed dollar minimum tax, imposed under paragraph
  (d) of subdivision one of section two hundred ten of this  chapter,  for
  five  taxable  years, beginning with the first taxable year during which
  the qualified entity becomes a tenant in or part of  an  innovation  hot
  spot.  A  taxpayer  under  article  nine-A  of  this  chapter  that is a
  corporate partner in a qualified entity, or is a qualified  entity  that
  is  located  both  within  and  without an innovation hot spot, shall be
  allowed only a deduction for the amount of income or  gain  included  in
  its  federal  taxable  income  to  the extent that the income or gain is
  attributable to the operations at or as part of the innovation hot spot.
  The deduction is allowed for five  taxable  years,  beginning  with  the
  first taxable year during which the qualified entity becomes a tenant in
  or part of an innovation hot spot.
    (c)  An individual who is the sole proprietor of a qualified entity or
  a member of a limited liability company, a partner in a partnership or a
  shareholder in a New York subchapter S  corporation  where  the  limited
  liability  company, partnership, or S corporation is a qualified entity,
  that is taxable under  article  twenty-two  of  this  chapter  shall  be
  allowed  a  deduction  for  the amount of income or gain included in its
  federal adjusted gross income to the extent that the income or  gain  is
  attributable  to the operations of a qualified entity at or as a part of
  a New York state innovation hot spot. The deduction is allowed for  five
  taxable  years,  beginning  with the first taxable year during which the
  qualified entity becomes a tenant in or part of an innovation hot spot.
    (d) A qualified entity that is a tenant in or part of a New York state
  innovation hot spot shall be eligible for a credit or refund  for  sales
  and  use  taxes imposed on the retail sale of tangible personal property
  or services under subdivisions (a),  (b),  and  (c)  of  section  eleven
  hundred  five and section eleven hundred ten of this chapter. The credit
  or refund shall be allowed for sixty months  beginning  with  the  first
  full  month  after the qualified entity becomes a tenant in an incubator
  hot spot.
    (e) A taxpayer who claims any of the tax benefits  described  in  this
  section  is  no longer eligible for any other New York state exemptions,
  deductions, or credit or refunds under this chapter to the  extent  that
  any  such  exemption, deduction, credit or refund is attributable to the
  business operations of a tenant in or as part  of  the  New  York  state
  innovation hot spot. The election to claim the tax benefits described in
  this section is not revocable.
    (f) Cross-references. For application of the tax benefits provided for
  in this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (i)   Article  9-A,  section  208,  subdivision  (9),  paragraph  (a),
  subparagraph (18).
    (ii) Article 9-A, section 209, subdivision 11.
    (iii) Article 22, section 612, subsection (c), paragraph (39).
    (iv) Article 28, section 1119, subdivision (d).
    * NB There are 2 § 38's








   * §  38. Minimum wage reimbursement credit.  (a) A taxpayer that is an
  eligible employer or an owner of an  eligible  employer  as  defined  in
  subdivision  (b)  of this section shall be eligible for a credit against
  the tax imposed under article nine, nine-A, twenty-two, or  thirty-three
  of  this  article,  pursuant to the provisions referenced in subdivision
  (e) of this section.
    (b) An eligible employer is a corporation  (including  a  New  York  S
  corporation),  a  sole  proprietorship, a limited liability company or a
  partnership. An eligible employee is an individual who is  (i)  employed
  by an eligible employer in New York state, (ii) paid at the minimum wage
  rate  as defined in article nineteen of the labor law during the taxable
  year by the eligible employer, (iii) between the  ages  of  sixteen  and
  nineteen  during  the  period in which he or she is paid at such minimum
  wage rate by the eligible employer, and (iv) a student during the period
  in which he or she is paid at such minimum wage rate by the taxpayer.
    (c) For taxable  years  beginning  on  or  after  January  first,  two
  thousand  fourteen  and  before January first, two thousand fifteen, the
  amount of the credit allowed under this section shall be  equal  to  the
  product  of  the total number of hours worked during the taxable year by
  eligible employees for which they were paid at the minimum wage rate  as
  defined in article nineteen of the labor law and seventy five cents. For
  taxable  years beginning on or after January first, two thousand fifteen
  and before January first, two thousand sixteen, the amount of the credit
  allowed under this section shall be equal to the product  of  the  total
  number of hours during the taxable year worked by eligible employees for
  which  they  were  paid  at  such  minimum  wage rate and one dollar and
  thirty-one cents. For taxable years beginning on or after January first,
  two thousand sixteen and before January first,  two  thousand  nineteen,
  the  amount  of  the credit allowed under this section shall be equal to
  the product of the total number of hours during the taxable year  worked
  by eligible employees for which they were paid at such minimum wage rate
  and  one dollar and thirty-five cents. Provided, however, if the federal
  minimum wage established by federal law pursuant to  29  U.S.C.  section
  206  or  its  successors  is  increased above eighty-five percent of the
  minimum wage in article nineteen of the labor law, the dollar amounts in
  this subdivision shall be reduced to the difference between the  minimum
  wage  in article nineteen of the labor law and the federal minimum wage.
  Such reduction would take effect on the date that employers are required
  to pay such federal minimum wage.
    (d) Employer prohibition. An employer shall not discharge an  employee
  and  hire  an eligible employee solely for the purpose of qualifying for
  this credit. An eligible employee who is used  as  the  basis  for  this
  credit  may  not  be used as the basis of any other credit allowed under
  this chapter.
    (e) Cross references: For application of the credit provided  in  this
  section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (2) Article 9-A: Section 210-B, subdivision 40.
    (3) Article 22: Section 606, subsection (aaa).
    (4) Article 33: Section 1511, subdivision (cc).
    * NB There are 2 § 38's




   * §  38. Minimum wage reimbursement credit.  (a) A taxpayer that is an
  eligible employer or an owner of an  eligible  employer  as  defined  in
  subdivision  (b)  of this section shall be eligible for a credit against
  the tax imposed under article nine, nine-A, twenty-two, or  thirty-three
  of  this  article,  pursuant to the provisions referenced in subdivision
  (e) of this section.
    (b) An eligible employer is a corporation  (including  a  New  York  S
  corporation),  a  sole  proprietorship, a limited liability company or a
  partnership. An eligible employee is an individual who is  (i)  employed
  by an eligible employer in New York state, (ii) paid at the minimum wage
  rate  as defined in article nineteen of the labor law during the taxable
  year by the eligible employer, (iii) between the  ages  of  sixteen  and
  nineteen  during  the  period in which he or she is paid at such minimum
  wage rate by the eligible employer, and (iv) a student during the period
  in which he or she is paid at such minimum wage rate by the taxpayer.
    (c) For taxable  years  beginning  on  or  after  January  first,  two
  thousand  fourteen  and  before January first, two thousand fifteen, the
  amount of the credit allowed under this section shall be  equal  to  the
  product  of  the total number of hours worked during the taxable year by
  eligible employees for which they were paid at the minimum wage rate  as
  defined in article nineteen of the labor law and seventy five cents. For
  taxable  years beginning on or after January first, two thousand fifteen
  and before January first, two thousand sixteen, the amount of the credit
  allowed under this section shall be equal to the product  of  the  total
  number of hours during the taxable year worked by eligible employees for
  which  they  were  paid  at  such  minimum  wage rate and one dollar and
  thirty-one cents. For taxable years beginning on or after January first,
  two thousand sixteen and before January first,  two  thousand  nineteen,
  the  amount  of  the credit allowed under this section shall be equal to
  the product of the total number of hours during the taxable year  worked
  by eligible employees for which they were paid at such minimum wage rate
  and  one dollar and thirty-five cents. Provided, however, if the federal
  minimum wage established by federal law pursuant to  29  U.S.C.  section
  206  or  its  successors  is  increased above eighty-five percent of the
  minimum wage in article nineteen of the labor law, the dollar amounts in
  this subdivision shall be reduced to the difference between the  minimum
  wage  in article nineteen of the labor law and the federal minimum wage.
  Such reduction would take effect on the date that employers are required
  to pay such federal minimum wage.
    (d) Employer prohibition. An employer shall not discharge an  employee
  and  hire  an eligible employee solely for the purpose of qualifying for
  this credit. An eligible employee who is used  as  the  basis  for  this
  credit  may  not  be used as the basis of any other credit allowed under
  this chapter.
    (e) Cross references: For application of the credit provided  in  this
  section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (2) Article 9-A: Section 210-B, subdivision 40.
    (3) Article 22: Section 606, subsection (aaa).
    (4) Article 33: Section 1511, subdivision (cc).
    * NB There are 2 § 38's




   §  39.  Tax  benefits  for businesses located in tax-free NY areas and
  employees of such businesses.  (a)  (1)  Any  business  or  owner  of  a
  business  in  the  case  of  a  business taxed as a sole proprietorship,
  partnership or New York S corporation, that is located in a tax-free  NY
  area approved pursuant to article twenty-one of the economic development
  law  is  eligible for the tax benefits described in this section. Unless
  otherwise specified, such business or owner of such  business  shall  be
  eligible  for these tax benefits for a period of ten consecutive taxable
  years, commencing with the taxable year during which it locates  in  the
  tax-free NY area.
    (2)  In order to be eligible for these tax benefits during any taxable
  year, calendar quarter or sales  tax  quarter,  such  business  must  be
  approved  to participate in the START-UP NY program, must operate at the
  approved location  in  the  tax-free  NY  area,  and  must  satisfy  the
  eligibility  criteria  specified  in paragraph (b) of subdivision one of
  section four hundred thirty-three of the economic development law.
    (b) Tax-free NY area elimination credit. Such business or the owner of
  such business shall be eligible for the tax-free NY area tax elimination
  credit described in section forty of this article.
    (c-1) Excise tax on telecommunication services. Such business or owner
  of a business shall be eligible for  a  credit  of  the  excise  tax  on
  telecommunication  services  imposed by section one hundred eighty-six-e
  of this chapter that is passed through to such business, pursuant to the
  provisions referenced in subdivision (k) of this section.
    (d) Metropolitan commuter transportation district mobility tax. If the
  tax-free NY area at  which  such  business  is  located  is  within  the
  metropolitan  commuter transportation district (MCTD), and such business
  is an employer engaged in business within the MCTD, the payroll  expense
  of  such  business at such location within the tax-free NY area shall be
  exempt from the metropolitan commuter transportation  district  mobility
  tax  imposed  under  article  twenty-three  of  this  chapter  for forty
  consecutive calendar quarters,  commencing  with  the  calendar  quarter
  during  which  the  employer  locates in the tax-free NY area within the
  MCTD. If the tax-free NY area at  which  such  business  is  located  is
  within  the MCTD and the owner of such business is an individual who has
  net earnings from self-employment at such location,  such  net  earnings
  shall  be  exempt from the metropolitan commuter transportation district
  mobility tax imposed under article twenty-three of this chapter for  ten
  consecutive  taxable years commencing with the taxable year during which
  the business locates in the tax-free NY area.
    (e) To the extent specified, the wages of  an  individual  who  is  an
  employee  of  such  business  located within a tax-free NY area received
  from such business for employment in such  tax-free  NY  area  shall  be
  eligible  for  the  benefits  as  provided in article twenty-two of this
  chapter, the New York city personal income tax as  provided  in  article
  thirty  of  this  chapter,  the  Yonkers  city income tax as provided in
  article thirty-A of this  chapter,  and  the  Yonkers  earnings  tax  on
  non-residents  during  the  ten  taxable  year  period for such business
  specified in subdivision (a) of this section, provided the  requirements
  of this subdivision are satisfied.
    (i)  The  individual when employed by such business must be engaged in
  work performed exclusively at the location within the tax-free  NY  area
  during the taxable year.
    (ii)  The individual when employed by such business must be engaged in
  work at the location of such business within the tax-free NY area for at
  least one-half of the taxable year.
    (iii) Such business must be in compliance with  the  requirements  set
  forth in subdivision (a) of this section.


   (iv) The individual must be employed by such business in a net new job
  created by such business in the tax-free NY area.
    (f) Sales and use tax. Such business shall be eligible for a credit or
  refund  for  sales  and use taxes imposed on the retail sale of tangible
  personal property or services under subdivisions (a), (b),  and  (c)  of
  section  eleven  hundred  five  and  section  eleven hundred ten of this
  chapter and similar taxes imposed pursuant to the authority  of  article
  twenty-nine  of  this chapter. The credit or refund shall be allowed for
  one hundred twenty consecutive months beginning with  the  month  during
  which such business locates in the tax-free NY area.
    (g) Real estate transfer taxes. Any lease of property to such business
  shall be exempt from any state or local real estate transfer tax or real
  property transfer tax.
    (h) (A) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary,
  the  commissioner,  to the extent practicable, may disclose publicly the
  names and addresses of the businesses receiving any of the tax  benefits
  specified  in  this  section. In addition, the commissioner may disclose
  publicly the amounts of such benefits allowed to each such business, and
  whether or not a business created or maintained net new jobs during  the
  taxable  year.  With  regard  to  the  income tax exemption specified in
  subdivision (e) of this section, the commissioner may publicly  disclose
  the  aggregate  amounts  of  such tax exemption allowed to employees. In
  addition, the commissioner may publicly disclose the number of  net  new
  jobs  such  business  reports  on  its tax return or report or any other
  information necessary for the commissioner of  economic  development  or
  the  campus,  college  or  university  sponsoring  the  tax-free NY area
  approved pursuant to article twenty-one of the economic development  law
  to  monitor  and  enforce compliance with the law, rules and regulations
  governing the START-UP NY program.
    (B) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the
  commissioner, in determining whether a business or any of its owners  is
  entitled  to the tax benefits described in this section, may utilize and
  if necessary, disclose to  the  commissioner  of  economic  development,
  information  derived  from  the  tax returns of such business or related
  persons of such business and wage reporting information relating to  any
  employees of such business or its related persons.
    (i)  Such  business shall not be allowed to claim any other tax credit
  allowed under this chapter with respect to its activities  or  employees
  in such tax-free NY area.
    (j) If the application of a business for participation in the START-UP
  NY  program  specifies  that  failure to meet the performance benchmarks
  specified in such application shall result in proportional  recovery  of
  tax  benefits  awarded under the START-UP NY program, the business shall
  be required to reduce the total amount of tax benefits described in this
  section that the business or its owners claimed or received  during  the
  taxable year by the percentage reduction in net new jobs promised by the
  performance benchmarks, and if the tax benefits are reduced to an amount
  less  than  zero, those negative amounts shall be added back as tax. The
  amount required to be added back shall be reported  on  such  business's
  corporate   franchise  tax  report  if  such  business  is  taxed  as  a
  corporation or on the corporate franchise tax reports or personal income
  tax returns of the owners of such business if such business is taxed  as
  a sole proprietorship, partnership or New York S corporation.
    (k) Cross-references. For application of the tax benefits provided for
  in this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) Section 40.
    (4) Article 9-A: section 210-B, subdivision 41 and subdivision 44.


   (5)   Article   22:   section  606,  subsection  (i),  paragraph  (1),
  subparagraph (B), clause (xxxvi).
    (6) Article 22: section 606, subsection (ww) and subsection (yy).
    (7) Article 22: section 612, subsection (c), paragraph (40).
    (8) Article 23: section 803.
    (9) Article 28: section 1119, subdivision (d).
    (10) Article 31: section 1405, subdivision (b), paragraph 11.






	   §  39-a.  Penalties  for  fraud  in  the  START-UP  NY program. If the
  commissioner of economic development on his or her own initiative or  on
  the recommendation of a sponsoring campus, university or college finally
  determines  that  any  such  business  participating  in the START-UP NY
  program authorized under article twenty-one of the economic  development
  law  has acted fraudulently in connection with its participation in such
  program, such business:
    (a) shall be immediately terminated from such program;
    (b) shall be subject to applicable criminal penalties,  including  but
  not  limited  to  the  felony  crime  of offering a false instrument for
  filing in the first degree pursuant to section 175.35 of the penal  law;
  and
    (c)  shall be required in that year to add back to tax the total value
  of the tax benefits described in section  thirty-nine  of  this  article
  that  such business has received and that the employees of such business
  have received up to the date of such finding. The amount required to  be
  added  back  shall  be  reported  on such business's corporate franchise
  report if such business is taxed as a corporation or  on  the  corporate
  franchise  tax  reports  or personal income tax returns of the owners of
  such business if such  business  is  taxed  as  a  sole  proprietorship,
  partnership or New York S corporation.




   §  40.  The  tax-free NY area tax elimination credit. (a) Allowance of
  credit. A taxpayer that is a business or owner of a business in the case
  of a business taxed as a sole proprietorship, partnership or New York  S
  corporation,  that is located in a tax-free NY area approved pursuant to
  article twenty-one of the economic development law and is subject to tax
  under article nine-A, or twenty-two of this chapter, shall be allowed  a
  credit  against  such  tax,  pursuant  to  the  provisions referenced in
  subdivision (e) of this section, to be computed as hereinafter provided.
    (b) Amount of credit. The amount of the credit shall  be  the  product
  of:  (1) the tax-free area allocation factor; and (2) the tax factor.
    (c)  Tax-free  area  allocation  factor.  The tax-free area allocation
  factor shall be the  percentage  representing  the  business's  economic
  presence  in  the tax-free NY area in which the business was approved to
  locate pursuant to article twenty-one of the economic  development  law.
  This percentage shall be computed by:
    (1)  ascertaining  the  percentage  that  the  average  value  of  the
  business's real and tangible personal property, whether owned or  rented
  to  it, in the tax-free NY area in which the business was located during
  the period covered by the taxpayer's  report  or  return  bears  to  the
  average  value  of  the  business's real and tangible personal property,
  whether owned or rented to it, within  the  state  during  such  period;
  provided  that  the  term  "value  of  the  business's real and tangible
  personal property" shall have the same  meaning  as  such  term  has  in
  paragraph  (a)  of subdivision two of section two hundred nine-B of this
  chapter; and
    (2) ascertaining the percentage that the  total  wages,  salaries  and
  other  personal  service  compensation,  similarly computed, during such
  period of employees, except general executive officers, employed at  the
  business's  location  in the tax-free NY area, bears to the total wages,
  salaries and other personal service  compensation,  similarly  computed,
  during  such  period,  of all the business's employees within the state,
  except general executive officers; and
    (3) adding together the percentages so  determined  and  dividing  the
  result by two.
    For purposes of article twenty-two of this chapter, references in this
  subdivision  to  property,  wages,  salaries  and other personal service
  compensation shall be deemed to be references to  such  items  connected
  with the conduct of a business.
    (d)  Tax  factor. (1) General. The tax factor shall be, in the case of
  article nine-A of this chapter,  the  largest  of  the  amounts  of  tax
  determined  for  the  taxable  year  under paragraphs (a) through (d) of
  subdivision one of section two hundred ten of  such  article  after  the
  deduction  of  any  other  credits allowable under such article. The tax
  factor shall be, in the case of article twenty-two of this chapter,  the
  tax determined for the taxable year under subsections (a) through (d) of
  section six hundred one of such article after the deduction of any other
  credits allowable under such article.
    (2)  Sole  proprietors,  partners  and S corporation shareholders. (A)
  Where the taxpayer is a sole proprietor  of  a  business  located  in  a
  tax-free NY area, the taxpayer's tax factor shall be that portion of the
  amount   determined  in  paragraph  one  of  this  subdivision  that  is
  attributable to the income of  the  business  at  its  location  in  the
  tax-free  NY area. Such attribution shall be made in accordance with the
  ratio of the taxpayer's income from such business allocated  within  the
  state,  entering  into New York adjusted gross income, to the taxpayer's
  New York adjusted gross income, or in accordance with such other methods
  as the commissioner may prescribe as  providing  an  apportionment  that
  reasonably  reflects  the  portion of the taxpayer's tax attributable to


 the income of such business. In no event may  the  ratio  so  determined
  exceed  1.0.  The  income  from such business allocated within the state
  shall be determined as if the sole proprietor was a non-resident.
    (B)(i)  Where  the  taxpayer  is  a  member of a partnership that is a
  business located in a tax-free NY area, the taxpayer's tax factor  shall
  be  that  portion  of  the  amount  determined  in paragraph one of this
  subdivision that is attributable to the income of the partnership.  Such
  attribution  shall be made in accordance with the ratio of the partner's
  income from the partnership allocated within the state to the  partner's
  entire  income,  or  in  accordance  with  such  other  methods  as  the
  commissioner may prescribe as providing an apportionment that reasonably
  reflects the portion of the partner's tax attributable to the income  of
  the partnership. In no event may the ratio so determined exceed 1.0. The
  income  from  the  partnership  allocated  within  the  state  shall  be
  determined as if any of the partners was a non-resident.
    (ii) For  purposes  of  article  nine-A  of  this  chapter,  the  term
  "partner's  income  from  the  partnership"  means  partnership items of
  income, gain, loss and deduction, and New  York  modifications  thereto,
  entering  into  business  income  and the term "partner's entire income"
  means business income, allocated  within  the  state.  For  purposes  of
  article  twenty-two of this chapter, the term "partner's income from the
  partnership"  means  partnership  items  of  income,  gain,   loss   and
  deduction,  and  New  York modifications thereto, entering into New York
  adjusted gross income, and the term "partner's entire income" means  New
  York adjusted gross income.
    (C)  (i)  Where  the  taxpayer  is  a  shareholder  of  a  New  York S
  corporation that is a business  located  in  a  tax-free  NY  area,  the
  shareholder's  tax factor shall be that portion of the amount determined
  in paragraph one of this subdivision that is attributable to the  income
  of  the S corporation. Such attribution shall be made in accordance with
  the ratio of the shareholder's income from the S  corporation  allocated
  within  the  state, entering into New York adjusted gross income, to the
  shareholder's New York adjusted gross income, or in accordance with such
  other  methods  as  the  commissioner  may  prescribe  as  providing  an
  apportionment  that reasonably reflects the portion of the shareholder's
  tax attributable to the income of such business. The  income  of  the  S
  corporation   allocated   within   the  state  shall  be  determined  by
  multiplying the income of the S corporation  by  a  business  allocation
  factor  that shall be determined in clause (ii) of this subparagraph. In
  no event may the ratio so determined exceed 1.0.
    (ii) The business allocation factor for purposes of this  subparagraph
  shall  be  computed  by adding together the property factor specified in
  subclause (I) of this clause, the wage  factor  specified  in  subclause
  (II)  of  this  clause  and  the  apportionment  factor determined under
  section two hundred ten-A of this chapter and dividing by three.
    (I) The property  factor  shall  be  determined  by  ascertaining  the
  percentage  that  the  average value of the business's real and tangible
  personal property, whether owned or  rented  to  it,  within  the  state
  during  the  period  covered by the taxpayer's report or return bears to
  the average value of the business's real and tangible personal property,
  whether owned or rented to it, within and without the state during  such
  period;  provided  that  the  term  "value  of  the  business's real and
  tangible personal property" shall have the same meaning as such term has
  in paragraph (a) of subdivision two of section  two  hundred  nine-B  of
  this chapter.
    (II)   The  wage  factor  shall  be  determined  by  ascertaining  the
  percentage that the total wages, salaries  and  other  personal  service
  compensation,  similarly  computed,  during  such  period  of employees,


 except general executive officers, employed at the  business's  location
  or  locations  within  the state, bears to the total wages, salaries and
  other personal service compensation,  similarly  computed,  during  such
  period,  of  all  the business's employees within and without the state,
  except general executive officers.
    (3) Combined returns or reports. (A) Where the taxpayer is a  business
  located  in  a  tax-free  NY area and is required or permitted to make a
  return or report on a  combined  basis  under  article  nine-A  of  this
  chapter,  the  taxpayer's  tax  factor shall be the amount determined in
  paragraph one of this subdivision that is attributable to the income  of
  such  business.  Such  attribution  shall be made in accordance with the
  ratio of the  business's  income  allocated  within  the  state  to  the
  combined group's income, or in accordance with such other methods as the
  commissioner may prescribe as providing an apportionment that reasonably
  reflects  the  portion  of  the combined group's tax attributable to the
  income of such business. In no event may the ratio so determined  exceed
  1.0.
    (B)  The  term  "income of the business located in a tax-free NY area"
  means  business  income  calculated  as  if  the  taxpayer  was   filing
  separately  and the term "combined group's income" means business income
  as shown on the combined report, allocated within the state.
    (4) If a business is generating or receiving income  from  a  line  of
  business  or  intangible property that was previously conducted, created
  or developed by the business or  a  related  person,  as  that  term  is
  defined  in  section four hundred thirty-one of the economic development
  law, the tax factor specified in this subdivision shall be  adjusted  to
  disregard such income.
    (e)  Cross-references.  For  application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) Article 9-A: section 210-B, subdivision 41.
    (2)  Article  22:  section  606,  subsection   (i),   paragraph   (1),
  subparagraph (B), clause (xxxvi).
    (3) Article 22: section 606, subsection (ww).




   §  41.  Limitations on tax credit eligibility. Any taxpayer who stands
  convicted, or who is a shareholder of an S corporation or partner  in  a
  partnership  which  is  convicted,  of an offense defined in article two
  hundred or four hundred ninety-six or section 195.20 of  the  penal  law
  shall  not  be  eligible  for any tax credit allowed under article nine,
  nine-A, thirty-two or thirty-three of this chapter or any  business  tax
  credit allowed under article twenty-two of this chapter. For purposes of
  this  section, a business tax credit allowed under article twenty-two of
  this chapter  is  a  tax  credit  allowed  to  taxpayers  under  article
  twenty-two  which  is  substantially  similar to a tax credit allowed to
  taxpayers under article nine-A of this chapter. In the event a person or
  firm, partnership or corporation is convicted of an offense  defined  in
  article  two hundred or four hundred ninety-six or section 195.00 of the
  penal law, the office responsible for  prosecuting  such  offense  shall
  send  notice  of  such  conviction, together with the names of any firm,
  partnership or corporation of which the person is known to be a  member,
  partner, officer or director, to the commissioner.




   §  42.  Farm workforce retention credit. (a) A taxpayer that is a farm
  employer or an owner of a farm employer shall be eligible for  a  credit
  against  the  tax  imposed  under  article  nine-A or twenty-two of this
  chapter, pursuant to the provisions referenced  in  subdivision  (g)  of
  this section.
    (b)  A  farm  employer  is  a  corporation  (including  a  New  York S
  corporation), a sole proprietorship, a limited liability  company  or  a
  partnership who is also an eligible farmer.
    (c)  For  purposes of this section, the term "eligible farmer" means a
  taxpayer  whose  federal  gross  income  from  farming  as  defined   in
  subsection  (n)  of  section  six  hundred  six  of this chapter for the
  taxable year is at least two-thirds  of  excess  federal  gross  income.
  Excess  federal  gross  income  means the amount of federal gross income
  from all sources for the taxable  year  in  excess  of  thirty  thousand
  dollars.  For  purposes  of  this  section,  payments  from  the state's
  farmland  protection  program,  administered  by   the   department   of
  agriculture  and markets, shall be included as federal gross income from
  farming for otherwise eligible farmers.
    (d) An eligible farm employee is an individual  who  is  employed  for
  five  hundred  hours or more per taxable year, by a farm employer in New
  York state,  but  excluding  general  executive  officers  of  the  farm
  employer; provided, however, that where an individual employed by a farm
  employer  in  New  York state becomes unable to work due to a documented
  illness or disability, the hours such  individual  is  employed  may  be
  combined  with  the  hours worked by an individual hired to replace such
  individual when determining whether the five hundred hour threshold  has
  been met.
    (d-1)  Special  rules.  If  more  than  fifty percent of such eligible
  farmer's federal gross income from farming is from the sale of wine from
  a licensed farm winery as provided for in article six of  the  alcoholic
  beverage  control  law,  or  from the sale of cider from a licensed farm
  cidery as  provided  for  in  section  fifty-eight-c  of  the  alcoholic
  beverage  control  law,  then an eligible farm employee of such eligible
  farmer shall be included for  purposes  of  calculating  the  amount  of
  credit allowed under this section only if such eligible farm employee is
  employed  by  such eligible farmer on qualified agricultural property as
  defined in paragraph four of subsection (n) of section six  hundred  six
  of this chapter.
    (e)  For  taxable  years  beginning  on  or  after  January first, two
  thousand seventeen and before January first, two thousand eighteen,  the
  amount  of  the  credit allowed under this section shall be equal to the
  product of the total number of eligible farm employees and  two  hundred
  fifty  dollars.  For  taxable years beginning on or after January first,
  two thousand eighteen and before January first, two  thousand  nineteen,
  the  amount  of  the credit allowed under this section shall be equal to
  the product of the total number of eligible  farm  employees  and  three
  hundred  dollars. For taxable years beginning on or after January first,
  two thousand nineteen and before January first, two thousand twenty, the
  amount of the credit allowed under this section shall be  equal  to  the
  product  of the total number of eligible farm employees and five hundred
  dollars. For taxable years beginning on  or  after  January  first,  two
  thousand  twenty  and before January first, two thousand twenty-one, the
  amount of the credit allowed under this section shall be  equal  to  the
  product  of the total number of eligible farm employees and four hundred
  dollars. For taxable years beginning on  or  after  January  first,  two
  thousand  twenty-one  and before January first, two thousand twenty-two,
  the amount of the credit allowed under this section shall  be  equal  to
  the  product  of  the  total  number  of eligible farm employees and six


 hundred dollars. For taxable years beginning on or after January  first,
  two   thousand   twenty-two  and  before  January  first,  two  thousand
  twenty-six, the amount of the credit allowed under this section shall be
  equal  to the product of the total number of eligible farm employees and
  twelve hundred dollars.
    (f) A taxpayer claiming the credit allowed under  this  section  shall
  not be allowed to claim any other tax credit allowed under this chapter,
  except  the  credit  allowed  under section forty-two-a of this article,
  with respect to any eligible farm employee included in the total  number
  of  eligible  farm  employees used to determine the amount of the credit
  allowed under this section.
    (g) Cross references: For application of the credit provided  in  this
  section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) Article 9-A: Section 210-B, subdivision 51.
    (2) Article 22: Section 606, subsection (fff).




   § 42-a. Farm employer overtime credit. (a) Notwithstanding subdivision
  (f)  of  section  forty-two  of  this article, a taxpayer that is a farm
  employer or an owner of a farm employer shall be eligible for  a  credit
  against  the  tax  imposed  under  article  nine-A or twenty-two of this
  chapter, pursuant to the provisions referenced  in  subdivision  (i)  of
  this section.
    (b)  A  farm  employer  is  a  corporation  (including  a  New  York S
  corporation), a sole proprietorship, a limited liability  company  or  a
  partnership that is an eligible farmer.
    (c)  For  purposes of this section, the term "eligible farmer" means a
  taxpayer  whose  federal  gross  income  from  farming  as  defined   in
  subsection  (n)  of  section  six  hundred  six  of this chapter for the
  taxable year is at least two-thirds  of  excess  federal  gross  income.
  Excess  federal  gross  income  means the amount of federal gross income
  from all sources for the taxable  year  in  excess  of  thirty  thousand
  dollars.  For  purposes  of  this  section,  payments  from  the state's
  farmland  protection  program,  administered  by   the   department   of
  agriculture  and markets, shall be included as federal gross income from
  farming for otherwise eligible farmers.
    (d)  An  eligible  farm  employee  is  an  individual  who  meets  the
  definition of a "farm laborer" under section two of the labor law who is
  employed  by  a  farm  employer in New York state, but excluding general
  executive officers of the farm employer.
    (e) Eligible overtime  is  the  aggregate  number  of  hours  of  work
  performed  during  the taxable year by an eligible farm employee that in
  any calendar week  exceeds  the  overtime  work  threshold  set  by  the
  commissioner  of  labor  pursuant  to  the  recommendation  of  the farm
  laborers wage board, provided that work performed in such calendar  week
  in excess of sixty hours shall not be included.
    (f)  Special  rules.  If  more  than  fifty  percent  of such eligible
  farmer's federal gross income from farming is from the sale of wine from
  a licensed farm winery as provided for in article six of  the  alcoholic
  beverage  control  law,  or  from the sale of cider from a licensed farm
  cidery as  provided  for  in  section  fifty-eight-c  of  the  alcoholic
  beverage  control  law,  then an eligible farm employee of such eligible
  farmer shall be included for  purposes  of  calculating  the  amount  of
  credit allowed under this section only if such eligible farm employee is
  employed  by  such eligible farmer on qualified agricultural property as
  defined in paragraph four of subsection (n) of section six  hundred  six
  of this chapter.
    (g) The amount of the credit allowed under this section shall be equal
  to  the  aggregate  amount  of  such  credit  allowed  per eligible farm
  employee, as follows. The amount of the credit allowed per eligible farm
  employee shall be equal to one hundred eighteen percent of  the  product
  of  (1)  the  eligible  overtime  worked  during the taxable year by the
  eligible farm employee and (2)  the  overtime  rate  paid  by  the  farm
  employer to the eligible farm employee less such employee's regular rate
  of pay.
    (h)(1)  Taxpayers  shall have the option to request an advance payment
  of the portion of the amount of tax credit they are allowed  under  this
  section  for the amount of eligible overtime that the farm employer paid
  from January first through July thirty-first. To  be  eligible  for  the
  advance  payment, the farm employer must submit by September thirtieth a
  properly completed application to  the  department  of  agriculture  and
  markets,  in  a  form  prescribed by the commissioner of agriculture and
  markets, that demonstrates how much the farm employer paid  in  eligible
  overtime during that period. After reviewing a farm employer's completed
  application  for  the  advance payment of a portion of the amount of tax


 credit allowed under this section, the  department  of  agriculture  and
  markets may issue to that farm employer a certificate of tax credit that
  specifies  the  exact amount of the tax credit under this article that a
  taxpayer may claim as an advance payment pursuant to this subdivision.
    (2)  A  taxpayer must submit a request to the department in the manner
  prescribed by the commissioner after it has been issued a certificate of
  tax credit by the department of  agriculture  and  markets  pursuant  to
  paragraph  one  of this subdivision (or such certificate has been issued
  to a partnership, limited liability company or subchapter S  corporation
  in which it is a partner, member or shareholder, respectively, that is a
  farm  employer),  but  such  request  must  be  submitted  no later than
  November first of the  taxable  year  for  which  the  credit  is  being
  claimed.  For  those taxpayers who have requested an advance payment and
  for whom the commissioner has determined to be eligible for this credit,
  the commissioner shall advance a payment of the portion of the amount of
  tax credit allowed to the taxpayer.  The  taxpayer  will  claim  on  the
  taxpayers'  return for the taxable year the portion of the amount of tax
  credit allowed for eligible overtime paid  by  the  farm  employer  from
  August  first  through December thirty-first. The taxpayer must properly
  reconcile  the  advance  payment  of  tax  credit  allowed  under   this
  subdivision on the taxpayer's return.
    (3)  If  a  taxpayer  that  has  received an advance payment is not an
  eligible farmer for the taxable year for which it  received  an  advance
  payment, the taxpayer shall be required to add back as tax the amount of
  advance payment the taxpayer received during the taxable year.
    (4)  Notwithstanding  any  provision of this chapter, employees of the
  department of agriculture  and  markets  and  the  department  shall  be
  allowed to share and exchange:
    (i)  information  derived from tax returns or reports that is relevant
  to a taxpayer's eligibility for the credit allowed by this section;
    (ii) information regarding the credit applied for, allowed or  claimed
  pursuant  to  this section and regarding taxpayers that are applying for
  the credit or that are claiming the credit; and
    (iii) information collected  by  the  department  of  agriculture  and
  markets  and exchanged between the department of agriculture and markets
  and the department pursuant to this section  shall  not  be  subject  to
  disclosure or inspection under the state's freedom of information law.
    (i)  Cross  references: For application of the credit provided in this
  section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) Article 9-A: Section 210-B, subdivision 58.
    (2) Article 22: Section 606, subsection (nnn).




   * §  43.  Life  sciences  research  and  development  tax  credit. (a)
  Allowance of credit. (1) A taxpayer that is a  qualified  life  sciences
  company,  or  that is a sole proprietor of or a partner in a partnership
  that is a qualified life sciences company or a shareholder of a New York
  S corporation that is a qualified life sciences company, and is  subject
  to  tax  under  article  nine-A  or twenty-two of this chapter, shall be
  allowed a credit against such tax, pursuant to the  provisions  referred
  to  in  subdivision (e) of this section, for a period of three years, as
  provided in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph two of this  subdivision,  to
  be  computed  as provided in this section, provided that no credit shall
  be allowed for taxable years beginning on or after  January  first,  two
  thousand  twenty-eight.  Such  credit may be claimed in the taxable year
  specified on the certificate of tax credit issued to the qualified  life
  sciences company.
    (2)(i)  For a qualified life sciences company that employs ten or more
  persons during the taxable year, the amount of the credit shall be equal
  to fifteen percent of such qualified life  sciences  company's  research
  and  development  expenditures in this state for the taxable year. For a
  qualified life sciences company  that  employs  less  than  ten  persons
  during  the  taxable  year,  the  amount of the credit shall be equal to
  twenty percent of such qualified life sciences  company's  research  and
  development expenditures in this state for the taxable year.
    (ii)  The  credit  shall  be  allowed  only  with respect to the first
  taxable year during which the criteria set forth in this subdivision are
  satisfied, and with respect to  each  of  the  two  taxable  years  next
  following  (but  only,  with  respect  to  each  of  such years, if such
  criteria are satisfied). Subsequent certifications of the life  sciences
  company  by  the  department  of  economic  development pursuant to this
  section shall not extend the three taxable year time limitation  on  the
  allowance of the credit set forth in the preceding sentence.
    (3)  The total amount of credit allowable to a qualified life sciences
  company, or, if the  life  sciences  company  is  properly  included  or
  required  to  be  included  in a combined report, to the combined group,
  taken in the aggregate, shall not exceed five hundred  thousand  dollars
  in  any taxable year. If the taxpayer is a partner in a partnership that
  is a life sciences company or a shareholder of a New York S  corporation
  that  is  a  life  sciences  company,  then  the  total amount of credit
  allowable shall be applied at the entity level, so that the total amount
  of credit allowable to all the partners or  shareholders  of  each  such
  entity,  taken  in  the aggregate, does not exceed five hundred thousand
  dollars in any taxable year.
    (4) No research and development expenditures made by the life sciences
  company and used either as the basis for the  allowance  of  the  credit
  provided  for pursuant to this section or used in the calculation of the
  credit provided pursuant to this section shall  be  used  to  claim  any
  other  credit  allowed  pursuant  to  this  chapter  or  be  used in the
  calculation of any other credit allowed pursuant to this chapter.
    (b) Maximum amount of credits. The aggregate  amount  of  tax  credits
  allowed  under  this  section to taxpayers subject to tax under articles
  nine-A and twenty-two of this chapter in any taxable year shall  be  ten
  million  dollars, and shall be allotted from the funds available for tax
  credits under article seventeen of the economic  development  law.  Such
  aggregate  amount  of  credits  shall  be allocated by the department of
  economic development among taxpayers in order of priority based upon the
  date of filing an application for allocation of life  sciences  research
  and  development tax credit with such department. If the total amount of
  allocated credits  applied  for  in  any  particular  year  exceeds  the
  aggregate  amount  of  tax  credits  allowed  for  such  year under this


 section, such excess shall be treated as having been applied for on  the
  first day of the subsequent year.
    (c)  Definitions.  As  used  in this section the following terms shall
  have the following meanings:
    (1) "Certificate of  tax  credit"  means  the  document  issued  to  a
  qualified   life   sciences   company  by  the  department  of  economic
  development, after the department of economic development  has  verified
  that  such life sciences company has met all applicable criteria in this
  section to be eligible for the life sciences  research  and  development
  tax  credit  allowed  under  this  section, including but not limited to
  verifying that  the  life  sciences  company  is  a  new  business.  The
  certificate  shall be issued annually if such criteria are satisfied and
  shall specify the  exact  amount  of  the  life  sciences  research  and
  development  tax  credit  that  may  be  claimed  by such qualified life
  sciences company, pursuant  to  this  section,  and  shall  specify  the
  taxable year in which such credit may be claimed.
    (2) "New business" means any business that qualifies as a new business
  under  either  paragraph  (f)  of subdivision one of section two hundred
  ten-B or paragraph ten of subsection (a) of section six hundred  six  of
  this chapter.
    (3)  "Qualified  life sciences company" means a life sciences company,
  as defined in subdivision eleven of section three hundred  fifty-two  of
  the  economic development law, that has been certified by the department
  of economic development  as  a  life  sciences  company  and  is  a  new
  business.  Provided however, for purposes of the credit authorized under
  this  section,  the department of economic development shall not certify
  as  a  life  sciences  company  any  corporation,  partnership,  limited
  partnership,  or  other  entity  that  has  been  within the immediately
  preceding sixty months a related person to an  entity  that  is  a  life
  sciences company or an entity that is engaged in scientific research and
  development  as  defined  in  subdivision  twenty-two  of  section three
  hundred fifty-two of the economic development law.
    (4) "Research and development expenditures" means  qualified  research
  expenses  as  defined  in  subsection  (b) of section 41 of the internal
  revenue code, provided, however, that such qualified  research  expenses
  shall  not  include  amounts  under  subparagraph  (B) of paragraph 1 of
  subsection (b) of section 41 of the internal revenue code and as further
  described in paragraph 3 of subsection (b) of section 41 of the internal
  revenue code. If section 41 of the internal revenue  code  has  expired,
  then the research and development expenses shall be calculated as if the
  federal  research  and  development  credit  structure and definition in
  effect in section 41 in federal tax year two thousand nine were still in
  effect.
    (5) "Related person" means a related person as defined in subparagraph
  (C) of paragraph three of subsection (b) of section 465 of the  internal
  revenue  code.  For  this  purpose,  a "related person" shall include an
  entity that would have qualified as a "related person"  if  it  had  not
  been  dissolved,  liquidated,  merged  with  another entity or otherwise
  ceased to exist or operate.
    (d)(1) For purposes of this section, in order to be eligible  for  the
  life  sciences  research  and  development tax credit allowed under this
  section, a life sciences company must be issued  a  certificate  of  tax
  credit  by  the  department  of  economic development. The department of
  economic development shall verify that such life  sciences  company  has
  met all applicable eligibility criteria in this section before issuing a
  certificate  of  tax credit, including but not limited to verifying that
  the life sciences company is a new business.


   (2) The commissioner of economic development,  after  consulting  with
  the  commissioner, shall promulgate regulations by October thirty-first,
  two thousand seventeen to establish procedures for the allocation of tax
  credits allowed under this section. Such  rules  and  regulations  shall
  include  provisions  describing  the  application process for the credit
  allowed under this section, the due dates  for  such  applications,  the
  eligibility   standards  for  qualified  life  sciences  companies,  the
  standards  which  shall  be  used  to  evaluate  the  applications,  the
  documentation  that will be provided to taxpayers to substantiate to the
  department the amount of tax credits allocated to  such  taxpayers,  and
  such   other   provisions   as   deemed   necessary   and   appropriate.
  Notwithstanding any other  provisions  to  the  contrary  in  the  state
  administrative  procedure act, such rules and regulations may be adopted
  on an emergency basis if necessary to meet  such  October  thirty-first,
  two thousand seventeen deadline.
    (e)  Cross-references.  For  application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) article 9-A: section 210-B: subdivision 52.
    (2) article 22: section 606: subsection (hhh).
    (f) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, (i)  employees  and
  officers  of  the  department of economic development and the department
  shall be allowed and are directed  to  share  and  exchange  information
  regarding  the credits applied for, allowed, or claimed pursuant to this
  section and taxpayers who are applying for credits or who  are  claiming
  credits, including information contained in or derived from credit claim
  forms  submitted  to  the  department and applications for certification
  submitted to the  department  of  economic  development,  and  (ii)  the
  commissioner   and  the  commissioner  of  the  department  of  economic
  development may release the names and addresses of any taxpayer claiming
  the credit allowed under this section  and  the  amount  of  the  credit
  earned  by  the  taxpayer.  Provided, however, if a taxpayer claims such
  credit because it is a member  of  a  limited  liability  company  or  a
  partner in a partnership, only the amount of credit earned by the entity
  and not the amount of credit claimed by the taxpayer may be released.
    (g)  For purposes of the credit allowed under this section, the number
  of persons employed by a qualified  life  sciences  company  during  the
  taxable  year  shall  be  determined  by ascertaining the number of such
  individuals  employed  full-time  by  such  company,  excluding  general
  executive  officers, on the thirty-first day of March, the thirtieth day
  of June, the thirtieth day of September  and  the  thirty-first  day  of
  December during each taxable year, by adding together the number of such
  individuals  ascertained  on  each of such dates and dividing the sum so
  obtained by the number of such dates occurring within such taxable year.
  An individual employed full-time means an employee in a  job  consisting
  of at least thirty-five hours per week, or two or more employees who are
  in  jobs  that  together  constitute the equivalent of a job of at least
  thirty-five hours per week (full-time equivalent).
    * NB There are 2 § 43's




   * §  43. Single member limited liability companies and eligibility for
  tax credits. A limited liability company that has a single member and is
  disregarded as an entity separate from its owner for federal income  tax
  purposes  (without  reference  to  any  special  rules  related  to  the
  imposition of certain  federal  taxes,  including  but  not  limited  to
  certain  employment  and excise taxes) shall be disregarded as an entity
  separate from its owner for purposes of determining whether or  not  the
  taxpayer  that  is  the  single member of such limited liability company
  satisfies the requirements to be eligible for  any  tax  credit  allowed
  under  article  nine, nine-A, twenty-two or thirty-three of this chapter
  or allowed under article thirty-two of this chapter prior to the  repeal
  of  such  article.  Such  requirements, including but not limited to any
  necessary certification, employment or  investment  thresholds,  payment
  obligations,  and  any  time period for eligibility, shall be imposed on
  the taxpayer and the determination of whether or not  such  requirements
  have  been  satisfied and the computation of the credit shall be made by
  deeming such taxpayer and such limited liability company to be a  single
  entity.  If  the  taxpayer is the single member of more than one limited
  liability company that is disregarded as an  entity  separate  from  its
  owner,  the  determination  of  whether  or  not  the requirements to be
  eligible  for  any  tax  credit  allowed  under  article  nine,  nine-A,
  twenty-two  or  thirty-three  of  this  chapter or allowed under article
  thirty-two of this chapter prior to the repeal of such article have been
  satisfied and the computation of the credit shall  be  made  by  deeming
  such  taxpayer  and  such  limited  liability  companies  to be a single
  entity.
    * NB There are 2 § 43's




   §  44.  Employer-provided  child  care credit. (a) General. A taxpayer
  subject to tax under article nine-A, twenty-two, or thirty-three of this
  chapter shall be allowed a credit against such tax in an amount equal to
  two hundred percent of the portion of the credit that is allowed to  the
  taxpayer  under  section  45F  of  the  internal  revenue  code  that is
  attributable to (i) qualified child care expenditures paid  or  incurred
  with  respect  to  a  qualified  child care facility with a situs in the
  state,  and  to  (ii)  qualified  child  care  resource   and   referral
  expenditures  paid  or incurred with respect to the taxpayer's employees
  working in the state. The credit allowable under  this  subdivision  for
  any  taxable year shall not exceed five hundred thousand dollars. If the
  entity operating the qualified child care facility is a partnership or a
  New York S corporation, then such cap shall be  applied  at  the  entity
  level,   so  the  aggregate  credit  allowed  to  all  the  partners  or
  shareholders of such entity in a  taxable  year  does  not  exceed  five
  hundred thousand dollars.
    (b)  Credit  recapture. If there is a cessation of operation or change
  in ownership, as defined by section 45F of  the  internal  revenue  code
  relating  to  a qualified child care facility with a situs in the state,
  the taxpayer shall add back the applicable recapture percentage  of  the
  credit  allowed  under  this  section  in  accordance with the recapture
  provisions of  section  45F  of  the  internal  revenue  code,  but  the
  recapture  amount  shall  be  limited  to  the credit allowed under this
  section.
    (c) Reporting requirements. A taxpayer that has claimed a credit under
  this  section  shall  notify  the  commissioner  of  any  cessation   of
  operation,  change  in  ownership,  or  agreement  to  assume  recapture
  liability as such terms are defined  by  section  45F  of  the  internal
  revenue code, in the form and manner prescribed by the commissioner.
    (d)  Definitions.  The  terms  "qualified  child  care  expenditures",
  "qualified child care facility",  "qualified  child  care  resource  and
  referral  expenditure", "cessation of operation", "change of ownership",
  and "applicable recapture percentage" shall have the same meanings as in
  section 45F of the internal revenue code.
    (e) Cross-references. For application of the credit  provided  for  in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) article 9-A: section 210-B, subdivision 53;
    (2) article 22: section 606(i), subsections (i) and (jjj);
    (3) article 33: section 1511, subdivision (dd).




   §  45.  Empire  state  digital  gaming  media  production  credit. (a)
  Allowance of credit. (1) A taxpayer which  is  a  digital  gaming  media
  production  entity engaged in qualified digital gaming media production,
  or who is a sole proprietor of or a member of a partnership, which is  a
  digital  gaming  media  production  entity  engaged in qualified digital
  gaming media production, and is subject to tax under article  nine-A  or
  twenty-two  of  this chapter, shall be allowed a credit against such tax
  to be computed as provided herein for  taxable  years  beginning  on  or
  after January first, two thousand twenty-three and before January first,
  two thousand twenty-eight.
    (2)  The  amount of the credit shall be the product (or pro rata share
  of the product, in the case  of  a  taxpayer  who  is  a  partner  in  a
  partnership,  member  of a limited liability company or shareholder in a
  subchapter S corporation)  of  twenty-five  percent  and  the  qualified
  digital  gaming  media production costs of one or more qualified digital
  gaming media productions.
    (3) Qualified digital gaming media production costs  for  a  qualified
  digital  gaming  media  production  incurred  and paid in this state but
  outside such metropolitan commuter transportation district as defined in
  section twelve hundred sixty-two of the public authorities law shall  be
  eligible  for  a credit of ten percent of such eligible production costs
  in  addition  to  the  credit  specified  in  paragraph  two   of   this
  subdivision.
    (4)  All  applicants  to  this program are required, as a condition of
  receiving the credit, to include in the credits  of  each  digital  game
  development  media  production language and a logo to be provided by the
  governor's  office  of  motion  picture   and   television   development
  acknowledging the state's role in the creation of the production.
    (5)  A  qualified digital gaming media production that has applied for
  credit under the provisions of this section shall, as  a  condition  for
  the granting of the credit, file a diversity plan with the department of
  economic  development  outlining  specific  goals  for  hiring a diverse
  workforce. The commissioner of  economic  development  shall  promulgate
  regulations  implementing  the  requirements  of  this paragraph, which,
  notwithstanding  any  provisions  to   the   contrary   in   the   state
  administrative  procedure  act, may be adopted on an emergency basis, to
  ensure compliance with the provisions of this paragraph. The  department
  of  economic  development shall review each submitted plan as to whether
  it meets the requirements established by the  commissioner  of  economic
  development,  and  shall  verify  that  the  applicant  has  met or made
  good-faith efforts in achieving these goals.
    (b) Allocation of credit. The aggregate amount of tax credits  allowed
  under  this section, subdivision fifty-five of section two hundred ten-B
  and subsection (nnn) of section six hundred six of this chapter  in  any
  taxable  year  shall  be  five  million  dollars.  Such  credit shall be
  allocated by the department of economic development in order of priority
  based upon the date of filing an application for allocation  of  digital
  gaming  media production credit with such office. If the total amount of
  allocated credits  applied  for  in  any  particular  year  exceeds  the
  aggregate  amount  of  tax  credits  allowed  for  such  year under this
  section, such excess shall be treated as having been applied for on  the
  first day of the subsequent taxable year.
    (c) Definitions. As used in this section:
    (1)  "Qualified digital gaming media production" means: (i) a website,
  the digital media  production  costs  of  which  are  paid  or  incurred
  predominately  in connection with (A) video simulation, animation, text,
  audio, graphics or similar gaming related property embodied  in  digital
  format,  and  (B)  interactive  features of digital gaming (e.g., links,


 message boards, communities or  content  manipulation);  (ii)  video  or
  interactive games produced primarily for distribution over the internet,
  wireless  network or successors thereto; and (iii) animation, simulation
  or  embedded  graphics  digital  gaming  related  software  intended for
  commercial distribution regardless of medium;  provided,  however,  that
  the  qualified  digital  game development media productions described in
  subparagraphs (i) through (iii) of  this  paragraph  must  have  digital
  media  production  costs  equal  to or in excess of one hundred thousand
  dollars per production. A qualified digital gaming media production does
  not include a website, video, interactive game or software that is  used
  predominately  for:  electronic  commerce  (retail or wholesale purposes
  other than the sale of video  interactive  games),  gambling  (including
  activities regulated by a New York gaming agency), or political advocacy
  purposes.
    (2)  "Digital gaming media production costs" means any costs for wages
  or salaries paid to individuals, other than actors or writers,  directly
  employed  for  services  performed  by  those  individuals  directly and
  predominantly in the creation of a digital gaming  media  production  or
  productions.  Up  to  one hundred thousand dollars in wages and salaries
  paid to such employees, other than actors and writers, directly employed
  shall be used in the calculation of this credit.  Digital  gaming  media
  production  costs  include  but  shall  not  be  limited to payments for
  services  performed  directly  and  predominantly  in  the   development
  (including  concept  creation),  design,  production  (including concept
  creation), design, production (including  testing),  editing  (including
  encoding)  and  compositing  (including the integration of digital files
  for interaction by end users) of digital gaming  media.  Digital  gaming
  media  production  costs  shall  not  include  expenses incurred for the
  distribution, marketing, promotion, or advertising content generated  by
  end  users,  other  costs  not directly and predominantly related to the
  creation, production or modification of digital gaming  media  or  costs
  used  by  the  taxpayer  as  a basis of the calculation of any other tax
  credit allowed under this chapter. In addition, salaries or other income
  distribution related to the creation of digital  gaming  media  for  any
  person  who  serves  in  the  role  of  chief  executive  officer, chief
  financial officer, president, treasurer or similar position shall not be
  included as digital gaming media production costs if the digital  gaming
  media  production  entity has more then ten employees. Salaries or other
  income to a person serving in such a role for the digital  gaming  media
  production  entity shall also not be included if the person was employed
  by a related person of the digital gaming media production entity within
  sixty months of the date the  digital  gaming  media  production  entity
  applied  for  the tax credit certificate described in subdivision (d) of
  this section. For purposes of the preceding sentence, a  related  person
  shall have the same meaning as the term "related person" in section four
  hundred sixty-five of the internal revenue code. Furthermore, any income
  or  other  distribution to any individual including, but not limited to,
  licensing or royalty fees, who holds an ownership interest in a  digital
  gaming  media  production  entity,  whether  or  not  such individual is
  serving in the role of chief executive officer, chief financial officer,
  president, treasurer or similar position for such an entity,  shall  not
  be included as digital gaming media production costs. Up to four million
  dollars   in   qualified  digital  gaming  media  production  costs  per
  production shall be used in the  calculation  of  this  credit.  Digital
  gaming  media production costs shall not include those costs used by the
  taxpayer or another taxpayer as the basis calculation of any  other  tax
  credit allowed under this chapter.


   (3)  "Qualified  digital  gaming media production costs" means digital
  gaming media  production  costs  only  to  the  extent  such  costs  are
  attributable  to  the  use of property or the performance of services by
  any persons within the state directly and predominantly in the creation,
  production  or  modification of digital gaming related media. Such total
  production costs incurred and paid in this state shall be  equal  to  or
  exceed  seventy-five  percent  of  total  cost of an eligible production
  incurred and paid within and without this state.
    (4) "Digital gaming media  production  entity"  means  a  corporation,
  partnership,  limited  partnership or other entity or individual engaged
  in qualified digital game development media production.
    (d)  To  be  eligible  for  the  empire  state  digital  gaming  media
  production  credit, the taxpayer shall have been issued a certificate of
  tax credit by the department of economic development, which  certificate
  shall  set  forth  the  amount of the credit that may be claimed and the
  taxable year in which it shall be claimed. The taxpayer shall be allowed
  to claim only the amount listed on the certificate  of  tax  credit  for
  that  taxable  year.  In  order  to properly administer this credit, the
  department shall be allowed to exchange information with the  department
  of  economic  development  about  the  taxpayers  claiming  this credit,
  including information about the tax credits claimed. A taxpayer that  is
  a  partner  in  a  partnership, member of a limited liability company or
  shareholder  in  a  subchapter  S  corporation  that  has   received   a
  certificate  of  tax  credit  shall be allowed its pro rata share of the
  credit  earned  by  the  partnership,  limited  liability   company   or
  subchapter S corporation. The taxpayer shall claim the tax credit in the
  taxable  year  that  begins in the year for which it is allocated credit
  under this section.
    (e) Cross-references. For application of the credit  provided  for  in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) Article nine-A: section two hundred ten-B, subdivision fifty-five.
    (2)  Article  twenty-two:  section  six  hundred  six, subsection (i),
  paragraph one, subparagraph (B), clause (xlvi).
    (3) Article twenty-two: section six hundred six, subsection (nnn).




   § 46. Restaurant return-to-work tax credit. (a) Allowance of credit. A
  taxpayer  subject  to  tax  under  article  nine-A or twenty-two of this
  chapter shall be allowed a credit against  such  tax,  pursuant  to  the
  provisions  referenced in subdivision (f) of this section. The amount of
  the credit is equal to the amount determined pursuant  to  section  four
  hundred seventy-five of the economic development law. No cost or expense
  paid  or  incurred  by  the  taxpayer  which  is included as part of the
  calculation of this credit shall be the basis of any  other  tax  credit
  allowed under this chapter.
    (b)  Eligibility. To be eligible for the restaurant return-to-work tax
  credit, the taxpayer shall have been issued a certificate of tax  credit
  by the department of economic development pursuant to subdivision two of
  section four hundred seventy-four of the economic development law, which
  certificate shall set forth the amount of the credit that may be claimed
  for  the  taxable  year. The taxpayer shall be allowed to claim only the
  amount listed on the certificate of tax credit for that taxable year.  A
  taxpayer  that  is  a  partner  in  a  partnership,  member of a limited
  liability company or shareholder in a subchapter S corporation that  has
  received a certificate of tax credit shall be allowed its pro rata share
  of  the  credit  earned by the partnership, limited liability company or
  subchapter S corporation.
    (c) Tax  return  requirement  and  advance  payment  option.  (1)  The
  taxpayer  shall  be  required  to  attach  to its tax return in the form
  prescribed by the commissioner, proof of receipt of its  certificate  of
  tax  credit  issued  by  the  commissioner of the department of economic
  development.
    (2) Taxpayers who choose to  use  August  thirty-first,  two  thousand
  twenty-one  as the last date to calculate their average ending full-time
  employment and have received their certificate of tax credit by November
  fifteenth, two thousand twenty-one shall have the option to  request  an
  advance  payment of the amount of tax credit they are allowed under this
  section. A taxpayer must submit such request to the  department  in  the
  manner  prescribed  by  the  commissioner  after  it  has  been issued a
  certificate of tax credit by  the  department  of  economic  development
  pursuant  to subdivision two of section four hundred seventy-four of the
  economic development law (or such  certificate  has  been  issued  to  a
  partnership,  limited  liability  company or subchapter S corporation in
  which it is a partner, member or shareholder,  respectively),  but  such
  request must be submitted no later than November fifteenth, two thousand
  twenty-one.  For  those  taxpayers who have requested an advance payment
  and for whom the commissioner has determined eligible for  this  credit,
  the  commissioner  shall  advance a payment of the tax credit allowed to
  the taxpayer. However, in the case of  a  taxpayer  subject  to  article
  nine-A  of  this  chapter,  such payment shall be equal to the amount of
  credit  allowed  to  the  taxpayer  less   twenty-five   dollars.   Such
  twenty-five dollars shall represent a partial payment of tax owed by the
  taxpayer  under  article nine-A, including any fixed dollar minimum owed
  under paragraph (d) of subdivision one of section  two  hundred  ten  of
  this  chapter.  When  a  taxpayer files its return for the taxable year,
  such taxpayer shall properly  reconcile  the  advance  payment  and  any
  partial  payment  of  fixed  dollar  minimum  tax, if applicable, on the
  taxpayer's return.
    (d)  Information  sharing.  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of   this
  chapter,  employees  of  the  department of economic development and the
  department shall be allowed and are directed to share and exchange:
    (1) information derived from tax returns or reports that  is  relevant
  to   a   taxpayer's   eligibility   to  participate  in  the  restaurant
  return-to-work tax credit program;


   (2) information regarding the credit applied for, allowed  or  claimed
  pursuant  to this section and taxpayers that are applying for the credit
  or that are claiming the credit; and
    (3)  information  contained  in  or  derived  from  credit claim forms
  submitted to the department and  applications  for  admission  into  the
  restaurant  return-to-work  tax  credit  program.  Except as provided in
  paragraph two of this subdivision, all information exchanged between the
  department of economic development  and  the  department  shall  not  be
  subject  to  disclosure  or  inspection  under  the  state's  freedom of
  information law.
    (e) Credit recapture. If a certificate of tax  credit  issued  by  the
  department  of  economic  development  under  article twenty-five of the
  economic development law is revoked by such department,  the  amount  of
  credit  described  in  this section and claimed by the taxpayer prior to
  that revocation shall be added back to tax in the taxable year in  which
  any such revocation becomes final.
    (f)  Cross  references.  For application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) article 9-A: section 210-B, subdivision 56;
    (2) article 22: section 606, subsection (lll).




   § 46-a. Additional restaurant return-to-work tax credit. (a) Allowance
  of  credit. A taxpayer subject to tax under article nine-A or twenty-two
  of this chapter shall be allowed a credit against such tax, pursuant  to
  the provisions referenced in subdivision (f) of this section. The amount
  of the credit is equal to the amount determined pursuant to section four
  hundred  seventy-five-a  of  the  economic  development  law. No cost or
  expense paid or incurred by the taxpayer which is included  as  part  of
  the  calculation  of  this  credit  shall  be the basis of any other tax
  credit allowed under this chapter.
    (b)  Eligibility.  To  be  eligible  for  the  additional   restaurant
  return-to-work  tax  credit,  the  taxpayer  shall  have  been  issued a
  certificate of additional tax  credit  by  the  department  of  economic
  development  pursuant  to  subdivision  four  of  section  four  hundred
  seventy-four of the economic development law,  which  certificate  shall
  set  forth  the amount of the credit that may be claimed for the taxable
  year. The taxpayer shall be allowed to claim only the amount  listed  on
  the  certificate  of  additional  tax  credit  for  that taxable year. A
  taxpayer that is a  partner  in  a  partnership,  member  of  a  limited
  liability  company or shareholder in a subchapter S corporation that has
  received a certificate of additional tax credit shall be allowed its pro
  rata share of the credit earned by the  partnership,  limited  liability
  company  or  subchapter  S  corporation. However, the taxpayer must be a
  partner, member or shareholder of such  partnership,  limited  liability
  company  or  subchapter  S  corporation  as of April first, two thousand
  twenty-two.
    (c) Tax  return  requirement  and  advance  payment  option.  (1)  The
  taxpayer  shall  be  required  to  attach  to its tax return in the form
  prescribed by the commissioner, proof of receipt of its  certificate  of
  additional  tax  credit  issued by the commissioner of the department of
  economic development.
    (2) Taxpayers shall have the option to request an advance  payment  of
  the amount of tax credit they are allowed under this section. A taxpayer
  must  submit  such request to the department in the manner prescribed by
  the commissioner after it has been issued a  certificate  of  additional
  tax  credit  by  the  department  of  economic  development  pursuant to
  subdivision four of section four hundred seventy-four  of  the  economic
  development  law  (or such certificate has been issued to a partnership,
  limited liability company or subchapter S corporation in which it  is  a
  partner,  member or shareholder, respectively), but such request must be
  submitted no later than September thirtieth,  two  thousand  twenty-two.
  For  those  taxpayers who have requested an advance payment and for whom
  the  commissioner  has  determined  eligible  for   this   credit,   the
  commissioner  shall  advance  a payment of the tax credit allowed to the
  taxpayer. However, in the case of a taxpayer subject to  article  nine-A
  of  this  chapter,  such  payment shall be equal to the amount of credit
  allowed to the  taxpayer  less  twenty-five  dollars.  Such  twenty-five
  dollars  shall  represent  a partial payment of tax owed by the taxpayer
  under article nine-A, including any  fixed  dollar  minimum  owed  under
  paragraph  (d)  of  subdivision  one  of section two hundred ten of this
  chapter. When a taxpayer files its return for  the  taxable  year,  such
  taxpayer  shall  properly  reconcile the advance payment and any partial
  payment of fixed dollar minimum tax, if applicable,  on  the  taxpayer's
  return.
    (d)   Information  sharing.  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  this
  chapter, employees of the department of  economic  development  and  the
  department shall be allowed and are directed to share and exchange:


   (1)  information derived from tax returns or reports that are relevant
  to  a  taxpayer's  eligibility  to   participate   in   the   restaurant
  return-to-work tax credit program;
    (2)  information regarding the credit applied for, allowed, or claimed
  pursuant to this section and taxpayers that are applying for the  credit
  or that are claiming the credit; and
    (3)  information  contained  in  or  derived  from  credit claim forms
  submitted to the department and  applications  for  admission  into  the
  restaurant  return-to-work  tax  credit  program.  Except as provided in
  paragraph two of this subdivision, all information exchanged between the
  department of economic development  and  the  department  shall  not  be
  subject  to  disclosure  or  inspection  under  the  state's  freedom of
  information law.
    (e) Credit recapture. If a certificate of additional tax credit issued
  by the department of economic development under article  twenty-five  of
  the  economic  development law is revoked by such department, the amount
  of credit described in this section and claimed by the taxpayer prior to
  that revocation shall be added back to tax in the taxable year in  which
  any such revocation becomes final.
    (f)  Cross  references.  For application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) article 9-A: section 210-B, subdivision 56-a;
    (2) article 22: section 606, subsection (nnn).




   * §  47. COVID-19 capital costs tax credit. (a) Allowance of credit. A
  taxpayer subject to tax under  article  nine-A  or  twenty-two  of  this
  chapter  shall  be  allowed  a  credit against such tax, pursuant to the
  provisions referenced in subdivision (f) of this section. The amount  of
  the  credit  is  equal to the amount determined pursuant to section four
  hundred eighty-five of the economic development law. No cost or  expense
  paid  or  incurred  by  the  taxpayer  which  is included as part of the
  calculation of this credit shall be the basis of any  other  tax  credit
  allowed under this chapter.
    (b)  Eligibility.  To  be  eligible for the COVID-19 capital costs tax
  credit, the taxpayer shall have been issued a certificate of tax  credit
  by  the department of economic development pursuant to subdivision three
  of section four hundred eighty-four of  the  economic  development  law,
  which  certificate  shall set forth the amount of the credit that may be
  claimed for the taxable year. The taxpayer shall  be  allowed  to  claim
  only the amount listed on the certificate of tax credit for that taxable
  year. A taxpayer that is a partner in a partnership, member of a limited
  liability  company or shareholder in a subchapter S corporation that has
  received a certificate of tax credit shall be allowed its pro rata share
  of the credit earned by the partnership, limited  liability  company  or
  subchapter S corporation.
    (c)  Tax  return requirement. The taxpayer shall be required to attach
  to its tax return in the form prescribed by the commissioner,  proof  of
  receipt  of  its certificate of tax credit issued by the commissioner of
  the department of economic development.
    (d)  Information  sharing.  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of   this
  chapter,  employees  of  the  department of economic development and the
  department shall be allowed and are directed to share and exchange:
    (1) information derived from tax returns or reports that  is  relevant
  to a taxpayer's eligibility to participate in the COVID-19 capital costs
  tax credit program;
    (2)  information  regarding the credit applied for, allowed or claimed
  pursuant to this section and taxpayers that are applying for the  credit
  or that are claiming the credit; and
    (3)  information  contained  in  or  derived  from  credit claim forms
  submitted to the department and  applications  for  admission  into  the
  COVID-19  capital  costs  tax  credit  program.  Except  as  provided in
  paragraph two of this subdivision, all information exchanged between the
  department of economic development  and  the  department  shall  not  be
  subject  to  disclosure  or  inspection  under  the  state's  freedom of
  information law.
    (e) Credit recapture. If a certificate of tax  credit  issued  by  the
  department  of  economic  development  under  article  twenty-six of the
  economic development law is revoked by such department,  the  amount  of
  credit  described  in  this section and claimed by the taxpayer prior to
  that revocation shall be added back to tax in the taxable year in  which
  any such revocation becomes final.
    (f)  Cross  references.  For application of the credit provided for in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) article 9-A: section 210-B, subdivision 58;
    (2) article 22: section 606, subsection (nnn).
    * NB There are 3 § 47's






	   * §  47.  Grade  no.  6  heating  oil  conversion  tax credit. (a) (1)
  Allowance of credit. A taxpayer that meets the eligibility  requirements
  of  subdivision  (b) of this section and is subject to tax under article
  nine-A or twenty-two of this chapter may be eligible to  claim  a  grade
  no.  6  heating  oil  conversion  tax  credit  in  the  taxable year the
  conversion is complete. The credit shall be equal to  fifty  percent  of
  the  conversion  costs  for all of the taxpayer's buildings located at a
  facility regulated pursuant to section 19-0302 or title ten  of  article
  seventeen  of  the environmental conservation law, paid by such taxpayer
  on or after January first, two thousand twenty-two  and  before  January
  first,  two  thousand twenty-four. The credit cannot exceed five hundred
  thousand dollars per facility.
    (2) A taxpayer that is a partner in a partnership, member of a limited
  liability company or shareholder in a subchapter S corporation shall  be
  allowed  its  pro  rata  share  of the credit earned by the partnership,
  limited liability company or subchapter S  corporation  that  meets  the
  eligibility  criteria  described  in  subdivision (b) of this section to
  claim a grade no. 6 heating oil conversion tax credit. In no  event  may
  the  total  amount  of  the  credit  earned  by the partnership, limited
  liability company  or  subchapter  S  corporation  exceed  five  hundred
  thousand  dollars  for  all  buildings  located  at  a  New  York  state
  department of environmental conservation regulated facility.
    (3) No cost or expense paid  or  incurred  by  the  taxpayer  that  is
  included as part of the calculation of this credit shall be the basis of
  any other tax credit allowed under this chapter.
    (b)  Eligibility  criteria.  (1) To be eligible to claim a grade no. 6
  heating oil conversion tax credit, a business entity must:
    (i) incur expenses for the conversion from grade  no.  6  heating  oil
  fuel, as described as "conversion costs" in paragraph (1) of subdivision
  (c)  of this section, to biodiesel heating oil or a geothermal system at
  any building located in New York state outside the city of New York;
    (ii) submit an application to and obtain approval of such  application
  by  the  New  York  state  energy  research  and  development  authority
  describing  the  conversion  and  approved  costs   to   complete   such
  conversion;
    (iii)  not be principally engaged in the generation or distribution of
  electricity, power or energy;
    (iv) be in compliance with all  environmental  conservation  laws  and
  regulations; and
    (v)  not owe past due state taxes unless the business entity is making
  payments and  complying  with  an  approved  binding  payment  agreement
  entered into with the taxing authority.
    (c)  Definitions.  As  used  in this section the following terms shall
  have the following meanings:
    (1) Conversion costs means the equipment and  labor  costs  associated
  with  the design, installation and use of space heating and other energy
  conversion systems that are  designed  to  or  accommodate  the  use  of
  biodiesel  fuel  or  a  geothermal  system  and,  at  the  option of the
  taxpayer, the costs  of  completing  an  ASHRAE  level  2  energy  audit
  including assessment of electrification options.
    (2)  Biodiesel  means  a  minimum  blend  of  eighty-five (85) percent
  biodiesel, defined as fuel  manufactured  from  vegetable  oils,  animal
  fats,  or  other  agricultural  or  other  products or by-products, with
  petrodiesel fuel commonly used for heating systems.
    (3) Geothermal means a system that uses the ground or ground water  as
  a  thermal  energy source/sink to heat or cool a building or provide hot
  water within the building.


   (4)  A  New  York  state  department  of  environmental   conservation
  regulated  facility  is a facility regulated pursuant to section 19-0302
  or title ten of article seventeen of the environmental conservation law.
    (d)  The  commissioner, in consultation with the New York state energy
  research and development authority, will develop an application  process
  to certify the expenses necessary for the conversion and a taxpayer will
  not  be  eligible  to  claim  the  credit  unless  it has completed that
  application process and the application has been  approved  by  the  New
  York state energy research and development authority.
    (e)   Information   sharing.   The   department,   the  department  of
  environmental conservation and the New York state  energy  research  and
  development  authority  shall  be  allowed and are directed to share and
  exchange information regarding the information contained on  the  credit
  application  for  claiming  the  grade  no. 6 heating oil conversion tax
  credit and  such  information  exchanged  between  the  department,  the
  department  of  environmental conservation and the New York state energy
  research and development authority shall not be subject to disclosure or
  inspection under the state's freedom of information law.
    (f) Cross references. For application of the credit  provided  for  in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) article 9-A: section 210-B, subdivision 58;
    (2) article 22: section 606, subsection (nnn).
    * NB There are 3 § 47's




   * § 47. Suspension  of  certain  taxes  on motor fuel and Diesel motor
  fuel.  (a) Definitions. For purposes of this section:
    (1) "Distributor" shall have the same meaning as that term is  defined
  in subdivision one of section two hundred eighty-two of this chapter;
    (2)  "Motor  fuel" shall have the same meaning as that term is defined
  in subdivision two of section two hundred eighty-two of this chapter;
    (3) "Diesel motor fuel" shall mean  "highway  diesel  motor  fuel"  as
  defined  in  subdivision  sixteen-a of section two hundred eighty-two of
  this chapter;
    (4) The terms "retail sale", "sale" and  "use"  shall  have  the  same
  meanings  as  those  terms  are defined in section eleven hundred one of
  this chapter.
    (b) Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the following taxes
  shall be suspended beginning on June first, two thousand twenty-two  and
  ending  on December thirty-first, two thousand twenty-two: (1) the taxes
  imposed on Diesel motor fuel by subdivision one of section  two  hundred
  eighty-two-a,  and  sections  two  hundred  eighty-two-b and two hundred
  eighty-two-c of this chapter; (2) the taxes imposed  on  motor  fuel  by
  sections  two  hundred  eighty-four,  two  hundred eighty-four-a and two
  hundred eighty-four-c of this chapter; and (3) the prepaid  sales  taxes
  imposed  on  motor  fuel  and  Diesel  motor  fuel by subdivision (a) of
  section eleven hundred two of this chapter.
    (c) Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, beginning  on  June
  first,  two thousand twenty-two and ending on December thirty-first, two
  thousand twenty-two, the state sales and use taxes imposed  by  sections
  eleven  hundred five, eleven hundred nine and eleven hundred ten of this
  chapter shall not apply to sales or uses of motor fuel or  Diesel  motor
  fuel,  and the provisions of subdivision (e), and paragraphs one and two
  of subdivision (m) of section eleven  hundred  eleven  of  this  chapter
  shall  be  suspended.  Nothing  in  this  subdivision  shall  affect the
  application of the taxes imposed pursuant to the  authority  of  article
  twenty-nine of this chapter to motor fuel or Diesel motor fuel.
    (d)  The  taxes  described in subdivisions (b) and (c) of this section
  shall not be included in the price of motor fuel or  Diesel  motor  fuel
  sold for the period beginning on June first, two thousand twenty-two and
  ending  on  December thirty-first, two thousand twenty-two. Any retailer
  that purchases motor fuel or Diesel motor fuel during such  period  upon
  which  such taxes were previously paid and included in the price paid by
  such retailer shall be entitled to a refund or credit of such taxes.
    (e) Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, beginning  on  June
  first,  two thousand twenty-two and ending on December thirty-first, two
  thousand twenty-two, the composite rates of tax applicable for  purposes
  of  subdivision  two of section five hundred three-a and subdivision (b)
  of section five hundred twenty-three of this chapter shall be determined
  without  reference  to  the  suspension  of  the  taxes   described   by
  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c) of this section, but shall be computed using
  the respective  rates  in  effect  on  May  thirty-first,  two  thousand
  twenty-two.
    (f)  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, on or
  before the fifth day each month  for  the  period  beginning  July,  two
  thousand  twenty-two  and ending January, two thousand twenty-three, the
  comptroller shall, in consultation with the director of the division  of
  the  budget,  transfer  from the general fund to the mass transportation
  operating assistance fund created by section eighty-eight-a of the state
  finance law, the dedicated highway and bridge trust fund established  by
  section eighty-nine-b of such law, and the dedicated mass transportation
  trust  fund  established  by  section eighty-nine-c of such law, amounts
  equal to the revenue distributed to such funds from the taxes  described


 in  subdivisions  (b)  and  (c) of this section in state fiscal year two
  thousand twenty-one--two thousand twenty-two, adjusted by the change  in
  such   amounts   projected   for   state   fiscal   year   two  thousand
  twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three as if the suspension of such taxes
  had  not  occurred,  as  reflected in the state fiscal year two thousand
  twenty-two--two thousand twenty-three enacted budget.
    (g) Every person engaged in the retail sale of motor  fuel  or  Diesel
  motor  fuel  or  a  distributor  of  such  fuels,  shall comply with the
  provisions of this section by reducing the prices charged for motor fuel
  and Diesel motor fuel in an amount  equal  to  any  reduction  in  taxes
  prepaid by the distributor or imposed on retail customers resulting from
  the  suspension  of taxes on motor fuel and Diesel motor fuel under this
  section.
    * NB There are 3 § 47's




   §  48.  Child care creation and expansion tax credit. (a) Allowance of
  credit. A taxpayer subject to tax under article  nine-A,  twenty-two  or
  thirty-three of this chapter shall be allowed a credit against such tax,
  pursuant  to  the  provisions  referenced  in  subdivision  (f)  of this
  section. The amount of the credit is  equal  to  the  amount  determined
  pursuant  to  section three hundred ninety-four-d of the social services
  law and shall be claimed in the taxable year that includes the last  day
  of  the  service  year  for  which  the credit is calculated. No cost or
  expense paid or incurred by the taxpayer that is included as part of the
  calculation of this credit shall be the basis of any  other  tax  credit
  allowed under this chapter.
    (b)  Eligibility.  To  be  eligible  for  the  child care creation and
  expansion tax credit, the taxpayer shall have been issued a  certificate
  of  tax credit by the office of children and family services pursuant to
  section three hundred  ninety-four-c  of  the  social  services  law.  A
  taxpayer  that  is  a  partner  in  a  partnership,  member of a limited
  liability company or shareholder in a subchapter S corporation that  has
  received a certificate of tax credit shall be allowed its pro rata share
  of  the  credit  earned by the partnership, limited liability company or
  subchapter S corporation.
    (c) Tax return requirement. The taxpayer shall be required  to  attach
  to  its  tax return in the form prescribed by the commissioner, proof of
  receipt of its certificate of tax credit issued by the  commissioner  of
  the office of children and family services.
    (d)   Information  sharing.  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  this
  chapter, employees of the office of children and family services and the
  department shall be allowed and are directed to share and exchange:
    (1) information regarding the credit applied for, allowed  or  claimed
  pursuant  to this section and taxpayers that are applying for the credit
  or that are claiming the credit; and
    (2) information contained  in  or  derived  from  credit  claim  forms
  submitted to the department. Except as provided in paragraph one of this
  subdivision,  all  information  exchanged between the office of children
  and  family  services  and  the  department  shall  not  be  subject  to
  disclosure or inspection under the state's freedom of information law.
    (e)  Credit  recapture.  If  a certificate of tax credit issued by the
  office of children and family services under title one-A of article  six
  of  the  social  services  law  is revoked by such office, the amount of
  credit described in this section and claimed by the  taxpayer  prior  to
  that  revocation shall be added back to tax in the taxable year in which
  any such revocation becomes final.
    (f) Cross references. For application of the credit  provided  for  in
  this section, see the following provisions of this chapter:
    (1) article 9-A: section 210-B, subdivision 59;
    (2) article 22: section 606, subsection (ooo);
    (3) article 33: section 1511, subdivision (ee).




   §  170. Department of taxation and finance. 1. The existing department
  of taxation and finance and its present  functions  are  continued.  The
  head of the department of taxation and finance shall be the commissioner
  of taxation and finance who shall have sole charge of the administration
  of  such  department  except  with  regard  to the administration of the
  division of tax appeals which shall  be  the  sole  charge  of  the  tax
  appeals  tribunal  authorized  by  article  forty  of  this chapter. The
  commissioner of taxation and finance shall be appointed by the  governor
  by  and  with the advice and consent of the senate and shall hold office
  as commissioner of taxation and finance until the end of the term of the
  governor by whom he was appointed  and  until  his  successor  has  been
  appointed and has qualified.
    2.  Existing  divisions  or  bureaus in the department of taxation and
  finance  or  transferred  to  the  department   shall   continue   until
  consolidated  or  abolished  pursuant to this section. There shall be in
  the department of  taxation  and  finance  a  division  of  taxation,  a
  division  of  the treasury, a division of the lottery, an office of real
  property tax services, and a division of tax appeals.
    3. The  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance  may  establish  such
  additional  divisions  and  bureaus  as  he  may  deem necessary. He may
  appoint the heads of such divisions and bureaus and fix their duties and
  he may consolidate, alter or abolish any divisions  or  bureaus,  except
  that such commissioner shall have no such authority or power with regard
  to the division of tax appeals.
    3-a.  (a)  There  shall  be  in  the  division of taxation a bureau of
  conciliation and mediation  services  which  shall  be  responsible  for
  providing  conciliation  conferences. Such conference shall be provided,
  at the option of any  taxpayer  or  any  other  person  subject  to  the
  provisions  of  this  chapter  or any other provision of law relating to
  administration of taxes, where such taxpayer or any  other  such  person
  has  received  any  written  notice of a determination of tax due, a tax
  deficiency, a denial of a refund or credit application, a  cancellation,
  revocation  or suspension of a license, permit or registration, a denial
  of an application for a license, permit or  registration  or  any  other
  notice  which  gives  rise to a right to a hearing under this chapter if
  the time to petition for such a hearing has  not  elapsed.  Such  notice
  shall  contain information advising the recipient of the right to have a
  conciliation conference.
    (b) A request for a conciliation conference shall be  applied  for  in
  the  manner  as  set  forth  by  regulation  of  the  commissioner  and,
  notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, shall suspend  the
  running  of  the  period  of  limitations  for  the filing of a petition
  protesting such notice and requesting  a  hearing.  To  discontinue  the
  conciliation  proceeding,  the  recipient  of  the  notice  shall make a
  request in writing and such person shall have ninety days from the  time
  such  request  of discontinuance is made to petition the division of tax
  appeals for a hearing, except that the recipient  of  a  written  notice
  described  in  paragraph  (h)  of this subdivision will have thirty days
  from the time such request of discontinuance is  made  to  petition  the
  division of tax appeals for a hearing. The commissioner shall notify the
  division  of  tax  appeals  when  any  person  requests  a conference or
  requests to discontinue such conference.
    (c) A conciliation conferee, all of whom, unless otherwise provided by
  law, shall be  in  the  classified  civil  service,  shall  conduct  the
  conciliation  conference in an informal manner and shall hear or receive
  testimony and evidence deemed necessary or  desirable  for  a  just  and
  equitable  result.  The  commissioner of taxation and finance shall have
  the power to delegate  authority  to  a  conferee  to  waive  or  modify


 penalty,  interest  and  additions  to  tax  to  the same extent as such
  commissioner is permitted under this chapter.
    (d)  The  person  who requests the conference may appear and represent
  himself, including a  member  of  a  partnership,  in  any  conciliation
  conference, or may designate the person's spouse, parent or child, or an
  attorney  admitted  to practice in the courts of record of this state, a
  certified public accountant licensed in this state,  an  enrolled  agent
  enrolled  to  practice  before the internal revenue service, or a public
  accountant licensed in this  state  to  appear  and  represent  him.  In
  addition  the  commissioner  shall  promulgate  rules and regulations to
  permit a corporation to be represented by one  of  its  officers  or  an
  employee.  The  department  may also allow an attorney, certified public
  accountant or licensed  public  accountant  authorized  to  practice  or
  licensed  in  any  other jurisdiction of the United States to appear and
  represent such person in a conciliation conference  proceeding  and,  on
  the  written  request  of such person, may allow any other individual to
  represent him. An employee of the department  of  taxation  and  finance
  familiar with the controversy shall also be present at such proceedings.
    (e)  A  conciliation  order shall be rendered within thirty days after
  the proceeding is concluded and such order shall, in the  absence  of  a
  showing  of  fraud, malfeasance or misrepresentation of a material fact,
  be binding  upon  the  department  and  the  person  who  requested  the
  conference,  except  such  order  shall not be binding on such person if
  such person petitions for the hearing provided for  under  this  chapter
  within  ninety  days  after  the conciliation order is issued, or, for a
  conciliation order affirming a written notice described in paragraph (h)
  of this subdivision, within thirty days after the conciliation order  is
  issued, notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary.
    (f)  Conciliation  conference  orders  shall  not  be  required  to be
  published and such orders shall not be considered  as  precedent  or  be
  given  any  force  or effect in any subsequent administrative proceeding
  with respect to the person who requested the conference or in any  other
  proceeding.
    (g)  The  commissioner  of taxation and finance shall collect, compile
  and prepare for publication statistics and other data  with  respect  to
  the operations of the bureau of conciliation and mediation services, and
  to  submit  annually  to  the  governor,  the temporary president of the
  senate and the speaker of the assembly  a  report  on  such  operations,
  including  but  not  limited  to,  the  number  of conferences held, the
  dispositions made and the number of conferences pending.
    (h) Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary,  any  person
  who seeks review by the bureau of conciliation and mediation services of
  a   written  notice  that  advises  that  person  of  (i)  the  proposed
  cancellation,  revocation,  or  suspension   of   a   license,   permit,
  registration,  or  other  credential  issued under the authority of this
  chapter excluding a certificate of registration of a retail dealer under
  section four hundred eighty-a of this chapter, (ii)  the  denial  of  an
  application  for  a  license,  permit, registration, or other credential
  issued under the authority of this chapter excluding an application  for
  registration  as  a retail dealer under section four hundred eighty-a of
  this chapter and an application to  renew  a  certificate  of  authority
  filed  pursuant  to  paragraph  five  of  subdivision (a) of section one
  thousand one hundred thirty-four of this chapter and any other law,  or,
  (iii) the imposition of a fraud penalty under this chapter, must request
  a  conciliation  conference  within  thirty  days of the mailing of that
  notice.
    4. The commissioner of taxation and finance  may  appoint  and  remove
  such  officers,  assistants and other employees as he may deem necessary


 for the exercise of the powers and duties of the department, all of whom
  shall be in the classified civil service unless  otherwise  provided  by
  law;  and  he  may  prescribe  their  duties, and fix their compensation
  within  the  amounts appropriated therefor. The commissioner of taxation
  and finance may transfer officers or employees from their  positions  to
  other  positions  in  the  department,  or  abolish  or consolidate such
  positions. He shall have all powers  necessary  to  perform  the  duties
  conferred  upon  him  regarding  the state lottery authorized by article
  thirty-four of this chapter. However, the commissioner of  taxation  and
  finance  shall  have  no power to appoint or remove any personnel of the
  division of tax appeals nor shall such commissioner have  any  power  or
  authority  with  regard  to  the  operation  and  administration of such
  division including any power or authority over such  division's  budget.
  The  commissioner  shall  furnish to the director of the division of the
  budget the itemized estimates of the financial needs of the division  of
  tax  appeals  prepared  by  the  tax  appeals  tribunal.  Such  itemized
  estimates  may  not  be  revised  or  altered  in  any  manner  by   the
  commissioner.
    5.  The  head of the division of taxation shall be the commissioner of
  taxation and finance who shall be appointed by the governor as  provided
  in  subdivision  one  of  this  section. No person shall be appointed as
  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance  unless  at  the  time  of  his
  appointment he is a resident of the state and known to have knowledge on
  the  subject  of  taxation and skill in matters pertaining thereto. Such
  commissioner shall devote his entire time to the duties of  his  office.
  The  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance  may  after  notice and an
  opportunity to be heard, be removed by the governor for neglect of  duty
  or  misfeasance in office, and the commissioner may be removed for other
  cause  by  the  senate  on  the  recommendation  of  the  governor.  The
  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance  shall receive an annual salary
  within the amounts appropriated therefor.
    6. The head of the division  of  the  treasury  shall  be  an  officer
  entitled the deputy commissioner and treasurer to be appointed by and to
  hold office during the pleasure of the commissioner. The state treasury,
  the custody of monies therein and the custody of all other funds, as now
  or  hereafter  prescribed  by  law shall continue to be in the immediate
  charge of the head of such division,  subject  to  the  supervision  and
  control  of  the commissioner; and the head of such division, subject to
  such supervision and  control,  shall  make  the  payments  out  of  the
  treasury  and  from such funds authorized or directed by law to be made.
  Notwithstanding any other provision of  law,  expenditures  relating  to
  financial  services  performed by the division of the treasury as fiscal
  agent, trustee or  sole  custodian  of  funds,  moneys  or  accounts  of
  agencies,  authorities  or  other  entities,  shall  be  charged to such
  agencies, authorities or other entities. Payment of such  charges  shall
  be  in  a  manner  prescribed  by  the  commissioner and may include the
  withholding of interest due on any investments made for  such  agencies,
  authorities  or  other  entities. All income derived from fees levied by
  the commissioner for such financial services shall be deposited  by  the
  commissioner  in  the  miscellaneous  special  revenue  fund, investment
  services account. The commissioner may  assign  to  such  division  such
  other  powers and duties of the department of taxation and finance as he
  may deem proper.
    7. The head of the division of the lottery shall be an officer  to  be
  appointed by, and hold office during the pleasure of the commissioner of
  taxation and finance.


   7-a.  The head of the office of real property tax services shall be an
  officer to be appointed and hold  office  as  provided  by  section  two
  hundred three of the real property tax law.
    8.  The  reasonable  and necessary traveling and other expenses of the
  commissioner, deputy commissioners and other officers and  employees  of
  the  department,  while  actually  engaged  in  the performance of their
  duties, outside of the city of Albany, or if such officer or employee be
  in charge of or actually employed at a branch office of the  department,
  the reasonable and necessary traveling and other expenses outside of the
  place  in  which  such  branch  office  is  located,  and  the necessary
  traveling expenses incurred in the performance of their  duties  in  the
  place in which their duties are performed of such officers and employees
  as  are specifically authorized by order of the commissioner of taxation
  and finance, shall be paid  upon  the  order  of  the  comptroller  upon
  vouchers approved by the commissioner of taxation and finance.




   §  171. Powers and duties of commissioner of taxation and finance. The
  commissioner of taxation and finance shall:
    First. Make such reasonable rules and  regulations,  not  inconsistent
  with  law,  as  may  be necessary for the exercise of its powers and the
  performance of its duties  under  this  chapter,  including  regulations
  which  shall  advise  the public of (i) the various methods by which the
  department communicates tax policy and interpretations to taxpayers, tax
  practitioners, personnel of the department and the  general  public  and
  (ii)  the  legal force and effect, precedential value and binding nature
  of each such method of communication.
    Second. Assess, determine, revise, readjust and impose the corporation
  taxes under articles nine and nine-A of this chapter, and on  and  after
  July  first, nineteen hundred twenty-one, have the power and perform the
  duties of the state comptroller in the collection of such taxes and  the
  crediting  of  such  taxes  erroneously paid, as jurisdiction thereof is
  vested in such commissioner by section one hundred seventy-six  of  this
  chapter.
    Third.  On and after July first, nineteen hundred twenty-one, have the
  powers and perform the duties of the state comptroller  in  relation  to
  the  assessment, determination and collection of the tax on transfers of
  property, as jurisdiction thereof is  vested  in  such  commissioner  by
  section one hundred seventy-six of this chapter.
    Fourth. On and after July first, nineteen hundred twenty-one, have the
  powers and perform the duties of the state comptroller in the collection
  of  the  tax on transfers of stock under article twelve of this chapter,
  as jurisdiction thereof is vested in such commissioner  by  section  one
  hundred seventy-six of this chapter.
    Fifth.  On and after July first, nineteen hundred twenty-one, have the
  power and perform the duties of the state comptroller in the assessment,
  determination, review, readjustment and collection  of  taxes  upon  and
  with  respect  to  personal income, as jurisdiction thereof is vested in
  such commissioner by section one hundred seventy-six of this chapter.
    Sixth. Administer, supervise and  enforce  the  tax  on  mortgages  as
  provided in article eleven of this chapter.
    Eighth.  Take  testimony and proofs, under oath, with reference to any
  matter within the line of his official duty. A deputy  tax  commissioner
  and such other officials and employees of the department of taxation and
  finance  as may be nominated by such commissioner by resolution recorded
  in the minutes  may  be  designated  for  the  purpose  of  taking  such
  testimony and proofs.
    Ninth.  Require  from all state and local officers such information as
  may be necessary for the proper discharge of its duties.
    Tenth. Hold meetings at an office to be assigned in one of  the  state
  buildings  at Albany, at such times as may be fixed by such commissioner
  or by adjournment thereof, or at such other places as he may designate.
    Eleventh. Compile and publish statistics relating to state  and  local
  taxation.
    Twelfth.  Make  investigations of the general system of state taxation
  from time to time.
    Thirteenth. Inquire into the provisions of the laws  of  other  states
  and  jurisdictions;  to  confer  with  tax commissioners of other states
  regarding the most effectual and  equitable  methods  of  taxation,  and
  particularly  regarding  the  best  methods  of  avoiding  conflicts and
  duplication of taxation,  and  to  recommend  to  the  legislature  such
  measures  as  will  bring  about  uniformity  of  methods,  harmony  and
  co-operation between the different states and jurisdictions  in  matters
  of taxation.


   Fourteenth.  Perform  the other powers and duties conferred upon it by
  law.
    Fifteenth. Have authority to compromise any taxes or other impositions
  or  any  warrant or judgment for taxes or other impositions administered
  by the commissioner,  and  the  penalties  and  interest  in  connection
  therewith, if the tax debtor has been discharged in bankruptcy, is shown
  by  proofs submitted to be insolvent, or shows by proofs that collection
  in full would cause the tax debtor  undue  economic  hardship,  provided
  that  the  amount  payable  in compromise reasonably reflects collection
  potential or is otherwise justified by the proofs  offered  by  the  tax
  debtor.  Provided, further, the commissioner shall not accept any amount
  payable in compromise that would undermine compliance with the taxes  or
  other  impositions  administered  by  the  commissioner,  nor  shall the
  commissioner enter into any offer of compromise that would be adverse to
  the best interests of the state. Where the amount  owing  for  taxes  or
  other impositions or the warrant or judgment, exclusive of any penalties
  and interest, is more than one hundred thousand dollars, such compromise
  shall be effective only when approved by a justice of the supreme court.
  The  commissioner shall promulgate regulations defining what constitutes
  undue economic hardship.  The  inability  to  maintain  an  affluent  or
  luxurious lifestyle shall not constitute undue economic hardship.
    Sixteenth.  Have  authority  to compromise any taxes or any warrant or
  judgment for taxes  imposed  by  this  chapter  and  the  penalties  and
  interest  in  connection  therewith  of a tax debtor which is a domestic
  railroad corporation, or its trustee or trustees in bankruptcy,  (1)  in
  connection   with   its   qualification   as  a  railroad  redevelopment
  corporation  or  the  acquisition  of  its  facilities  by  a   railroad
  redevelopment  corporation  or (2) if said domestic railroad corporation
  is principally engaged in the transportation of passengers  and  at  the
  time  of said compromise it is the debtor in a reorganization proceeding
  pursuant to the United States bankruptcy  act  and  said  compromise  is
  approved by the bankruptcy court.
    Seventeenth.  Have authority to release any real and personal property
  from the lien of  any  warrant  for  unpaid  taxes,  additions  to  tax,
  penalties  and interest, or vacate such warrant, upon such conditions as
  he or she may require, if he or she finds  that  the  interests  of  the
  state  will  not thereby be jeopardized. Such release or vacating of the
  warrant  may  be  recorded  in  the  office  of  any  recording  officer
  (including  the  department  of  state)  in  which such warrant has been
  filed. When the warrant is vacated, the recording officer (including the
  department of state) shall thereupon cancel  and  discharge  as  of  the
  original date of docketing the vacated warrant.
    Eighteenth.  Have authority to enter into a written agreement with any
  person, relating to the liability of such person (or of the  person  for
  whom  he acts) in respect of any tax or fee imposed by the tax law or by
  a law enacted pursuant to the authority of the tax law or article  two-E
  of  the general city law, which agreement shall be final and conclusive,
  and except upon a showing of fraud, malfeasance, or misrepresentation of
  a material fact: (a) the case shall not be reopened as  to  the  matters
  agreed  upon  or  the  agreement  modified, by any officer, employee, or
  agent of this state, and (b) in any suit, action,  or  proceeding,  such
  agreement,   or  any  determination,  assessment,  collection,  payment,
  cancellation, abatement, refund or credit made in accordance  therewith,
  shall  not  be  annulled, modified, set aside or disregarded. As used in
  this paragraph the term "person" includes an individual, trust,  estate,
  partnership and corporation.
    Eighteenth-a.  Have authority to compromise civil liability, with such
  qualifications and limitations as may be established  pursuant  to  such


 rules  and  regulations  as  the  commissioner may prescribe, where such
  liability arises under a tax or other imposition which  is  administered
  by  the  commissioner,  at  any  time  prior  to the time the tax, other
  imposition  or  administrative  action  becomes  finally and irrevocably
  fixed and no longer subject to administrative review. Upon acceptance of
  an offer in compromise by  the  commissioner,  the  matter  may  not  be
  reopened    except   upon   a   showing   of   fraud,   malfeasance   or
  misrepresentation  of  a  material  fact.  The  attorney   general   may
  compromise  any  such liability after reference to the department of law
  for prosecution or defense at any time prior to the time the tax,  other
  imposition  or  administrative  action  taken  by the commissioner is no
  longer subject to judicial review. Whenever a compromise is made by  the
  commissioner of any such liability, there shall be placed on file in the
  office  of  the  commissioner  the  opinion  of  the  counsel  for  such
  department, with his or her reasons therefor, with a statement  of:  (a)
  the  amount of tax or other imposition and any other issues which may be
  the subject of such compromise, (b) the amount of interest, additions to
  the tax, or penalty imposed by law on  the  taxpayer  or  other  persons
  against  whom the administrative action was taken by the department, and
  (c) the amount actually  paid  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the
  compromise.  Notwithstanding  the  preceding  sentence,  no such opinion
  shall be required with respect to the compromise of any civil  liability
  in  which  the  unpaid  amount  of tax or other imposition which was the
  subject of the administrative action (including any interest,  additions
  to tax, or penalty) is less than fifty thousand dollars.
    Eighteenth-b.  Where  the  filing  requirement  arises  under  article
  twenty-two of this chapter or  under  a  law  enacted  pursuant  to  the
  authority  of article thirty or thirty-A of this chapter, have authority
  to require a husband and wife whose federal income tax  liabilities  are
  determined  on a joint federal return and who have not filed a joint New
  York income tax return to file separate income  tax  returns,  in  which
  case  their  income  tax  liabilities  shall be separate. Such authority
  shall be exercised only where one of such persons demonstrates,  to  the
  satisfaction of the commissioner, that (a) the address or whereabouts of
  his  or her spouse is unknown to him or her, (b) reasonable efforts have
  been made by him or her to  locate  such  spouse,  and  (c)  good  cause
  existed for the failure to file a joint New York income tax return.
    Eighteenth-c.  Where  the  filing  requirement  arises  under  article
  twenty-two of this chapter or  under  a  law  enacted  pursuant  to  the
  authority  of article thirty or thirty-A of this chapter, have authority
  to require a husband and wife whose federal income tax  liabilities  are
  determined  on a joint federal return and who have not filed a joint New
  York income tax return to file separate income  tax  returns,  in  which
  case  their  income  tax  liabilities  shall be separate. Such authority
  shall be exercised only where one of such persons demonstrates,  to  the
  satisfaction of the commissioner, that (a) his or her spouse has refused
  to  sign a joint New York income tax return, (b) reasonable efforts have
  been made by him or her to have such spouse sign a joint New York income
  tax return, (c) there exists objective evidence of  alienation  of  such
  person  from  his  or her spouse such as a judicial order of protection,
  legal separation under a decree  of  divorce  or  separate  maintenance,
  separation  under  a  written separation agreement or judicial decree of
  separation,  living  apart  at  all  times  during  the  twelve   months
  immediately  preceding  the  application for exercise of authority under
  this provision, the commencement  of  an  action  for  divorce,  or  the
  commencement   of  proceedings  in  family  court  which  evidence  such
  alienation, and (d) good cause existed for the failure to file  a  joint
  New York income tax return.


   Eighteenth-d.  (a)  Have authority to compromise civil liability, with
  such qualifications and limitations as may be  established  pursuant  to
  such  rules  and  regulations  as  the commissioner may prescribe, for a
  taxpayer's spousal share of liability arising from a  joint  income  tax
  return,  filed  under  article twenty-two of this chapter or under a law
  enacted pursuant to the authority of article thirty or thirty-A of  this
  chapter, where the following conditions are met:
    (1)  the  taxpayer and spouse filing the joint return are, at the time
  of the offer in compromise, separated  under  a  decree  of  divorce  or
  separate  maintenance,  or a written separation agreement, or a judicial
  decree of separation, or the taxpayer  at  the  time  of  the  offer  in
  compromise  is  not  considered as married within the meaning of section
  7703(b) of the  internal  revenue  code  (relating  to  certain  married
  individuals living apart), and
    (2)  it  is  demonstrated to the satisfaction of the commissioner that
  the collection of the spousal  share  of  liability  from  the  taxpayer
  cannot  be  accomplished  within  a  reasonable  period  of time without
  imposing substantial economic hardship on the taxpayer.
    (b) Upon acceptance of an offer in compromise under  this  subdivision
  by  the  commissioner,  the  matter  may  not  be reopened except upon a
  showing of fraud, malfeasance or misrepresentation of a material fact.
    (c) Whenever a compromise is  made  by  the  department  of  any  such
  liability,  there  shall  be  placed  on  file  in  the  office  of  the
  commissioner the opinion of the counsel for  the  department,  with  his
  reasons therefor with a statement of:
    (1) the amount of tax assessed,
    (2)  the  amount of interest, additions to the tax, or penalty imposed
  by law on the taxpayer and spouse against whom the tax is assessed, and
    (3) the amount actually paid in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the
  compromise.
  Notwithstanding  the  preceding  sentence,  no  such  opinion  shall  be
  required with respect to the compromise of any civil liability in  which
  the  unpaid amount of tax assessed (including any interest, additions to
  tax, or penalty) is less than twenty-five thousand dollars.
    (d) Spousal share of liability. For purposes of this subdivision,  the
  spousal  share of liability shall be determined by multiplying the joint
  and several liability arising from the joint return by a  fraction,  the
  numerator  of  which is the tax for the taxable year at issue determined
  separately for the spouse, and the denominator of which is  the  sum  of
  the taxes for such taxable year determined separately for the spouse and
  for the taxpayer.
    (e)  A  compromise  under  this subdivision as to a taxpayer's spousal
  share of liability arising from a joint  income  tax  return  shall  not
  compromise the joint and several liability of the spouse with respect to
  that return.
    Nineteenth.  Have  authority  to provide by regulation (1) that in any
  determination, assessment,  collection,  refund  or  credit  under  this
  chapter,  a  fractional  part  of  a dollar may be disregarded unless it
  amounts to fifty cents or more, in which case it shall be  increased  to
  one  dollar,  and  (2)  that any person making a return, report or other
  statement required to be filed with it under  this  chapter,  may  elect
  with  respect to any amount required to be shown thereon, if such amount
  is other than a whole dollar amount, either to disregard the  fractional
  part  of a dollar or to disregard the fractional part of a dollar unless
  it amounts to fifty cents or more, in which case the amount  (determined
  without regard to the fractional part of a dollar) shall be increased by
  one   dollar;  provided,  however,  that  such  election  shall  not  be
  applicable to items which must be  taken  into  account  in  making  the


 computations  necessary  to determine the amount required to be shown on
  any such return, report or other statement but shall be applicable  only
  to the final amount required to be shown thereon.
    Twentieth.  Have  authority,  of  his  own  motion, to abate any small
  unpaid balance of an assessment of tax,  or  any  liability  in  respect
  thereof, under articles twelve-A, eighteen, twenty or twenty-one of this
  chapter,  if such commissioner determines under uniform rules prescribed
  by him that the administration and collection costs involved  would  not
  warrant  collection  of  the  amount  due. He may also abate, of his own
  motion, the unpaid portion of the assessment of any of  such  taxes,  or
  any  liability  in  respect thereof, which is excessive in amount, or is
  assessed after the expiration  of  the  period  of  limitation  properly
  applicable  thereto,  or  is erroneously or illegally assessed. No claim
  for abatement under this subdivision shall be  filed  for  any  of  such
  taxes.
    Twenty-third.  Technical  memoranda  issued  by  the  department shall
  advise and inform taxpayers and others of  existing  interpretations  of
  laws  and  regulations  by the department or changes to the statutory or
  case law of  interest  to  the  public.  In  no  event  shall  technical
  memoranda  be issued by the department in violation of the provisions of
  the state administrative procedure act where and to the  extent  that  a
  duly  promulgated rule or regulation would be required. Where and to the
  extent that an opinion of the counsel of the department is deemed to  be
  of sufficient significance and general applicability to a group or group
  of  taxpayers,  such  opinion  shall  be  disseminated  via  a technical
  memorandum.
    Twenty-fourth. Be required to render advisory opinions with respect to
  taxes administered by  such  commissioner  within  ninety  days  of  the
  receipt of a petition for such an opinion. Such ninety day period may be
  extended  by  such  commissioner,  for good cause shown, to no more than
  thirty additional days. Such advisory opinion shall be rendered  to  any
  person  subject  to  a  tax  or liability under this chapter or claiming
  exemption from such tax or liability and may, in the discretion  of  the
  commissioner, be rendered to any non-taxpayer, including but not limited
  to  a  local official, petitioning on behalf of a local jurisdiction, or
  the head of a state agency, petitioning on behalf of  the  agency.  Such
  advisory  opinions,  which  shall be published and made available to the
  public, shall not be binding upon such commissioner except with  respect
  to the person to whom such opinion is rendered provided, however, that a
  subsequent modification by such commissioner of such an advisory opinion
  shall  operate  prospectively  only.  A petition for an advisory opinion
  shall contain a specific set of facts and be submitted in such  form  as
  may  be  prescribed  by  such commissioner and subject to such rules and
  regulations as such commissioner may  promulgate  with  respect  to  the
  procedures  for  submission  of such a petition. Nothing herein shall be
  construed to limit or otherwise alter the rights of any applicant for  a
  declaratory  ruling  pursuant  to  section two hundred four of the state
  administrative procedure act.
    Twenty-fifth. a. With  respect  to  the  income  to  be  used  in  the
  computation  of  school  aid payable in the school year nineteen hundred
  ninety-four--ninety-five and thereafter, be required to design,  develop
  and implement a permanent computerized statewide school district address
  match and income verification system in regard to each school district's
  valuation  of  total New York adjusted gross income as determined by the
  department,  for  use  in  determining  state  aid  to  education.   The
  department   shall  promulgate  rules  and  regulations  to  effect  the
  provisions of this paragraph within ninety days of the enactment of  the
  chapter  of  the  laws  of  nineteen  hundred  ninety-four amending this


 paragraph. Commencing September first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-seven,
  the  commissioner  and  the  commissioner  of  education, subject to the
  approval of the director of the budget shall be required to enter into a
  cooperative agreement by September first of each year, which will govern
  the  validation  and  correction  and  completion  of the total New York
  adjusted gross income of school districts until September first  of  the
  following year. Such agreement shall include, but not be limited to: (i)
  procedures  to improve the accuracy of school district income data, in a
  manner which gives appropriate recognition  to  computerized  processing
  capabilities,   administrative   feasibility  of  manual  processes  and
  confidentiality implications;  (ii)  procedures  to  verify  the  school
  district  codes  reported  by  taxpayers;  (iii)  procedures  to correct
  identified inaccuracies; (iv) procedures to assign school district codes
  based on the permanent residence addresses of taxpayers  who  failed  to
  complete  the school district code; (v) the schedule for the transmittal
  of electronic data between the agencies, as necessary, to implement such
  system; and (vi) beginning in  the  nineteen  hundred  ninety-six  state
  fiscal year, procedures for the review process provided for in paragraph
  c  of  this  subdivision. All state departments and agencies, and school
  districts and other local governments and agencies, shall cooperate with
  the parties to such agreement in its implementation.
    b.  1.  Any  correction,  pursuant  to  this  paragraph,  of  verified
  inaccuracies  of  income  data  shall only result in the removal of such
  returns from the identified school district.
    2. All state departments and agencies, and school districts and  other
  local governments and agencies, shall cooperate with the parties to such
  agreement  in the implementation of the review process provided pursuant
  to this paragraph.
    c. 1. With respect to income used in the  computation  of  school  aid
  payable  in  the school years nineteen hundred ninety-eight--ninety-nine
  and thereafter, be required to design, develop and implement  a  process
  whereby  school  districts  may  request  a  review of the assignment of
  taxpayer addresses to their  school  district.  Procedures  for  such  a
  review  process  shall  be included in the cooperative agreement entered
  into pursuant to paragraph a of this subdivision.
    2. School  districts  requesting  a  review  in  accordance  with  the
  provisions of this paragraph shall be required, in consultation with the
  district superintendent of schools for the supervisory district in which
  the  school  district is located, appointed pursuant to section nineteen
  hundred fifty of the education law, to submit  to  the  commissioner  of
  education evidence in support of a contention that the assignment of tax
  returns to their district is inaccurate. Identified school districts may
  be required to review ordered listings, prepared by the department or an
  authorized  vendor  contracted  by  the  department,  of  the  permanent
  resident address of selected taxpayers who  filed  personal  income  tax
  returns  with the department reporting a school district code or address
  which indicates that the taxpayer was  a  resident  of  such  identified
  school  district  at  the close of the taxable year for which the return
  was filed. In no case shall ordered address listings for school district
  review include  those  addresses  which  the  school  district  had  the
  opportunity  to  review  pursuant  to  paragraph  a of this subdivision.
  District  superintendents  of  schools  appointed  pursuant  to  section
  nineteen hundred fifty of the education law, having an identified school
  district  within their supervisory district, shall be required to verify
  any suspected inaccuracies indicated by  an  identified  district  as  a
  result  of the district's review of ordered address listings pursuant to
  this paragraph.


   3.  Any  correction,  pursuant  to   this   paragraph,   of   verified
  inaccuracies  of  income  data  shall only result in the removal of such
  returns from the identified school district.
    4.  All state departments and agencies, and school districts and other
  local governments and agencies, shall cooperate with the parties to such
  agreement in the implementation of the review process provided  pursuant
  to this paragraph.
    Twenty-sixth.  a.  Set  the  overpayment  and  underpayment  rates  of
  interest  for  purposes  of  articles  twelve-A,  eighteen,  twenty  and
  twenty-one  of  this  chapter.  Such  rates shall be the overpayment and
  underpayment rates of interest set pursuant to subsection (e) of section
  one thousand ninety-six of this chapter, but the underpayment rate shall
  not be less than seven and one-half percent per annum.  Any  such  rates
  set  by  such commissioner shall apply to taxes, or any portion thereof,
  which remain or become due or overpaid (other  than  overpayments  under
  such  article twenty and not including reimbursements, if any, under any
  of such articles) on or after  the  date  on  which  such  rates  become
  effective  and  shall  apply  only  with respect to interest computed or
  computable for periods or portions of periods occurring  in  the  period
  during  which  such  rates are in effect. In computing the amount of any
  interest required to be paid under such articles by such commissioner or
  by the taxpayer, or any other amount determined  by  reference  to  such
  amount  of  interest,  such interest and such amount shall be compounded
  daily.
    b. Cross-reference. For  provisions  relating  to  the  power  of  the
  commissioner of taxation and finance to abate small amounts of interest,
  see subdivision twentieth of this section.
    Twenty-seventh.   Have   authority,  upon  agreement  with  the  state
  comptroller, to act as an  agent  for  the  state  comptroller  for  the
  purposes of crediting the payment of state money to any claimant against
  the amount of a past-due legally enforceable debt, as defined in section
  one  hundred  seventy-one-f  of this article, owed by such claimant to a
  state agency, as defined in section one hundred  seventy-one-f  of  this
  article. All the provisions of section one hundred seventy-one-f of this
  article  shall  be  applicable to the crediting of the payments of state
  money made in accordance with the authority granted in this subdivision,
  with such modifications as may be necessary to adapt  such  language  to
  such  crediting  and  shall  apply  with the same force and effect as if
  those provisions had been set forth in full  in  this  section  and  had
  expressly referred to such crediting, except to the extent any provision
  thereof  is  either  inconsistent  or is not relevant to such crediting.
  This section shall not be deemed to abrogate or limit  in  any  way  the
  powers  and authority of the state comptroller to set off debts owed the
  state against payments from the state  under  the  constitution  of  the
  state or any other law.
    Twenty-eighth.  a.    Have the authority to postpone certain deadlines
  for a period of up to ninety days, or longer  when  necessary  to  align
  with relief provided by the Internal Revenue Service pursuant to section
  seven  thousand five hundred eight-A of the internal revenue code, for a
  taxpayer who is determined to be affected by a  presidentially  declared
  disaster  or  by  a  disaster  emergency  declared  by the governor. Any
  extension period provided pursuant to the authority in this  subdivision
  shall  be  disregarded  in determining under the tax law, or under a law
  enacted pursuant to the authority of the tax law or former  article  2-E
  of  the  general  city  law  where  administered by the commissioner, in
  respect  of  any  tax  liability  (including  any   interest,   penalty,
  additional amount, or addition to the tax) of such taxpayer:


   1.  Whether  any  of the acts described in paragraph one of subsection
  (a) of section six hundred ninety-six of the tax law in relation to  the
  personal  income tax (or any comparable acts with respect to taxes under
  this chapter other than the personal income tax) were  performed  within
  the time prescribed therefor, and
    2. The amount of any credit or refund.
    b.  Special  rule for overpayments. 1. Paragraph a of this subdivision
  shall not apply for purposes of determining the amount  of  interest  on
  any overpayment of tax.
    2.  If  a  taxpayer is entitled to the benefits of paragraph a of this
  subdivision with respect to any return, amended  return,  or  claim  for
  credit  or  refund,  and  such return, amended return or claim is timely
  filed (determined after the application of this subdivision),  paragraph
  three  of  subsection  (a)  and  subsection  (c)  of section six hundred
  eighty-eight and paragraph three of subsection (a) and subsection (c) of
  section one thousand eighty-eight of this chapter shall not apply.
    c. Definitions. 1. Presidentially declared disaster. For  purposes  of
  this  subdivision, the term "presidentially declared disaster" means any
  disaster which, with respect  to  an  area,  resulted  in  a  subsequent
  determination  by  the  president  of  the  United States that such area
  warrants assistance by the federal government under the disaster  relief
  and emergency assistance act.
    2.  Taxpayer.  For  purposes  of this subdivision, the term "taxpayer"
  means any person or entity required to file a return or remit any tax to
  the commissioner pursuant to this chapter.
    d. Where a taxpayer who,  pursuant  to  section  seven  thousand  five
  hundred  eight-a of the internal revenue code, is determined for federal
  tax purposes to be affected by a presidentially  declared  disaster,  or
  who is determined to be affected by a disaster emergency declared by the
  governor, but the commissioner has not postponed a tax deadline pursuant
  to  the  authority  in  paragraph  a  of  this  subdivision  due to such
  disaster, the commissioner may abate any amount  of  interest  from  the
  underpayment  of  any  tax  administered  by the commissioner under this
  chapter that accrued for the period during which the taxpayer was unable
  to meet such deadline due to direct impacts of the disaster.




   * §  171-a.  Deposit  and  disposition  of  revenue.    1.  All taxes,
  interest, penalties and fees collected or received by  the  commissioner
  or  the commissioner's duly authorized agent under articles nine (except
  section  one  hundred  eighty-two-a  thereof  and  except  as  otherwise
  provided  in section two hundred five thereof), nine-A, twelve-A (except
  as otherwise provided in section  two  hundred  eighty-four-d  thereof),
  thirteen,  thirteen-A  (except  as  otherwise  provided in section three
  hundred twelve thereof), eighteen, nineteen, twenty (except as otherwise
  provided  in  section  four  hundred  eighty-two   thereof),   twenty-B,
  twenty-C,  twenty-D, twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-four, twenty-four-A,
  twenty-six, twenty-eight (except as otherwise provided in section eleven
  hundred  two  or  eleven   hundred   three   thereof),   twenty-eight-A,
  twenty-eight-D  (except  as otherwise provided in section eleven hundred
  ninety-seven, twenty-nine-B,, thirty-one (except as  otherwise  provided
  in  section  fourteen  hundred  twenty-one  thereof),  thirty-three  and
  thirty-three-A of this chapter shall be deposited daily in  one  account
  with such responsible banks, banking houses or trust companies as may be
  designated by the comptroller, to the credit of the comptroller. Such an
  account  may  be  established  in one or more of such depositories. Such
  deposits shall be kept separate and apart from all other  money  in  the
  possession  of  the  comptroller. The comptroller shall require adequate
  security from all such depositories.  Of the total revenue collected  or
  received  under  such  articles  of  this chapter, the comptroller shall
  retain in the comptroller's hands such amount as  the  commissioner  may
  determine  to  be  necessary  for  refunds  or reimbursements under such
  articles of this chapter out of which amount the comptroller  shall  pay
  any refunds or reimbursements to which taxpayers shall be entitled under
  the  provisions  of  such articles of this chapter. The commissioner and
  the comptroller shall maintain a system of accounts showing  the  amount
  of  revenue collected or received from each of the taxes imposed by such
  articles. The comptroller,  after  reserving  the  amount  to  pay  such
  refunds  or  reimbursements,  shall,  on or before the tenth day of each
  month, pay into the state treasury to the credit of the general fund all
  revenue deposited under this section during the preceding calendar month
  and remaining to the comptroller's  credit  on  the  last  day  of  such
  preceding  month, (i) except that the comptroller shall pay to the state
  department of social services that amount of overpayments of tax imposed
  by article twenty-two of this chapter and the interest  on  such  amount
  which  is certified to the comptroller by the commissioner as the amount
  to be credited against past-due support pursuant to subdivision  six  of
  section  one hundred seventy-one-c of this article, (ii) and except that
  the comptroller shall  pay  to  the  New  York  state  higher  education
  services  corporation  and  the state university of New York or the city
  university of New York respectively that amount of overpayments  of  tax
  imposed  by  article twenty-two of this chapter and the interest on such
  amount which is certified to the comptroller by the commissioner as  the
  amount  to  be  credited  against the amount of defaults in repayment of
  guaranteed student loans and state university loans or  city  university
  loans  pursuant to subdivision five of section one hundred seventy-one-d
  and subdivision  six  of  section  one  hundred  seventy-one-e  of  this
  article,  (iii)  and  except  further that, notwithstanding any law, the
  comptroller shall credit to the revenue arrearage account,  pursuant  to
  section   ninety-one-a   of  the  state  finance  law,  that  amount  of
  overpayment of tax imposed by article nine, nine-A, twenty-two,  thirty,
  thirty-A,  thirty-B  or  thirty-three  of this chapter, and any interest
  thereon, which is certified to the comptroller by  the  commissioner  as
  the  amount  to  be credited against a past-due legally enforceable debt
  owed to a state agency pursuant to paragraph (a) of subdivision  six  of


 section one hundred seventy-one-f of this article, provided, however, he
  shall  credit  to  the  special  offset  fiduciary  account, pursuant to
  section  ninety-one-c  of  the  state  finance  law,  any  such   amount
  creditable  as  a liability as set forth in paragraph (b) of subdivision
  six of section one hundred  seventy-one-f  of  this  article,  (iv)  and
  except  further  that  the comptroller shall pay to the city of New York
  that amount of overpayment of  tax  imposed  by  article  nine,  nine-A,
  twenty-two,  thirty,  thirty-A, thirty-B or thirty-three of this chapter
  and any interest thereon that is certified to  the  comptroller  by  the
  commissioner  as  the amount to be credited against city of New York tax
  warrant judgment debt pursuant to section one hundred  seventy-one-l  of
  this article, (v) and except further that the comptroller shall pay to a
  non-obligated  spouse  that  amount  of  overpayment  of  tax imposed by
  article twenty-two of this chapter and the interest on such amount which
  has been credited pursuant to section  one  hundred  seventy-one-c,  one
  hundred   seventy-one-d,   one   hundred   seventy-one-e,   one  hundred
  seventy-one-f or one hundred seventy-one-l of this article and which  is
  certified  to the comptroller by the commissioner as the amount due such
  non-obligated spouse pursuant to paragraph  six  of  subsection  (b)  of
  section  six hundred fifty-one of this chapter; and (vi) the comptroller
  shall deduct a like amount which the  comptroller  shall  pay  into  the
  treasury  to  the  credit  of the general fund from amounts subsequently
  payable to the department of social services, the  state  university  of
  New  York,  the  city  university  of  New York, or the higher education
  services corporation, or the revenue arrearage account or special offset
  fiduciary account pursuant to section ninety-one-a  or  ninety-one-c  of
  the  state  finance law, as the case may be, whichever had been credited
  the amount originally withheld from such  overpayment,  and  (vii)  with
  respect to amounts originally withheld from such overpayment pursuant to
  section  one  hundred seventy-one-l of this article and paid to the city
  of New York, the comptroller shall collect a like amount from  the  city
  of New York.
    2.  Notwithstanding  subdivision  one  of  this  section  or any other
  provision of law to the contrary, the taxes imposed pursuant to sections
  one hundred  eighty-three-a,  one  hundred  eighty-four-a,  one  hundred
  eighty-six-c,  two  hundred  nine-B  and  fifteen hundred five-a of this
  chapter, reduced  by  an  amount  for  administrative  costs,  shall  be
  deposited   to  the  credit  of  the  metropolitan  mass  transportation
  operating  assistance  account  in  the  mass  transportation  operating
  assistance fund, created pursuant to section eighty-eight-a of the state
  finance  law,  as such taxes are received. The amount for administrative
  costs shall be determined by the commissioner  to  represent  reasonable
  costs  of  the  department  of  taxation  and  finance in administering,
  collecting, determining  and  distributing  such  taxes.  Of  the  total
  revenue  collected  or received under such sections of this chapter, the
  comptroller shall retain in his hands such amount  as  the  commissioner
  may  determine  to be necessary for refunds or reimbursements under such
  sections of this chapter out of which amount the comptroller  shall  pay
  any refunds or reimbursements to which taxpayers shall be entitled under
  provisions  of  such  sections. The tax commissioner and the comptroller
  shall maintain a system  of  accounts  showing  the  amount  of  revenue
  collected or received from each of the taxes imposed by such sections.
    * NB There are 2 § 171-a's




   * §  171-a.  Statewide wage reporting system. (1) The department shall
  design, develop, implement and operate a wage  reporting  system  within
  the  department  utilizing information submitted by employers as defined
  under article eighteen of the labor law. The department is authorized to
  require submission of a report, in such  form  and  in  such  manner  as
  prescribed  by  regulations  for not more frequently than four times per
  annum, of the name, social security account number, and gross wages paid
  to each employee who resides or is employed in this  state,  whether  or
  not such employee is a resident for purposes of this chapter and whether
  or  not  the wages of such employee are subject to withholding of tax or
  payments of tax under article twenty-two of this chapter. Employers also
  shall report if dependent health insurance benefits  are  available.  No
  report  shall  be  filed with respect to an employee of a state or local
  agency performing intelligence or counterintelligence functions, if  the
  head  of  such  agency  has  determined  that filing such a report could
  endanger  the  safety  of  the  employee  or   compromise   an   ongoing
  investigation or intelligence mission.
    (2) Such system shall be designed in a manner compatible with existing
  reporting   requirements,   to  the  extent  possible,  while  remaining
  consistent with the goals of such system, and shall be  consistent  with
  the  provisions  of  article  eighteen  of the labor law. Not later than
  January  first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-six,  the  department  shall,
  pursuant  to  regulation,  begin to collect such data in such manner for
  the first quarter of calendar year nineteen hundred ninety-six  and  for
  all subsequent quarters.
    (3)  (a)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the commissioner of
  taxation and finance shall  maintain  cooperative  agreements  with  the
  state  office  of  temporary  and  disability  assistance,  which  shall
  provide:
    (i) for the utilization by the  office  of  temporary  and  disability
  assistance  of  information obtained pursuant to subdivision one of this
  section, for the purpose of verifying eligibility for and entitlement to
  amounts of benefits under  the  social  services  law,  locating  absent
  parents  or  other  persons  legally  responsible  for  the  support  of
  applicants or recipients of public assistance and care under the  social
  services  law  and  persons  legally  responsible  for  the support of a
  recipient of services under section one hundred eleven-g of  the  social
  services law and, in appropriate cases, establishing support obligations
  pursuant  to  the  social services law and the family court act, and for
  the purpose of evaluating the effect on  earnings  of  participation  in
  employment  or  training  programs  authorized  pursuant  to  the social
  services law by current recipients of public assistance and care and  by
  former  recipients  of  public assistance and care, such agreement shall
  further  provide  to  the  degree  required  by  federal  law  for   the
  commissioner  and  the  office of temporary and disability assistance to
  provide information obtained pursuant to subdivision one of this section
  to the federal social security administration or to public  agencies  in
  other  states  which  administer  programs  under  the food stamp act of
  nineteen hundred seventy-seven or title I, II, IV-A, IV-D, X, XIV,  XVI,
  or  XIX  of the federal social security act and to take such other steps
  as may be required by section one thousand one hundred  thirty-seven  of
  the  social  security act or federal regulations promulgated thereunder;
  and
    (ii) for the utilization by the office  of  temporary  and  disability
  assistance  of  information obtained pursuant to subdivision one of this
  section, with respect to the parents, the stepparents, the child and the
  siblings of the child who were living in the same household as  a  child
  who is in the custody, care and custody or custody and guardianship of a


 local  social  services district or of the office of children and family
  services during the month that the  court  proceedings  leading  to  the
  child's  removal  from  the  household  were  initiated,  or the written
  instrument  transferring  care  and custody of the child pursuant to the
  provisions of section  three  hundred  fifty-eight-a  or  three  hundred
  eighty-four-a  of  the social services law was signed, provided however,
  that the office of temporary and disability assistance  shall  only  use
  the  information  obtained pursuant to this subdivision, for the purpose
  of determining the eligibility of such child for  federal  payments  for
  foster  care and adoption assistance pursuant to the provisions of title
  IV-E of the federal  social  security  act.  Notwithstanding  any  other
  provision  of  law, the office of temporary and disability assistance is
  authorized to share information obtained pursuant  to  this  subdivision
  with  any applicable social services district, provided however, that if
  such information is shared, that such  social  services  district  shall
  only  use  the  information  obtained for the purpose of determining the
  eligibility of such child for  federal  payments  for  foster  care  and
  adoption  assistance  pursuant  to  the  provisions of title IV-E of the
  federal social security act.
    (b) Notwithstanding any law to the contrary and not later than  ninety
  days  after  the  effective  date of this paragraph, the commissioner of
  taxation and finance shall enter into a cooperative agreement  with  the
  commissioner of social services for the delivery to the state department
  of  social  services of information obtained pursuant to subdivision one
  hereof, which information shall be utilized for the purpose of  enabling
  such  department  to  fulfill obligations and responsibilities otherwise
  incumbent upon the state department of labor under section  one  hundred
  twenty-four  of  the  federal  family  support  act  of nineteen hundred
  eighty-eight by giving the federal parent locator service, maintained by
  the federal department of health and human services,  prompt  access  to
  certain  wage  information  for  use  by  such latter department for the
  purpose of complying with such act.
    (4) Notwithstanding any  law  to  the  contrary  and  not  later  than
  September  first,  nineteen hundred ninety-seven, the commissioner shall
  enter into a cooperative agreement with the state department of labor to
  allow the information obtained by the department pursuant to subdivision
  one of this section to be made available to the department of labor,  or
  other   individuals   designated  by  the  commissioner  of  labor,  for
  administration of such department's employment security programs, public
  assistance work programs, or for other purposes  deemed  appropriate  by
  the  commissioner  of  labor consistent with the provisions of the labor
  law, as well as  for  the  evaluation  of  the  effect  on  earnings  of
  participation  in training programs with respect to which the department
  of  labor  has  reporting,  monitoring,  administering,  or   evaluating
  responsibilities.
    5.   Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  law  to  the  contrary,  the
  commissioner  shall  enter  into  a  cooperative  agreement   with   the
  department  of health, which agreement shall provide for the utilization
  of information obtained pursuant to subdivision one of this section, for
  the purpose of verifying eligibility for  child  health  insurance  plan
  subsidy  payments  and  required  premium  payments  under  sections two
  thousand five hundred ten and two thousand five hundred  eleven  of  the
  public  health law, and for the purpose of verifying eligibility for the
  program for elderly pharmaceutical insurance coverage under title  three
  of  article  two  of  the elder law, when requested by the department of
  health.
    (6)  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  law  to  the  contrary,  the
  commissioner shall enter into a cooperative agreement with the office of


 vocational and educational services for individuals with disabilities of
  the  education  department,  the  commission for the blind and any other
  state vocational rehabilitation agency, which  agreement  shall  provide
  for  the utilization of information obtained pursuant to subdivision one
  of this section,  for  purposes  of  obtaining  reimbursement  from  the
  federal  social  security  administration  for expenditures made by such
  office, commission or agency on behalf of disabled individuals who  have
  achieved economic self-sufficiency.
    (6-a)  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  law  to  the contrary, the
  commissioner shall enter into a cooperative agreement with the New  York
  state  higher  education  services  corporation,  which  agreement shall
  provide  for  the  utilization  of  information  obtained  pursuant   to
  subdivision  one of this section, for purposes of default prevention and
  collection of defaulted education loan debt, including  judgments,  owed
  to  the  federal or New York state government that is being collected by
  the New York state higher education services corporation.
    (6-b) Notwithstanding any  provision  of  law  to  the  contrary,  the
  commissioner  shall  enter  into  a cooperative agreement with the state
  comptroller, which  agreement  shall  provide  for  the  utilization  of
  information  obtained  pursuant  to subdivision one of this section, for
  purposes of determining the amount a  retired  member  of  a  retirement
  system or pension plan administered by the state or any of its political
  subdivisions  who  returns  to  public  employment  has  earned  for the
  purposes of sections one hundred two, two hundred  eleven,  two  hundred
  twelve and four hundred two of the retirement and social security law.
    (7) No employer shall be subject to any civil or criminal liability by
  reason  of  his disclosure to the department of any information required
  to be disclosed pursuant to this subdivision unless such information  is
  knowingly and wilfully reported incorrectly.
    (8)  The  provisions of the state freedom of information act shall not
  apply to any personally identifiable information obtained by any  agency
  or any public official pursuant to the provisions hereof.
    (9)  Cross-references.  (a)  For the applicable penalty for failure to
  comply with wage reporting requirements, see subsection (v)  of  section
  six hundred eighty-five of this chapter.
    (b)  See  paragraph  four  of  subsection  (a)  of section six hundred
  seventy-four of this chapter for requirements relating to the filing  of
  quarterly   combined   withholding,   wage  reporting  and  unemployment
  insurance returns.
    * NB There are 2 § 171-a's




   § 171-b. Verification of income. (1) The commissioner is authorized to
  enter into an agreement with the commissioner of the division of housing
  and  community renewal, the supervising agency as defined in subdivision
  fifteen of section two of  the  private  housing  finance  law,  or  the
  corporation  described  in  section  forty-five-a of such law, to verify
  income information forwarded to the department by  the  commissioner  of
  housing  and community renewal, the supervising agency, the corporation,
  or a company, as defined in subdivision two of section  twelve  of  such
  law. The department may charge a reasonable fee, to be determined by the
  commissioner,  in  payment to the department for the expense incurred in
  verifying  income  information  forwarded  to  such  department  by  the
  commissioner  of  housing and community renewal, the supervising agency,
  the corporation,  or  a  company.  Nothing  contained  herein  shall  be
  construed  to  authorize the department to enter into any agreement with
  such commissioner to provide any income information whatsoever and  such
  agreement  shall  be  limited  solely  to  the  verification  of  income
  information.
    (2)  Verification  of  income  information   and   information   under
  subdivision  four  of this section by the department shall be limited to
  agreement or disagreement with the material representations contained in
  such information and a statement of whether each such representation has
  been overstated or understated.
    (3) (a) The commissioner is authorized and directed to enter  into  an
  agreement with the commissioner of the division of housing and community
  renewal   to   verify   the   income  of  tenants  residing  in  housing
  accommodations subject to rent regulation. The  department  shall  adopt
  rules and regulations to effect the provisions of this subdivision.
    (b)  The  department,  when  requested  by the division of housing and
  community renewal, shall verify the total annual income of  all  persons
  residing in housing accommodations as their primary residence subject to
  rent  regulation  and  shall  notify the commissioner of the division of
  housing and community renewal as may be appropriate  whether  the  total
  annual  income  exceeds  the applicable deregulation income threshold in
  each of the two preceding calendar years. No other information regarding
  the annual income of such persons shall be provided.
    (4) The commissioner is authorized  and  directed  to  enter  into  an
  agreement  with  the  commissioner  of  health which shall set forth the
  procedures  by  which  the  commissioner  shall   (a)   facilitate   the
  verification  of  income  eligibility  for  subsidized  health insurance
  coverage under the child health insurance plan pursuant to subparagraphs
  (i) and (ii) of paragraph (f) of subdivision two of section two thousand
  five hundred eleven of the  public  health  law,  and  for  the  medical
  assistance and family health plus programs pursuant to subdivision eight
  of  section  three  hundred  sixty-six-a  and  paragraphs (b) and (d) of
  subdivision two of section three hundred  sixty-nine-ee  of  the  social
  services  law,  as specified by the commissioner of health and agreed to
  by the commissioner, and (b) shall provide the information  required  by
  subdivision  two-a  of  section  two thousand five hundred eleven of the
  public health law.
    (5) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to  require  the
  violation  of any confidentiality agreement entered into by the state or
  any entity thereof under the provisions  of  section  sixty-one  hundred
  three,  or  any other provision, of the internal revenue code, nor shall
  this section be administered in  any  manner  which  will  result  in  a
  violation of any such confidentiality agreement.
    (6)  Except  with  respect  to  subdivision  four of this section, the
  commissioner shall  promulgate  rules  and  regulations  to  effect  the
  provisions of this section.


   (7)  The  provisions of the state freedom of information act shall not
  apply to any verification of income information obtained from a company,
  the commissioner of  housing  and  community  renewal,  the  supervising
  agency,  the  corporation,  or  officer or employee thereof, an approved
  organization  as defined in section two thousand five hundred ten of the
  public health  law  or  the  commissioner  of  health  pursuant  to  the
  provisions of this section nor shall the provisions of such act apply to
  any verifications prepared or provided pursuant to subdivision three and
  information provided pursuant to subdivision four of this section.




   §  171-c.  Certain overpayments credited against past-due support. (1)
  The commissioner, on behalf  of  the  department,  shall  enter  into  a
  written  agreement  with the commissioner of the office of temporary and
  disability assistance, on behalf of the state office  of  temporary  and
  disability   assistance,  which  shall  set  forth  the  procedures  for
  crediting any overpayment by an individual, estate or  trust  of  income
  tax  imposed by article twenty-two of this chapter, city personal income
  tax on residents imposed pursuant to the authority of article thirty  of
  this chapter, city income tax surcharge on residents imposed pursuant to
  the  authority of article thirty-A of this chapter and city earnings tax
  on nonresidents imposed pursuant to the authority of article thirty-B of
  this chapter and the interest  on  such  overpayments  against  past-due
  support   owed  by  such  individual,  estate  or  trust  of  which  the
  commissioner has been notified by the  commissioner  of  the  office  of
  temporary  and  disability assistance pursuant to the provisions of such
  agreement.
    (2) Such agreement shall apply to past-due support which  is  owed  to
  persons  or  entities  entitled  to  enforce  an  order  of support. For
  purposes of this section, an "order of support" means any  final  order,
  decree  or  judgment in a matrimonial action or family court proceeding,
  or any foreign support order, decree or  judgment  which  is  registered
  pursuant  to section thirty-seven-a of the domestic relations law, which
  requires the payment of alimony, maintenance, support or child  support.
  For  purposes  of this section, "past-due support" means the amount of a
  delinquency determined from an order of support  no  longer  subject  to
  appellate judicial review.
    (3) Such agreement shall include:
    (a)  the  procedure  under  which  the  state  department of office of
  temporary and disability assistance shall  notify  the  commissioner  of
  liability  for  past-due  support,  such  procedure  to specify when the
  commissioner shall be notified and the content of such notification;
    (b) the minimum period of delinquency in payment of  past-due  support
  and  the  minimum  amount  of past-due support with respect to which the
  commissioner of taxation and finance shall, pursuant  to  this  section,
  credit an overpayment against past-due support;
    (c)  the  procedure for reimbursement of the commissioner by the state
  office of temporary and disability  assistance  for  the  full  cost  of
  carrying out the procedures authorized by this section;
    (d)  such  other  matters  as the parties to such agreement shall deem
  necessary to carry out the provisions of this section; and
    (e) the procedure for reimbursement of the comptroller  by  the  state
  office  of  temporary  and disability assistance for any overpayment and
  interest thereon which has been credited against past due  support  owed
  by  a taxpayer filing a joint return, but which has been refunded by the
  comptroller, pursuant to paragraph six of subsection (b) of section  six
  hundred  fifty-one  of this chapter, to a spouse not liable for the past
  due support owed by such taxpayer.
    (4) (a) With regard to persons owed past-due support who are receiving
  services pursuant to title six-A of article three of the social services
  law, no later than thirty days prior to the date a local social services
  district  requests  the  state  office  of  temporary   and   disability
  assistance to notify the commissioner of the liability of an individual,
  estate  or  trust  for past-due support, such district shall notify such
  individual, estate or trust in writing that such request may be made and
  shall also notify him or it that he or it may correct any error in  such
  request  and  may avoid such notification by the office of temporary and
  disability assistance to the commissioner by satisfying  such  liability
  within  thirty  days  of  the  date of the written notice from the local


 social services district to  such  individual,  estate  or  trust.  Such
  notice  shall also set forth the name of an employee of the local social
  services district, including his address and telephone number,  who  may
  be  contacted  with  respect  to correction of any error in such request
  concerning such individual's, estate's or trust's liability for past-due
  support or with respect to payment of such liability.
    (b) With regard to persons owed past-due  support  who  are  receiving
  services pursuant to title six-B of article three of the social services
  law,  no  later  than  thirty days prior to the date the state office of
  temporary and disability assistance notifies  the  commissioner  of  the
  liability  of  an individual, estate or trust for past-due support, such
  office shall notify such individual, estate or  trust  in  writing  that
  such  request  may be made and shall also notify him or it that he or it
  may correct any error in such request and may avoid such notification by
  such office  to  the  commissioner  by  satisfying  such  liability  and
  submitting  proof  thereof satisfactory to the office within thirty days
  of the date of the written notice from such office to  such  individual,
  estate  or  trust.  Such  notice  shall  also  set  forth the name of an
  employee of such office, including his  or  her  address  and  telephone
  number,  who may be contacted with respect to correction of any error in
  such request concerning such individual's, estate's or trust's liability
  for past-due support or with respect to payment of such liability.
    (5) (i) In calculating the  amount  of  an  overpayment  and  interest
  thereon  which  shall  be  credited  against  past-due support owed by a
  taxpayer, the tax commission shall  first  credit  the  overpayment  and
  interest thereon against any:
    (A)  liability  of such taxpayer in respect of any tax imposed by this
  chapter;
    (B) liability of such taxpayer for any tax  imposed  pursuant  to  the
  authority  of  this chapter or any other law if such tax is administered
  by the tax commission; and
    (C) estimated tax for the succeeding  taxable  year  if  the  taxpayer
  claims  such  overpayment  or  a  portion  thereof  as  a credit against
  estimated tax for such succeeding taxable year  pursuant  to  subsection
  (e) of section six hundred eighty-six of this chapter or subdivision (e)
  of  section  11-1786  of the administrative code of the city of New York
  for any tax imposed pursuant to the authority of  this  chapter  or  any
  other law if such tax is administered by the tax commission.
    (ii)  Only  the  balance  remaining,  after  such  overpayment and the
  interest thereon has been credited as described in paragraph (i) of this
  subdivision, shall be certified as an overpayment plus any  interest  to
  be  credited against past-due support, with the remainder to be refunded
  to the taxpayer if such remainder is not required to satisfy the  amount
  of  a default in repayment of a state university loan or city university
  loan pursuant to section  one  hundred  seventy-one-e  of  this  article
  and/or  the  amount  of  a past-due legally enforceable debt pursuant to
  section one hundred seventy-one-f of this article and/or a city  of  New
  York   tax  warrant  judgment  debt  pursuant  to  section  one  hundred
  seventy-one-l of  this  article  and/or  the  amount  of  a  default  in
  repayment  of  a guaranteed student loan pursuant to section one hundred
  seventy-one-d of this article. In cases where the taxpayer owes past-due
  support to more than one person or  entity,  and  the  total  amount  of
  past-due  support  certified  to the commissioner by the state office of
  temporary and disability assistance exceeds the balance remaining,  each
  such  person  or  entity  shall  receive a pro rata share of the balance
  remaining, such share to be based on the amount of past-due support owed
  to such person or entity as certified to the commissioner by such office
  pursuant to this section. The state office of temporary  and  disability


 assistance  shall  be  responsible for determining and distributing each
  person's or entity's pro rata share  of  past-due  support  pursuant  to
  regulations of such office.
    (6)  The  tax  commission  shall  certify to the comptroller the total
  amount of the overpayment and the  interest  on  such  overpayment,  the
  amount  of  such  overpayment  and  the  interest  on  such amount to be
  credited against past-due support and the balance  of  such  overpayment
  and interest to be refunded to the taxpayer.
    (7) The commissioner of taxation and finance shall notify the taxpayer
  making  the  overpayment,  in writing, of the amount of such overpayment
  and the interest thereon certified to the comptroller as the  amount  to
  be   credited  against  past-due  support.  Such  notice  shall  include
  notification to any other person who may have filed a joint return  with
  the  taxpayer of the steps such other person may take in order to secure
  his or her proper share of the refund.
    (8) (a) For purposes of this section, past-due support owed to persons
  who are receiving services pursuant to title six-A of article  three  of
  the social services law may include:
    (i)  amounts  representing  delinquencies  which  have accrued under a
  court order of support;
    (ii) with  respect  to  any  court  order  of  support  issued  before
  September   first,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-four  which  provided  for
  periodic payments toward  an  established  arrears  amount,  the  entire
  amount  of  such  arrears  where  the  respondent  is, at any time after
  September first, nineteen hundred eighty-four, delinquent in making such
  periodic payments; and
    (iii) with respect to any court order of  support  made  on  or  after
  September  first,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-four  which  establishes an
  arrears amount, the entire amount of such  arrears,  unless  such  order
  includes a finding that any anticipated tax refunds have been considered
  by  the  court  and  taken  into  account  in  determining the amount of
  periodic  payments  to  be  made  toward  the  arrears  amount,  or   in
  determining  the  amount  of  the  current  support order, and expressly
  provides that such arrears are not to be so certified.
    (b) For the purpose of the state child support  program,  any  payment
  made  by  a  respondent  which is insufficient to fully satisfy both the
  current support obligation and a periodic payment toward the balance  of
  any  arrears  amount  established  by court order shall be first applied
  toward the current support obligation or  any  delinquency  thereon  and
  then  toward  the  periodic payment on any arrears amount established by
  court order unless otherwise required by federal regulation.
    (9) From the time the commissioner is notified by the state office  of
  temporary  and  disability  assistance  of  an individual's, estate's or
  trust's liability for past-due support under the agreement provided  for
  in  this  section, the commissioner and the department shall be relieved
  from all liability to such individual, estate or trust,  their  assigns,
  successors,  heirs  or representatives for the amount of an over payment
  and interest on such amount certified to the comptroller to be  credited
  against past-due support and such individual, estate or trust shall have
  no  right to commence a court action or proceeding or to any other legal
  recourse against the commissioner or  the  department  to  recover  such
  overpayment or such interest certified to the comptroller to be credited
  against  past-due  support.  Provided,  however, nothing herein shall be
  construed to prohibit such individual, estate or trust  from  proceeding
  against  the  state office of temporary and disability assistance or the
  appropriate local social services district to recover that part of  such
  overpayment  or  interest  thereon so certified to the comptroller to be
  credited against past-due support which is greater than  the  amount  of


 past-due support owed by such individual, estate or trust on the date of
  such certification.
    (10) The tax commission shall promulgate such rules and regulations as
  it deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.




   §  171-d. Certain overpayments credited against defaulted governmental
  education loans. (1) The commissioner, on behalf of the tax  commission,
  shall  enter into a written agreement with the president of the New York
  state  higher  education  services  corporation,  on  behalf   of   such
  corporation,  which  shall  set  forth  the procedures for crediting any
  overpayment by an individual, estate or trust of income tax  imposed  by
  article  twenty-two  of  this  chapter,  city  personal  income  tax  on
  residents imposed pursuant to the authority of article  thirty  of  this
  chapter,  city income tax surcharge on residents imposed pursuant to the
  authority of article thirty-A of this  chapter,  city  earnings  tax  on
  nonresidents  imposed  pursuant to the authority of former article two-E
  of the general city law and city earnings tax  on  nonresidents  imposed
  pursuant  to  the  authority of article thirty-B of this chapter and the
  interest on such overpayments against  the  amount  of  any  default  in
  repayment  of  any  governmental education loan owed by such individual,
  estate or trust of which the  commissioner  has  been  notified  by  the
  president  of  the  New York state higher education services corporation
  pursuant to the provisions of  such  agreement.  For  purposes  of  this
  section,  "governmental  education  loan"  shall mean any education loan
  debt, including judgments,  owed  to  the  federal  or  New  York  state
  government  that  is  being  collected  by  the  New  York  state higher
  education services corporation.
    (2) Such agreement shall apply only to the  amount  of  a  default  in
  repayment  of any governmental education loan debt, including judgments,
  being  collected  by  the  New  York  state  higher  education  services
  corporation.  Such  agreement  shall  require  the New York state higher
  education  services  corporation  to   satisfy   the   requirements   of
  subdivision three of section one hundred seventy-one-f of this article.
    (3) Such agreement shall include:
    (a)  the  procedure  under  which  the New York state higher education
  services corporation shall notify  the  commissioner  of  a  default  in
  repayment  of  a  governmental education loan, such procedure to specify
  when the  commissioner  shall  be  notified  and  the  content  of  such
  notification;
    (b)  the  minimum  amount  outstanding  on a default in repayment of a
  governmental  education  loan  against  which  the  commissioner  shall,
  pursuant to this section, credit an overpayment;
    (c)  the  procedure  for  reimbursement of the commissioner by the New
  York state higher education services corporation for the  full  cost  of
  carrying out the procedures authorized by this section;
    (d)  such  other  matters  as the parties to such agreement shall deem
  necessary to carry out the provisions of this section; and
    (e) the procedure for reimbursement of the comptroller by the New York
  state higher education services corporation for overpayment and interest
  thereon which has  been  credited  against  the  amount  of  default  in
  repayment  of  a governmental education loan owed by a taxpayer filing a
  joint return, but which has been refunded by the  comptroller,  pursuant
  to  paragraph  six of subsection (b) of section six hundred fifty-one of
  this chapter, to a spouse not  liable  for  the  amount  of  default  in
  repayment of a governmental education loan owed by such taxpayer.
    (4)  (i)  In  calculating  the  amount  of an overpayment and interest
  thereon which shall be credited against  the  amount  of  a  default  in
  repayment  of  a  governmental  education  loan  owed by a taxpayer, the
  commissioner shall first credit the  overpayment  and  interest  thereon
  against any:
    (A)  liability  of such taxpayer in respect of any tax imposed by this
  chapter;


   (B) liability of such taxpayer for any tax  imposed  pursuant  to  the
  authority  of  this chapter or any other law if such tax is administered
  by the tax commission;
    (C)  estimated  tax  for  the succeeding taxable year if such taxpayer
  claims such overpayment  or  a  portion  thereof  as  a  credit  against
  estimated  tax  for  such succeeding taxable year pursuant to subsection
  (e) of section six hundred eighty-six of this chapter or subdivision (e)
  of section 11-1786 of the administrative code of the city  of  New  York
  for  any  tax  imposed  pursuant to the authority of this chapter or any
  other law if such tax is administered by the tax commission; and
    (D) past-due support owed by the  taxpayer  pursuant  to  section  one
  hundred seventy-one-c of this article.
    (E) the amount of a default in repayment of a state university loan or
  city  university  loan  pursuant to section one hundred seventy-one-e of
  this article.
    (F) the amount of a past-due legally enforceable debt owed to a  state
  agency pursuant to section one hundred seventy-one-f of this article.
    (G) the amount of a city of New York tax warrant judgment debt owed to
  the  city  of  New York pursuant to section one hundred seventy-one-l of
  this article.
    (ii) Only the  balance  remaining,  after  such  overpayment  and  the
  interest thereon has been credited as described in paragraph (i) of this
  subdivision,  shall  be certified as an overpayment plus any interest to
  be  credited  against  the  amount  of  a  default  in  repayment  of  a
  governmental  education  loan,  with the remainder to be refunded to the
  taxpayer.
    (5) The tax commission shall certify  to  the  comptroller  the  total
  amount  of  the  overpayment  and  the interest on such overpayment, the
  amount of such overpayment  and  the  interest  on  such  amount  to  be
  credited   against   the  amount  of  the  default  in  repayment  of  a
  governmental education loan and the  balance  of  such  overpayment  and
  interest to be refunded to the taxpayer.
    (6) The commissioner shall notify the taxpayer making the overpayment,
  in  writing,  of the amount of such overpayment and the interest thereon
  certified to the comptroller as the amount to be  credited  against  the
  amount  of a default in repayment of a governmental education loan. Such
  notice shall include notification to any other person who may have filed
  a joint return with the taxpayer of the steps such other person may take
  in order to secure his or her proper share of the refund.
    (7) From the time the state tax commission is notified by the New York
  state higher education services corporation of an individual's, estate's
  or trust's default in repayment of a governmental education  loan  under
  the agreement provided for in this section, the state tax commission and
  the  department shall be relieved from all liability to such individual,
  estate or trust, their assigns, successors, heirs or representatives for
  the amount of an overpayment and interest on such  amount  certified  to
  the  comptroller  to  be  credited  against  the  amount  of  default in
  repayment of a governmental education loan and such  individual,  estate
  or trust shall have no right to commence a court action or proceeding or
  to  any  other  legal  recourse  against the state tax commission or the
  department to recover such overpayment or such interest certified to the
  comptroller to be credited against the amount of default in repayment of
  a governmental education loan. Provided, however, nothing  herein  shall
  be   construed  to  prohibit  such  individual,  estate  or  trust  from
  proceeding  against  the  New  York  state  higher  education   services
  corporation to recover that part of such overpayment or interest thereon
  so  certified  to the comptroller to be credited against the amount of a
  default in repayment of a governmental education loan which  is  greater


 than the amount of such default owed by such individual, estate or trust
  on the date of such certification.
    (8)  The tax commission shall promulgate such rules and regulations as
  it deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.




   § 171-e. Certain     overpayments     credited     against    national
  defense/national direct, health professions or  nursing  student  loans.
  (1)  As  used  in this section only, the term "state university loan" or
  "city  university  loan"  refers  to  loans  provided  to  students   at
  state-operated  units  of  the  state university of New York or the city
  university of New York respectively under the national  defense/national
  direct, health professions or nursing student loan programs.
    (2)  The  commissioner  of  taxation and finance, on behalf of the tax
  commission,  shall  enter  into  a  written  agreement  with  the  state
  university  of  New York or the city university of New York respectively
  which shall set forth the procedures for crediting any overpayment by an
  individual, estate or trust of income tax imposed by article  twenty-two
  of  this chapter, city personal income tax on residents imposed pursuant
  to the authority of article thirty of  this  chapter,  city  income  tax
  surcharge  on  residents  imposed  pursuant  to the authority of article
  thirty-A of this chapter, city  earnings  tax  on  nonresidents  imposed
  pursuant  to  the authority of article two-E of the general city law and
  city earnings tax on nonresidents imposed pursuant to the  authority  of
  article  thirty-B  of this chapter and the interest on such overpayments
  against the amount of any default in repayment  of  a  state  university
  loan or city university loan owed by such individual, estate or trust of
  which  the commissioner of taxation and finance has been notified by the
  state university of  New  York  or  the  city  university  of  New  York
  respectively pursuant to the provisions of such agreement.
    (3)  Such  agreement  shall  apply  only to the amount of a default in
  repayment of a state university loan or city university loan as to which
  the state and/or state university of New York or the city university  of
  New   York   respectively   has  obtained  a  judgment  or  has  made  a
  determination that satisfies the requirements of  subdivision  three  of
  section one hundred seventy-one-f of this article.
    (4) Such agreement shall include:
    (a)  the procedure under which the state university of New York or the
  city university of New York respectively shall notify  the  commissioner
  of  taxation  and  finance  of  a  default  in  a  repayment  of a state
  university loan or city university loan, such procedure to specify  when
  the  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance  shall be notified and the
  content of such notification;
    (b) the minimum amount outstanding on a  default  in  repayment  of  a
  state  university  loan  or  city  university  loan  against  which  the
  commissioner of taxation and finance shall, pursuant  to  this  section,
  credit an overpayment;
    (c)  the  procedure  for reimbursement of the commissioner of taxation
  and finance by the state university of New York or the  city  university
  of  New  York  respectively  for  the  full  cost  of  carrying  out the
  procedures authorized by this section;
    (d) a provision providing that  information  furnished  to  the  state
  university  of  New York or the city university of New York respectively
  by the commissioner of taxation and finance and the comptroller pursuant
  to said agreement shall be considered  confidential  and  shall  not  be
  disclosed  except to such federal or state department or agency entitled
  to such information;
    (e) such other matters as the parties to  such  agreement  shall  deem
  necessary to carry out the provisions of this section; and
    (f)  the  procedure  for reimbursement of the comptroller by the state
  university  of  New  York  or  city  university  of  New  York  for  any
  overpayment  and  interest  thereon  which has been credited against the
  amount of default on repayment of a state  university  loan  or  a  city
  university  loan owed by a taxpayer filing a joint return, but which has


 been  refunded  by  the  comptroller,  pursuant  to  paragraph  six   of
  subsection  (b)  of  section six hundred fifty-one of this chapter, to a
  spouse not liable for the amount of default  in  repayment  of  a  state
  university loan or city university loan owed by such taxpayer.
    (5)  (a)  In  calculating  the  amount  of an overpayment and interest
  thereon which shall be credited against  the  amount  of  a  default  in
  repayment  of  a state university loan or city university loan owed by a
  taxpayer, the tax commission shall  first  credit  the  overpayment  and
  interest thereon against any:
    (A)  liability  of such taxpayer in respect of any tax imposed by this
  chapter;
    (B) liability of such taxpayer for any tax  imposed  pursuant  to  the
  authority  of  this chapter or any other law if such tax is administered
  by the tax commission;
    (C) estimated tax for the succeeding taxable  year  if  such  taxpayer
  claims  such  overpayment  or  a  portion  thereof  as  a credit against
  estimated tax for such succeeding taxable year  pursuant  to  subsection
  (e) of section six hundred eighty-six of this chapter or subdivision (e)
  of  section  11-1786  of the administrative code of the city of New York
  for any tax imposed pursuant to the authority of  this  chapter  or  any
  other law if such tax is administered by the tax commission; and
    (D)  past-due  support  owed  by  the taxpayer pursuant to section one
  hundred seventy-one-c of this chapter;
    (b) Only  the  balance  remaining,  after  such  overpayment  and  the
  interest thereon has been credited as described in paragraph (a) of this
  subdivision,  shall  be certified as an overpayment plus any interest to
  be credited against the amount of a default  in  repayment  of  a  state
  university  loan  or  city  university  loan,  with  the remainder to be
  refunded to the taxpayer if such remainder is not  required  to  satisfy
  the  amount  of  a past-due legally enforceable debt pursuant to section
  one hundred seventy-one-f of this article, and/or a city of New York tax
  warrant judgment debt pursuant to section one hundred  seventy-one-l  of
  this article and/or the amount of a default in repayment of a guaranteed
  student  loan  pursuant  to  section  one  hundred seventy-one-d of this
  article.
    (6) The tax commission shall certify  to  the  comptroller  the  total
  amount  of  the  overpayment  and  the interest on such overpayment, the
  amount of such overpayment  and  the  interest  on  such  amount  to  be
  credited  against  the  amount  of  the  default in repayment of a state
  university loan  or  city  university  loan  and  the  balance  of  such
  overpayment and interest to be refunded to the taxpayer.
    (7) The commissioner of taxation and finance shall notify the taxpayer
  making  the  overpayment,  in writing, of the amount of such overpayment
  and the interest thereon certified to the comptroller as the  amount  to
  be  credited  against  the  amount  of a default in repayment of a state
  university loan or city  university  loan.  Such  notice  shall  include
  notification  to any other person who may have filed a joint return with
  the taxpayer of the steps such other person may take in order to  secure
  his or her proper share of the refund.
    (8)  From  the  time the state tax commission is notified by the state
  university of New York or the city university of New  York  respectively
  of  an individual's, estate's or trust's default in repayment of a state
  university loan or city university loan under the agreement provided for
  in this section, the state tax commission and the department of taxation
  and finance shall be relieved from all  liability  to  such  individual,
  estate or trust, their assigns, successors, heirs or representatives for
  the  amount  of  an overpayment and interest on such amount certified to
  the comptroller to be credited  against  the  amount  of  a  default  in


 repayment of such state university loan or city university loan and such
  individual,  estate  or  trust  shall  have no right to commence a court
  action or proceeding or to any other legal recourse  against  the  state
  tax commission or the department of taxation and finance to recover such
  overpayment or such interest certified to the comptroller to be credited
  against the amount of default in repayment of a state university loan or
  city  university  loan.  Provided,  however,  nothing  herein  shall  be
  construed to prohibit such individual, estate or trust  from  proceeding
  against  the  state university of New York or the city university of New
  York respectively to recover that part of such overpayment  or  interest
  thereon  so  certified  to  the  comptroller  to be credited against the
  amount of a default in repayment of a  state  university  loan  or  city
  university loan which is greater than the amount of such default owed by
  such individual, estate or trust on the date of such certification.
    (9)  The tax commission shall promulgate such rules and regulations as
  it deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.




   §  171-f. Certain overpayments credited against outstanding debts owed
  to a state agency. (1) For the purposes  of  this  section,  (a)  "state
  agency"  shall  mean  any  state  department,  board,  bureau, division,
  commission, committee, public  authority,  public  benefit  corporation,
  council,  office, or other governmental entity performing a governmental
  or proprietary function for the state, or, solely for purposes  of  this
  section,  a  local social services district; (b) "taxpayer" shall mean a
  corporation,   association,   company,   partnership,   estate,   trust,
  liquidator,  fiduciary  or  other  entity  or individual who or which is
  liable for any tax or other imposition imposed by or pursuant to article
  nine, nine-A, twenty-two, thirty, thirty-A, thirty-B or thirty-three  of
  this  chapter  or  article  two-E  of the general city law, which tax or
  other imposition is administered by the  commissioner  of  taxation  and
  finance,  or  who  or  which  is under a duty to perform an act under or
  pursuant to  such  tax  or  imposition,  excluding  a  state  agency,  a
  municipal  corporation  or a district corporation; and (c) "overpayment"
  shall mean an overpayment which has been requested or determined  to  be
  refunded,  a  refund  or  a  reimbursement, of a tax or other imposition
  imposed by or pursuant to  article  nine,  nine-A,  twenty-two,  thirty,
  thirty-A,  thirty-B  or thirty-three of this chapter or article two-E of
  the general city law, which  is  administered  by  the  commissioner  of
  taxation and finance.
    (2)  The commissioner of taxation and finance, upon agreement with the
  state comptroller and acting as an  agent  for  the  state  comptroller,
  shall  set  forth  the  procedures  for  crediting  any overpayment by a
  taxpayer of any tax or other imposition imposed by or authorized  to  be
  imposed  pursuant to article nine, nine-A, twenty-two, thirty, thirty-A,
  thirty-B or thirty-three of this chapter or article two-E of the general
  city law, which is administered by  the  commissioner  of  taxation  and
  finance,  and  the interest on any such overpayments, against the amount
  of a past-due legally enforceable debt owed by such taxpayer to a  state
  agency. An implementation plan shall be developed by the division of the
  budget  and  the department of taxation and finance which shall provide,
  but not be limited to, guidance with respect  to  coordination  of  debt
  collection  pursuant  to  this section and subdivision twenty-seventh of
  section one hundred seventy-one of this article. This section shall  not
  be  deemed  to  abrogate or limit in any way the powers and authority of
  the state comptroller to set off debts owed the state  against  payments
  from the state, under the constitution of the state or any other law.
    (3)  For  purposes of this section a past-due legally enforceable debt
  against which an overpayment and interest thereon may be credited  shall
  include any applicable interest or late payment charge and is a debt:
    (a)  as  to which the state has (i) obtained a judgment and (ii) given
  such notice as is required in subdivision (d) of section  five  thousand
  two hundred twenty-two of the civil practice law and rules; or
    (b)  as  to  which  a state agency has (i) made a final administrative
  determination where the taxpayer had the opportunity for an adjudicatory
  proceeding to which article three of the state administrative  procedure
  act  is  applicable, or the taxpayer had an opportunity for a proceeding
  which substantially complies with the requirements of such article three
  where such article three is not applicable, or the taxpayer was afforded
  such notice and  opportunity  to  be  heard  as  satisfies  due  process
  requirements  applicable  to  such state agency and to such debt, except
  that if, pursuant to law or regulation,  the  debt  is  not  collectible
  unless  the  state  agency obtains a judgment, then the debt will not be
  considered a past-due legally enforceable  debt  for  purposes  of  this
  section  until such state agency has obtained a final judgment no longer
  subject to judicial  review  and  (ii)  which  cannot  be  collected  by


 administrative  offset  by  the  referring  state agency against amounts
  payable to the taxpayer by the referring department; and
    (c)  with  respect  to which the state agency or the department of law
  has notified the taxpayer in writing, or has made a  reasonable  attempt
  to  so  notify the taxpayer at the taxpayer's last address known to such
  state agency (i) that the debt, which is clearly identified as to amount
  and nature, is past-due and unless paid within thirty  days  thereafter,
  would be referred to the department of taxation and finance to be offset
  against  an  overpayment;  (ii)  that  state  law  permits the offset of
  certain overpayments against such debts; (iii)  that  the  taxpayer  may
  request  a  review of the proposed referral for offset by contacting the
  state agency at a telephone  number  or  an  address  disclosed  in  the
  notice;  and  (iv)  that  the taxpayer may present, to the state agency,
  written evidence and arguments in support of his defense to the proposed
  referral or may appear at a scheduled conference with the  state  agency
  to  present  oral  arguments and written and oral evidence in support of
  such defense; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be deemed  to
  afford  the  taxpayer the opportunity to reargue any issue which was, or
  could have been, adjudicated in the proceeding  described  in  paragraph
  (a) or (b) of this subdivision; and
    (d)  which the state agency which is the creditor or the department of
  law, as the case may be, certifies to the commissioner of  taxation  and
  finance is past-due and legally enforceable.
    (4)  The  procedures  set  forth  by  the commissioner of taxation and
  finance for crediting any overpayments, and the  interest  on  any  such
  overpayments,  against  a  past-due legally enforceable debt pursuant to
  this section shall include but shall not be limited to:
    (a) the procedure under which the creditor state agency  shall  notify
  the   commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance  of  a  past-due  legally
  enforceable debt due from a taxpayer,  specifying  when  the  department
  will  be  notified, the information to be contained in such notification
  and the form and format to be used for such notification;
    (b) the minimum amount of a past-due legally enforceable debt  against
  which   the  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance  shall  credit  an
  overpayment of tax;
    (c)  a  provision  providing  that  information   furnished   to   the
  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance and the comptroller pursuant to
  such procedures shall  be  considered  confidential  and  shall  not  be
  disclosed, except as otherwise allowed in this chapter;
    (d)   a   provision   providing  that  information  furnished  by  the
  commissioner of taxation and finance pursuant to such  procedures  shall
  be considered confidential and shall not be disclosed, except the amount
  of  the  overpayment and interest thereon which has been credited may be
  disclosed  to  the  taxpayer,  and  the  amount  so  credited  and   the
  information necessary to properly identify the taxpayer may be disclosed
  to the creditor state agency; and
    (e)  the procedure for reimbursement of the comptroller by the revenue
  arrearage account, pursuant to section ninety-one-a of the state finance
  law, for any overpayment and interest thereon which  has  been  credited
  against  the past-due legally enforceable debt owed by a taxpayer filing
  a joint return, but which has been refunded by the comptroller, pursuant
  to paragraph six of subsection (b) of section six hundred  fifty-one  of
  this  chapter,  to  a  spouse  not  liable  for the amount of a past-due
  legally enforceable debt owed by such taxpayer.
    (5)(a) In calculating  the  amount  of  an  overpayment  and  interest
  thereon which shall be credited against the amount of a past-due legally
  enforceable debt owed by a taxpayer which is certified to the department
  of  taxation  and  finance  for collection pursuant to this section, the


 department of taxation and finance shall first  credit  the  overpayment
  and interest thereon against any:
    (i)  liability  of  such  taxpayer  in  respect  of  any  tax or other
  imposition imposed by this chapter and administered by the  commissioner
  of taxation and finance;
    (ii)  liability  of  such  taxpayer  for  any  tax or other imposition
  imposed pursuant to the authority of this chapter or any  other  law  if
  such tax is administered by the commissioner of taxation and finance;
    (iii)  estimated  tax for the succeeding taxable year if such taxpayer
  claims such overpayment  or  a  portion  thereof  as  a  credit  against
  estimated  tax  for  such succeeding taxable year pursuant to subsection
  (e) of section six hundred eighty-six or subsection (b) of  section  one
  thousand  eighty-six  of  this  chapter  or  subdivision  (e) of section
  11-1786 of the administrative code of the city of New York  or  for  any
  tax  imposed  pursuant to the authority of this chapter or any other law
  if such tax is administered by the commissioner of taxation and finance;
    (iv) past-due support owed by the taxpayer  pursuant  to  section  one
  hundred seventy-one-c of this article;
    (v)  unreimbursed medical assistance paid on behalf of a child payable
  pursuant to section three hundred sixty-seven-a of the  social  services
  law;
    (vi)  the  amount  of  a default in repayment of a state university or
  city university loan pursuant to section one  hundred  seventy-one-e  of
  this article.
    (b) Only the balance remaining, after the overpayment and the interest
  thereon  has  been  credited  as  described  in  paragraph  (a)  of this
  subdivision, shall be certified to the  comptroller  as  an  overpayment
  plus  any  interest  to be credited, in accordance with paragraph (g) of
  subdivision three of section one hundred seventy-one-l of this  article,
  against  a  past-due legally enforceable debt that has been certified to
  the commissioner of taxation and finance for collection pursuant to this
  section, and/or a city of New York tax warrant judgment  debt  that  has
  been   certified  to  the  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance  for
  collection  pursuant  to  section  one  hundred  seventy-one-l  of  this
  article,  with  the  remainder  to  be  refunded to the taxpayer if such
  remainder is not  required  to  satisfy  the  amount  of  a  default  in
  repayment  of  a guaranteed student loan pursuant to section one hundred
  seventy-one-d of this article.  If  a  taxpayer  owes  past-due  legally
  enforceable debt that has been certified to the commissioner of taxation
  and finance for collection pursuant to this section and city of New York
  tax warrant judgment debt that has been certified to the commissioner of
  taxation  and  finance  for  collection  pursuant to section one hundred
  seventy-one-l of this article, then the overpayment and interest thereon
  shall be credited against the debts in the  order  in  which  the  debts
  accrued.
    (b-1)  No taxpayer who has applied for, and is eligible for, an earned
  income tax credit under subsection (d) of section  six  hundred  six  of
  this  chapter  shall  have  more than ten percent of any tax overpayment
  credited against a past due legally enforceable debt owed to the  office
  of  temporary  and  disability  assistance  for an overpayment of public
  assistance unless such debt  was  incurred  as  a  result  of  false  or
  misleading  statements or other grounds set forth in section one hundred
  forty-five-c of the social services law, which led to a  sanction  under
  such section.
    (c) If a taxpayer owes more than one past-due legally enforceable debt
  which  is  certified  to  the  commissioner  of taxation and finance for
  collection pursuant  to  this  section,  the  overpayment  and  interest
  thereon  shall  be  credited against the debts in the order in which the


 debts accrued. A debt shall be considered to have accrued at the time at
  which the debt became past-due.
    (6)  The  commissioner shall (a) certify to the comptroller the amount
  of each overpayment and the interest  on  such  amount  to  be  credited
  against each past-due legally enforceable debt pursuant to this section,
  the  total amount of each such overpayment and the interest on each such
  overpayment, and the balance, if  any,  of  each  such  overpayment  and
  interest  thereon  to be refunded to the taxpayer, and (b) shall certify
  to  the  comptroller,  with  regard  to  each  such  past  due   legally
  enforceable  debt, the amount of liability underlying such debt which is
  creditable to unemployment insurance tax, federal funds,  federal  trust
  funds  or  fiduciary funds, or to the office of temporary and disability
  assistance or a local social services district relating  to  overpayment
  of  grants  and  allowances of public assistance or to the department of
  health  relating  to  overpayments  of  medical   assistance   made   to
  individuals  who  are or have been enrolled as providers in the New York
  state medical assistance program as established under  title  eleven  of
  article five of the social services law.
    (7)  The  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance  shall  notify each
  taxpayer who makes an overpayment, in writing, of  the  amount  of  such
  overpayment  and the interest thereon certified to the comptroller as an
  amount to be credited against a past-due legally enforceable debt  which
  has  been certified to the commissioner of taxation and finance pursuant
  to this section and of the name of the state agency which certified  the
  amount  to  the  commissioner of taxation and finance. Such notice shall
  include notification to any other person who  may  have  filed  a  joint
  return  with  the  taxpayer  of  the steps such other person may take in
  order to secure his or her proper share of the refund.
    (8) From the time the commissioner of taxation and finance is notified
  by a creditor state agency of a past-due legally  enforceable  debt  due
  from  a  taxpayer,  the  commissioner  of  taxation and finance shall be
  relieved from all liability to such taxpayer or its assigns, successors,
  heirs or representatives for the amount of an overpayment  and  interest
  on  such amount certified to the comptroller, to be credited against the
  amount of a past-due legally enforceable debt to be  collected  pursuant
  to  this  section,  and  such taxpayer shall have no right to commence a
  court action or proceeding or to any other legal  recourse  against  the
  commissioner  of taxation and finance to recover such overpayment or any
  interest thereon certified to the comptroller to be credited against the
  amount of  a  past-due  legally  enforceable  debt.  Provided,  however,
  nothing  herein  shall be construed to preclude any legal, equitable, or
  administrative action by such  taxpayer  against  the  certifying  state
  agency  to  which the amount of overpayment and any interest thereon was
  credited, with reference to the amount thereof which is greater than the
  amount of such past-due legally enforceable debt owed by  such  taxpayer
  on the date of such certification.




   §  171-g.  Provision of income information. (1) The commissioner shall
  enter into a written agreement with the commissioner of  the  office  of
  temporary  and  disability  assistance,  on  behalf  of  the  office  of
  temporary  and  disability  assistance,  which  shall  set   forth   the
  procedures  for  providing  information  limited  to  that  described in
  paragraph (b) of subdivision two of this  section  obtained  or  derived
  from  taxpayer  returns  for  the  purpose  of  reviewing support orders
  enforced pursuant to title six-A of article three of the social services
  law.
    (2) Such agreement shall include:
    (a) the procedure under which the office of temporary  and  disability
  assistance  shall  notify  the  department  of  the  identity  of  those
  individuals subject to  a  review  of  their  court  orders  of  support
  pursuant  to  section  one  hundred eleven-h of the social services law,
  including the requirement that such individuals be  identified  by  name
  and  social security number, and shall specify when the department shall
  be notified and the content of such notification;
    (b) a description of the specific  information  the  department  shall
  provide to the office of temporary and disability assistance with regard
  to individuals identified pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subdivision,
  which  shall  be  limited  to federal adjusted gross income and New York
  adjusted gross income obtained or derived from the most  recently  filed
  New  York state personal income tax return, the name, address and social
  security number of the taxpayer and an indication of whether such income
  tax return was filed jointly;
    (c)  a  requirement  that  the  office  of  temporary  and  disability
  assistance  maintain  a  record of all requests for tax information made
  pursuant to this section;
    (d) the procedure for reimbursement of the department by the office of
  temporary and disability assistance for the full costs of  carrying  out
  the procedures authorized by this section; and
    (e)  such  other  matters  as the parties to such agreement shall deem
  necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.




   §  171-h.  State  directory  of  new  hires.  (1)  Establishment.  The
  department shall establish an automated directory known  as  the  "State
  Directory  of  New  Hires"  which  shall contain information supplied by
  employers  in  accordance  with  subdivision  three  of  this   section,
  regarding each newly hired or re-hired employee.
    (2)   Definitions.  For  the  purposes  of  this  section,  the  terms
  "employer," "employee," and "business  day"  shall  have  the  following
  meanings:
    (a)  "employee"  means  an  individual  who  is an employee within the
  meaning of chapter twenty-four of the internal  revenue  code  of  1986,
  including an individual under an independent contractor arrangement with
  contracts in excess of twenty-five hundred dollars, and does not include
  an  employee  of  a  federal  or state agency performing intelligence or
  counterintelligence functions if the head of such agency has  determined
  that  a  report  made  pursuant  to  this  section  with  respect to the
  individual could endanger the safety of the employee  or  compromise  an
  ongoing investigation or intelligence mission.
    (b)  "employer" means an individual or entity within the meaning given
  the term employer in section three thousand four hundred one (d) of  the
  internal revenue code of 1986 and includes:
    (i) any governmental entity, and
    (ii)  any  labor  organization  as  defined  in section two (5) of the
  national labor relations act, including any  entity  (also  known  as  a
  "hiring  hall") which is used by such labor organization and an employer
  to carry out the requirements described in section eight (f)(3)  of  the
  national  labor  relations  act  with  respect to any agreement that may
  exist between the labor organization and the employer.
    (c) "business day" means a day on which state  offices  are  open  for
  regular business.
    (3) Employer reporting requirements:
    (a)  General.  Employers  shall  furnish to the state directory of new
  hires a report that contains the  name,  address,  and  social  security
  number  of each newly hired or re-hired employee who works in the state,
  and the employer's name, address, and identification number as  assigned
  pursuant  to  section  six  thousand  one  hundred  nine of the internal
  revenue code of 1986. Employers also shall report  if  dependent  health
  insurance benefits are available and the date the employee qualifies for
  the benefits.
    (b)  Format.  Each  report  shall  be  submitted  on a W-4 (employee's
  withholding allowance certificate)  form  or,  at  employer  option,  an
  equivalent  form  and  transmitted by first class mail, magnetically, or
  electronically to the state directory of new hires. In addition, if each
  report is submitted on a W-4, an additional form as  prescribed  by  the
  department  shall  be  submitted to report if dependent health insurance
  benefits are available and the  date  the  employee  qualifies  for  the
  benefits. That additional form shall be transmitted by first class mail,
  magnetically, or electronically to the state directory of new hires.
    (c)  Timing.  Employers  must submit reports to the state directory of
  new hires within twenty  calendar  days  of  the  employer's  hiring  or
  re-hiring  of  the  employee.  However,  in  the  case  of  an  employer
  transmitting reports magnetically  or  electronically,  by  two  monthly
  transmissions (if necessary), such reports shall be transmitted not less
  than twelve calendar days nor more than sixteen calendar days apart.
    (d)  Multistate  employers. An employer that has employees who work in
  New York and employees who  work  in  one  or  more  other  states,  and
  transmits reports magnetically or electronically, may designate New York
  or  one  of the other states in which such employer has employees as the
  state to which the employer  will  transmit  the  report  to  the  state


 directory  of  new  hires.  Any employer which transmits reports by this
  method must notify the secretary of the federal department of health and
  human services in writing as to which state such employer designates for
  the purpose of sending reports.
    (e)   Federal   government   employers.  Any  department,  agency,  or
  instrumentality of  the  federal  government  shall  transmit  new  hire
  reports  as  required by section four hundred fifty-three A (b)(1)(C) of
  the social security act.
    (4) The department shall:
    (a) notify all employers of the requirements for reporting information
  to the state directory of new hires as provided in subdivision three  of
  this section;
    (b)  enter  information  into  the  database  maintained  by the state
  directory of new hires within five business  days  of  receipt  from  an
  employer pursuant to subdivision three of this section;
    (c)  make automated comparisons of social security numbers between the
  state directory of new hires and the state case registry  maintained  by
  the  office of temporary and disability assistance for administration of
  the child support enforcement program  and,  where  there  is  a  match,
  provide the office of temporary and disability assistance with the name,
  address,  and  social security number of the employee to whom the social
  security number is assigned, and the name and address  of  the  employer
  and  the  employer's  identifying  number assigned to the employer under
  section six thousand nine of the internal revenue code of  1986,  within
  one  business  day  after  the  date the information is entered into the
  state directory of new hires;
    (d) transmit new hire information to the  national  directory  of  new
  hires  maintained by the federal department of health and human services
  within three business days after the date  the  information  is  entered
  into the state directory of new hires;
    (e)  conduct  matches  with  the  office  of  temporary and disability
  assistance, the department of health, and the  department  of  labor  to
  verify individuals' eligibility for the various programs specified under
  section one thousand one hundred thirty-seven (b) of the social security
  act  and  for  other public assistance programs authorized by state law,
  and  for  the  purposes  of  administering  state  employment   security
  programs,  and  with  the workers' compensation board for the purpose of
  administering workers' compensation programs;
    (f) on or before October first, nineteen hundred  ninety-seven,  enter
  into  written  agreements  with  the  commissioners  of  the  office  of
  temporary and disability assistance, health, and labor on behalf of  the
  office  of  temporary  and  disability assistance and the departments of
  health and labor respectively and the chair of the workers' compensation
  board on behalf of such board, which shall:
    (i) provide for  the  disclosure  of  information  obtained  from  the
  reports  required  to  be  submitted  pursuant  to  this section to such
  departments and board for the purposes set forth in this section;
    (ii) specify the frequency with which  the  department  shall  furnish
  information  obtained from such reports to such office, departments, and
  board, which shall be  within  one  business  day  after  the  date  the
  information is entered into the state directory of new hires;
    (iii)  set  forth the procedure for reimbursement of the department by
  such office, departments, and board  subject  to  the  approval  of  the
  director  of  the  budget  for  the additional costs of carrying out the
  provisions of this section;
    (iv) include such other matters as the parties to such agreement shall
  deem necessary to carry out the provisions of this section; and


   (g) furnish to the national directory of new  hires,  on  a  quarterly
  basis,   extracts  of  the  reports  required  under  paragraph  six  of
  subsection (a) of section three hundred  three  of  the  federal  social
  security  act  to be made to the secretary of labor concerning wages and
  unemployment  compensation  paid  to  individuals, by such dates, and in
  such manner as the secretary of health and human services shall  specify
  by regulations. The state department of labor shall, consistent with the
  authority  contained in paragraph e of subdivision three of section five
  hundred thirty-seven of the labor law, disclose to the  state  directory
  of new hires, such wage and unemployment compensation information as may
  be necessary to allow such state directory to comply with the provisions
  of this paragraph.




   §  171-i.  Enforcement of child support and combined child and spousal
  support arrears. 1. The commissioner, on behalf of the department, shall
  enter into a written agreement with the commissioner of  the  office  of
  temporary  and  disability  assistance,  on  behalf  of  the  office  of
  temporary  and  disability  assistance,  which  shall  set   forth   the
  procedures  for  the  department  to  collect child support and combined
  child and spousal support arrears.
    2. Such agreement shall include:
    (a) the criteria for determining cases  subject  to  referral  to  the
  department  for  enforcement  which  shall  not  include cases for which
  payments are being received by the support collection unit as  a  result
  of  an  income  execution  issued  pursuant to section five thousand two
  hundred forty-one of the civil practice law and  rules,  and  shall  not
  include  cases  in which the obligor has not accumulated support arrears
  equivalent to or greater than four months, but shall include cases which
  meet any of the following criteria:
    (i) cases  in  which  the  obligor  has  accumulated  support  arrears
  equivalent to or greater than four months; or
    (ii)  cases  with  support arrears, notwithstanding the amount of such
  arrears, selected by the support collection unit for referral consistent
  with this section, in consultation with the department and the office of
  temporary and disability assistance;
    (b) the procedures and criteria under which the  office  of  temporary
  and  disability assistance and the department shall identify cases to be
  referred to the department for enforcement;
    (c) the procedure under which the office of temporary  and  disability
  assistance  shall  notify  and  update  the commissioner of an obligor's
  liability for support arrears;
    (d) the procedures by which the department and the office of temporary
  and disability assistance shall  coordinate  their  support  enforcement
  activities;
    (e)  the  procedures  by  which  the department notifies the office of
  temporary and disability assistance of monies collected and remits  such
  monies  to  the  office  of temporary and disability assistance or their
  fiscal agent for distribution  to  the  appropriate  support  collection
  units;
    (f)  the  procedure  under which the commissioner shall be notified by
  the office of temporary and disability assistance that  an  obligor  has
  satisfied his or her support arrears;
    (g)  the  procedure  under  which  the  department  and  the office of
  temporary and disability assistance shall provide  notification  to  the
  other  or  to the support collection unit of the office of temporary and
  disability assistance of any information with  regard  to  an  obligor's
  address, income, or employment, or identification of assets which may be
  subject  to  enforcement  by  such  support  collection  unit  or by the
  department;
    (h) the procedure for the publicizing of sanctions for  nonpayment  of
  support, including enforcement of support arrears by the department; and
    (i)  such  other  matters  as the parties to such agreement shall deem
  necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.
    3. The office of temporary and  disability  assistance  shall  send  a
  notice by first class mail to the last known address or such other place
  where  a  support  obligor  is  likely  to receive notice, no later than
  thirty days prior to the date the office  of  temporary  and  disability
  assistance  notifies  the  commissioner  of such obligor's liability for
  support arrears. Such notice shall provide:
    (a) that  such  obligor  can  avoid  notification  by  the  office  of
  temporary  and  disability  assistance  to  the  commissioner  by  fully


 satisfying  the  support  arrears  or  by  complying  with  such   other
  requirements  as is provided for in paragraph (d) of subdivision fifteen
  of section one hundred eleven-b of the social services law; and
    (b)  the  address  and telephone number of the support collection unit
  which such obligor may contact to request information or to arrange  for
  payment of the support arrears.
    4.  Upon  receipt  of  notification  from  the office of temporary and
  disability assistance of an obligor's  eligibility  for  enforcement  of
  support  arrears by the department, the commissioner or his or her agent
  is authorized  to  initiate  enforcement  of  such  arrears.  When  such
  notification is made to the commissioner, the department shall be deemed
  to  have obtained a judgment against such obligor for the full amount of
  the support arrears stated in such notice  and  any  subsequent  arrears
  which  may  become  due. The department may enforce the judgment thereby
  obtained with like effect and in the  same  manner  prescribed  by  this
  chapter  for  the  collection  of tax assessment eligible to be docketed
  under this chapter as a warrant, except that any  payment  made  by  the
  support  obligor  to  the department to satisfy support arrears shall be
  paid over by the department to the office of  temporary  and  disability
  assistance  or  its  fiscal  agent  for  distribution to the appropriate
  support collection unit. Where  the  sum  collected  by  the  department
  exceeds  the  amount  of  the support arrears, and the support obligator
  also has a liability in respect of any  tax,  fee  or  other  imposition
  imposed by or pursuant to the authority of this chapter or any other law
  if   such   tax,   fee  or  other  imposition  is  administered  by  the
  commissioner,  the  department  may  credit  such  excess  against  such
  liability.
    5. (a) For purposes of the confidentiality provisions of this chapter,
  enforcement  activities  undertaken  by  the department pursuant to this
  section shall be considered to be court  actions  or  proceedings  under
  this chapter.
    (b)   Notwithstanding  anything  to  the  contrary  contained  in  the
  confidentiality provisions of this chapter, the department  may  furnish
  the  office  of  temporary  and  disability  assistance  or  the support
  collection unit with the  information  described  in  paragraph  (g)  of
  subdivision  two  of this section regarding a support obligor whose case
  has been referred to the commissioner for enforcement pursuant  to  this
  section.  The  office  of  temporary  and  disability  assistance or the
  support collection unit, as applicable, may redisclose such  information
  only to the extent necessary to secure the collection of support arrears
  from such obligor.
    6.  Activities to enforce support arrears undertaken by the department
  pursuant to this section shall not in any way limit, restrict or  impair
  the  office  of  temporary and disability assistance from exercising its
  authority to enforce support arrears under  applicable  laws;  provided,
  however,  that the department and the office of temporary and disability
  assistance shall coordinate their support enforcement  activities  in  a
  way  designed  to minimize duplication of effort and maximize collection
  of support arrears.
    7. If, following referral of an obligor's case  to  the  commissioner,
  such obligor commences an administrative or quasi-judicial proceeding or
  any   civil  proceeding  against  the  department  or  the  commissioner
  challenging such referral, then the office of temporary  and  disability
  assistance   and  the  commissioner  of  the  office  of  temporary  and
  disability assistance shall be substituted as respondents or  defendants
  in such proceeding, as the case may be. The department shall be bound by
  any   decision  in  such  proceeding  which  is  no  longer  subject  to
  administrative or quasi-judicial review. Neither the department nor  the


 commissioner shall be liable for any damages sustained by reason of such
  referral.
    8.  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, a payment of
  support arrears made to the department pursuant  to  the  provisions  of
  this  section  shall  be  deemed  to be a payment of such arrears to the
  office of temporary and disability assistance or its fiscal agent.




   §  171-j.    Verification of payroll records.  (1) The commissioner is
  authorized to enter into an agreement with the state insurance  fund  or
  other  insurance  carrier  writing  workers'  compensation  insurance to
  verify payroll information forwarded to the department  solely  for  the
  purpose   of   verifying,   by   each   employer   in  the  construction
  classification, the number of employees, by location, total gross  wages
  paid  to  such  employees per week, total hours worked by such employees
  per quarter  and total annual gross wages subject to withholding paid to
  such employees, as reported   pursuant  to  the  state's  combined  wage
  reporting  and  withholding  tax system, but shall not include the name,
  social security number or any other information which could be  used  to
  identify  any employee.  For purposes of this section the term "employer
  in the construction classification" shall have the meaning prescribed by
  subdivision two of section eighty-nine of the workers' compensation  law
  and paragraph one of subsection (e) of section twenty-three hundred four
  of  the insurance law.  The department may charge a reasonable fee to be
  determined by the commissioner, in payment to  the  department  for  the
  expense incurred in verifying such information.  Such agreement shall be
  limited solely to the verification of information enumerated herein.
    (2)  Verification of information under subdivision one of this section
  by the department shall be limited to agreement or disagreement with the
  payroll information supplied pursuant to  such  subdivision  one  and  a
  statement  of  whether  each  representation  contained therein has been
  overstated or understated.
    (3) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to  require  the
  violation  of any confidentiality agreement entered into by the state or
  any entity thereof under the provisions  of  section  six  thousand  one
  hundred three, or any other provision, of the internal revenue code, nor
  shall  this section be administered in any manner which will result in a
  violation of any such confidentiality agreement.
    (4) The commissioner shall promulgate such rules  and  regulations  as
  may  be  necessary  and  appropriate  to  effect  the provisions of this
  section.
    (5) The provisions of the state freedom of information act  shall  not
  apply  to  any verification prepared or provided pursuant to subdivision
  two of this section and information provided pursuant to subdivision one
  of this section.




   §  171-k.  Electronic signature. If any return or report relating to a
  tax, fee  or  other  imposition  administered  by  the  commissioner  is
  authorized  by  the  commissioner  to be filed electronically, then such
  return or report shall be  signed  electronically  consistent  with  the
  provisions  of  article  three  of  the  state technology law; provided,
  however, that if the commissioner determines that electronic  signatures
  that   are   used  by  the  federal  internal  revenue  service  in  tax
  administration are not consistent with the provisions of  article  three
  of  the  state  technology  law, then the commissioner, after conferring
  with the office of information technology services,  may  prescribe  the
  manner  and  form  of electronic signature on any such return or report.
  Such electronic signature shall conform, to the extent practicable, with
  electronic signatures that are used  by  the  federal  internal  revenue
  service.  The  use  of  such an electronic signature shall have the same
  validity and effect as the use of a signature affixed by hand.




   §  171-1.  Certain  overpayments credited against outstanding tax debt
  owed to the city of New York. (1) For the purposes of this section:
    (a)  "taxpayer"  shall  mean  a  corporation,  association,   company,
  partnership,  estate,  trust,  liquidator,  fiduciary or other entity or
  individual who or which is  liable  for  any  tax  or  other  imposition
  imposed  by  or  pursuant  to  article nine, nine-A, twenty-two, thirty,
  thirty-A, thirty-B or thirty-three of this chapter, which tax  or  other
  imposition  is administered by the commissioner of taxation and finance,
  or who or which is under a duty to perform an act under or  pursuant  to
  such   tax   or  imposition,  excluding  a  state  agency,  a  municipal
  corporation or a district corporation;
    (b) "overpayment" shall mean an overpayment which has  been  requested
  or  determined  to be refunded, a refund or a reimbursement, of a tax or
  other imposition  imposed  by  or  pursuant  to  article  nine,  nine-A,
  twenty-two,  thirty, thirty-A, thirty-B or thirty-three of this chapter,
  which is administered by the commissioner of taxation and finance; and
    (c) "city of New York tax warrant judgment debt," shall mean tax  debt
  owed to the city of New York that is the subject of a tax warrant issued
  by  the  city of New York department of finance and docketed pursuant to
  the provisions of title eleven of the administrative code of the city of
  New York and that remains outstanding.
    (2) The commissioner of  taxation  and  finance  shall  enter  into  a
  written  agreement  with  the commissioner of finance of the city of New
  York, which shall set forth the procedures for crediting any overpayment
  by a taxpayer and the interest thereon against  city  of  New  York  tax
  warrant judgment debt owed by such taxpayer of which the commissioner of
  taxation  and  finance  has  been  notified  by  the  city  of  New York
  commissioner of finance pursuant to the provisions of such agreement.
    (3) Such agreement shall include:
    (a) the procedure under which the city of  New  York  commissioner  of
  finance  shall  notify  the  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance of
  liability for city of New York tax  warrant  judgment  debt,  specifying
  when  the  commissioner  of  taxation  and finance will be notified, the
  information to be contained in such notification and the form and format
  to be used for such notification;
    (b) the fee, if not waived, for reimbursement of the  commissioner  of
  taxation  and  finance by the city of New York department of finance for
  the full cost of carrying out the procedures authorized by this section;
    (c) the minimum period of delinquency of the  city  of  New  York  tax
  warrant  judgment  debt,  and the minimum amount of the past due city of
  New York tax warrant judgment debt against  which  the  commissioner  of
  taxation  and  finance  shall,  pursuant  to  this  section,  credit  an
  overpayment;
    (d) the procedure for transferring the overpayments to the city of New
  York department of finance so the overpayments can be applied to  credit
  the past due city of New York tax warrant judgment debt;
    (e)  the procedure for reimbursement of the comptroller by the city of
  New York department of finance for any overpayment and interest  thereon
  which  has  been  credited against city of New York tax warrant judgment
  debt owed by a taxpayer, but which was paid by the taxpayer prior to the
  overpayment being applied;
    (f) the procedure for reimbursement of the comptroller by the city  of
  New  York department of finance for any overpayment and interest thereon
  which has been credited against city of New York  tax  warrant  judgment
  debt  owed  by  a  taxpayer  filing  a  joint return, but which has been
  refunded by the comptroller, pursuant to paragraph six of subsection (b)
  of section six hundred fifty-one of this chapter, to a spouse not liable


 for the city of  New  York  tax  warrant  judgment  debt  owed  by  such
  taxpayer;
    (g) a provision to the effect that if a taxpayer owes past-due legally
  enforceable debt that has been certified to the commissioner of taxation
  and finance for collection pursuant to section one hundred seventy-one-f
  of  this article and city of New York tax warrant judgment debt that has
  been  certified  to  the  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance   for
  collection  pursuant  to this section, then the overpayment and interest
  thereon shall be credited against the debts in the order  in  which  the
  debts  accrued.  The city of New York tax warrant judgment debt shall be
  deemed for purposes of this section to  have  accrued  at  the  time  of
  docketing of the tax warrant; and
    (h)  such  other  matters  as the parties to such agreement shall deem
  necessary to  carry  out  the  provisions  of  this  section,  including
  provisions relating to the notice to be given to the taxpayer.
    (4)(a)  In  calculating  the  amount  of  an  overpayment and interest
  thereon that shall be credited against city  of  New  York  tax  warrant
  judgment  debt  owed  by  a  taxpayer  that  has  been  certified to the
  commissioner of taxation and finance for  collection  pursuant  to  this
  section, the commissioner of taxation and finance shall first credit the
  overpayment and interest thereon against any:
    (i)  liability  of  such  taxpayer  in  respect  of  any  tax or other
  imposition imposed by this chapter and administered by the  commissioner
  of taxation and finance;
    (ii)  liability  of  such taxpayer for any tax imposed pursuant to the
  authority of this chapter or any other law if such tax  is  administered
  by the commissioner of taxation and finance;
    (iii)  estimated  tax  for the succeeding taxable year if the taxpayer
  claims such overpayment  or  a  portion  thereof  as  a  credit  against
  estimated  tax  for  such succeeding taxable year pursuant to subsection
  (e) of section six hundred eighty-six or subsection (b) of  section  one
  thousand  eighty-six  of  this  chapter  or  subdivision  (e) of section
  11-1786 of the administrative code of the city of New York  or  for  any
  tax  imposed  pursuant to the authority of this chapter or any other law
  if such tax is administered by the commissioner of taxation and finance;
    (iv) past-due support owed by the taxpayer  pursuant  to  section  one
  hundred seventy-one-c of this article;
    (v)  unreimbursed medical assistance paid on behalf of a child payable
  pursuant to section three hundred sixty-seven-a of the  social  services
  law; and
    (vi)  the  amount  of  a default in repayment of a state university or
  city university loan pursuant to section one  hundred  seventy-one-e  of
  this article.
    (b) Only the balance remaining, after the overpayment and the interest
  thereon  has  been  credited  as  described  in  paragraph  (a)  of this
  subdivision, shall be certified to the  comptroller  as  an  overpayment
  plus  any  interest  to be credited, in accordance with paragraph (g) of
  subdivision three of this section, against city of New York tax  warrant
  judgment  debt  that  has been certified to the commissioner of taxation
  and finance for collection pursuant to  this  section,  and/or  past-due
  legally  enforceable debt that has been certified to the commissioner of
  taxation and finance for collection  pursuant  to  section  one  hundred
  seventy-one-f  of this article, with the remainder to be refunded to the
  taxpayer if such remainder is not required to satisfy the  amount  of  a
  default  in  repayment  of a guaranteed student loan pursuant to section
  one hundred seventy-one-d of this article. If a taxpayer  owes  city  of
  New  York  tax  warrant  judgment  debt  that  has been certified to the
  commissioner of taxation and finance for  collection  pursuant  to  this


 section and past-due legally enforceable debt that has been certified to
  the  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance for collection pursuant to
  section one hundred seventy-one-f of this article, then the  overpayment
  and interest thereon shall be credited against the debts in the order in
  which the debts accrued.
    (5)  The  commissioner  of  taxation  and finance shall certify to the
  comptroller the amount of each overpayment and the interest  thereon  to
  be  credited against city of New York tax warrant judgment debt, and the
  balance, if any, of each such overpayment and interest to be refunded to
  the taxpayer.
    (6) The  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance  shall  notify  each
  taxpayer  who  makes  an  overpayment, in writing, of the amount of such
  overpayment and the interest thereon certified to the comptroller as the
  amount to be credited against city of  New  York  tax  warrant  judgment
  debt. Such notice shall include notification to any other person who may
  have  filed  a  joint  return  with the taxpayer of the steps such other
  person may take in order to secure  his  or  her  proper  share  of  the
  refund.
    (7) From the time the commissioner of taxation and finance is notified
  by  the city of New York department of finance of a taxpayer's liability
  for city of New York tax  warrant  judgment  debt  under  the  agreement
  provided  for  in this section, the commissioner of taxation and finance
  shall be relieved from all liability  to  such  taxpayer,  its  assigns,
  successors,  heirs  or  representatives for the amount of an overpayment
  and interest thereon certified to the comptroller to be credited against
  city of New York tax warrant judgment debt and the taxpayer  shall  have
  no  right to commence a court action or proceeding or to any other legal
  recourse against the commissioner of taxation  and  finance  to  recover
  such  overpayment or interest thereon certified to the comptroller to be
  credited against city of New York tax warrant judgment  debt.  Provided,
  however,  nothing  herein  shall  be construed to prohibit such taxpayer
  from proceeding against the city of New York department  of  finance  to
  recover  that  part of such overpayment or interest thereon so certified
  to the comptroller to be credited against city of New York  tax  warrant
  judgment  debt  that  is greater than the amount of city of New York tax
  warrant judgment debt  owed  by  such  taxpayer  on  the  date  of  such
  certification.
    (8)  The commissioner of taxation and finance and the city of New York
  department of finance may promulgate such rules and regulations as  they
  deem necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.




   §  171-m.  Certain  New  York  city  tax overpayments credited against
  outstanding debts owed to the state of New York.  (1)  For  purposes  of
  this section:
    (a)  "judgment" shall mean a warrant filed with a county clerk whereby
  the commissioner is, in the right of the people  of  the  state  of  New
  York,   deemed   to   have  obtained  judgment  against  an  individual,
  corporation,   association,   company,   partnership,   estate,   trust,
  liquidator,  fiduciary  or  other entity, identified in a tax warrant as
  the judgment debtor, for a tax or other imposition;
    (b) "overpayment" shall mean overpayment of a tax administered by  the
  commissioner of finance of the city of New York pursuant to title eleven
  of the administrative code of the city of New York;
    (c)   "taxpayer"  means  a  judgment  debtor  who  or  which  made  an
  overpayment.
    (2) Notwithstanding any law to the contrary,  an  overpayment  may  be
  paid  by  the  commissioner  of  finance  of the city of New York to the
  commissioner for full or partial satisfaction of a  judgment  against  a
  taxpayer  who  or  which  made the overpayment. The commissioner and the
  commissioner of finance of the city of New York are hereby authorized to
  enter into a written agreement which  shall  set  forth  procedures  for
  applying  an  overpayment and interest thereon for satisfaction, in part
  or in  full,  of  a  judgment.  The  commissioner  of  finance  and  the
  commissioner  may  also  obtain  and  exchange whatever return or report
  information is necessary to implement the agreement.
    (3) Such agreement shall include:
    (a) the procedure under which the commissioner shall certify  to,  and
  notify,  the  commissioner  of  finance  about  an outstanding judgment,
  amounts remaining due  thereon  and  the  format  of  certification  and
  notification;
    (b)  the fee, if any, for reimbursement of the commissioner of finance
  by the commissioner for the cost of implementing  procedures  authorized
  by this section;
    (c) the procedure for transferring overpayments to the commissioner;
    (d) the procedure for reimbursing the city of New York in the event an
  overpayment was improperly paid to the commissioner;
    (e)  such  other  matters  as  the parties to the agreement shall deem
  necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.
    (4) Before notifying the commissioner of finance  of  a  judgment  for
  partial  or  full  satisfaction  by  application  of an overpayment, the
  commissioner shall make a reasonable attempt to notify a taxpayer at the
  taxpayer's last known address (i) that the judgment, clearly  identified
  as  to amount and the tax or imposition, unless paid within thirty days,
  will be referred to the city of New York finance department for  payment
  by   application   of  an  overpayment;  (ii)  that  state  law  permits
  application of certain overpayments against judgments;  (iii)  that  the
  taxpayer  may request a review of the proposed referral of a judgment by
  contacting the department at a telephone number or address disclosed  in
  the  notice;  and (iv) that the taxpayer may present to the commissioner
  any written evidence and arguments  in  support  of  a  defense  to  the
  proposed  referral  or  may  appear  at  a scheduled conference with the
  department to present oral arguments and written and  oral  evidence  in
  support  of  such  defense.  Provided  however,  nothing herein shall be
  deemed to afford a taxpayer the opportunity to reargue any  issue  which
  was  or  could  have  been  adjudicated in an administrative or judicial
  proceeding prior to filing of a warrant serving as a judgment.
    (5) An overpayment shall be paid to the commissioner pursuant to  this
  section  only  to  the extent the commissioner of finance determines the
  overpayment is not subject to offset against a debt owed the city of New


 York or owed its instrumentalities, or subject to any other  enforceable
  city of New York interest or right in the overpayment.
    (6) The commissioner of finance shall notify each taxpayer who made an
  overpayment,  in  writing,  of  the  amount  of such overpayment and the
  interest thereon paid to the commissioner.  Such  notice  shall  include
  notification  to any other person who may have filed a joint return with
  the taxpayer of the steps such other person may take in order to  secure
  their proper share of the refund.
    (7)  From  the  time  the  commissioner  of finance is notified by the
  commissioner  of  a  taxpayer's  liability  for  a  judgment  under  the
  agreement  provided  for  in this section, the city of New York shall be
  relieved of all liability to such  taxpayer,  its  assigns,  successors,
  heirs  or representatives for the amount of the overpayment and interest
  thereon  paid  to  the  commissioner.  Such   taxpayer,   its   assigns,
  successors,  heirs  or representatives shall have no right to commence a
  court action or proceeding or have any other legal recourse against  the
  city of New York to recover such overpayment or interest thereon paid to
  the commissioner. However, nothing herein shall be construed to preclude
  any  legal,  equitable,  or  administrative  action by such taxpayer its
  assigns,  successors,  heirs  or  representatives   entitled   to   such
  overpayment  against  the  commissioner  to  recover  that  part  of the
  overpayment or interest thereon that is greater than the amount  of  the
  judgment  owed by such taxpayer on the date such overpayment is credited
  against a judgment.
    (8) The commissioner and the commissioner of  finance  may  promulgate
  such  rules and regulations deemed necessary to carry out the provisions
  of this section.




   §  171-n.  Certain overpayments credited against outstanding tax debts
  owed to other states. (1) For the purposes of this section:
    (a) "overpayment" means an amount requested for  refund  or  otherwise
  determined  to  be  in  excess  of  that  owed,  with respect to any tax
  administered by the commissioner and remaining after application, as may
  be determined by the commissioner, to the satisfaction of debts owed  by
  a taxpayer to this state or the federal government;
    (b) "taxpayer" means any individual, corporation, partnership, limited
  liability  partnership  or  company,  partner,  member, manager, estate,
  trust, fiduciary or entity, who or which has made an overpayment of  any
  tax administered by the commissioner;
    (c)  "tax debt" means any past due, legally enforceable tax obligation
  owed any other state administering that tax, which arises  from  (i)  an
  enforceable  judgment  of  a court of competent jurisdiction which is no
  longer subject to judicial review, or (ii) an enforceable  determination
  of  an  administrative body which is no longer subject to administrative
  or judicial review, or (iii) an assessment or  determination  (including
  self-assessment  or  self-assessed determination) which has become final
  or finally and irrevocably fixed and no longer subject to administrative
  or judicial review; and
    (d) "claimant state" means any state which requests application of  an
  overpayment to a tax debt.
    (2)  The  commissioner may, in his or her discretion, agree to pay the
  whole or part of an overpayment of tax administered by the  commissioner
  to a claimant state owed a tax debt by a taxpayer, provided the claimant
  state   grants  substantially  similar  privileges  to  this  state.  An
  agreement with a claimant state must provide  for  thirty  days  advance
  written  notice to, and an opportunity for, taxpayers to present written
  or oral evidence about application of their overpayments to tax debts. A
  proceeding may be commenced by a taxpayer within  four  months  after  a
  copy of a decision adverse to the taxpayer is mailed to the taxpayer for
  judicial  review  of  the  decision  in  the  manner provided by article
  seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules. Article forty of this
  chapter shall not apply to any  hearing  or  proceeding  on  whether  an
  overpayment  may  be  applied  to  a  tax  debt  in accordance with this
  section. The remedy provided by this section for review of hearings  and
  proceedings  shall  be  the  exclusive  remedy  available  to judicially
  determine whether an overpayment  may  be  applied  to  a  tax  debt  in
  accordance  with this section. The amount of a tax debt remaining due as
  certified by a claimant state shall  be  prima  facie  evidence  of  the
  correct amount of a tax debt.




   §  171-p.  Costs  or fees imposed by the United States or other states
  for crediting tax overpayments against outstanding tax debts owed to the
  state of New York. (1) For purposes of this section:
    (a) "overpayment" means the amount requested for refund  or  otherwise
  determined  to be in excess of that owed with respect to any tax imposed
  under, or pursuant to the authority of, the internal revenue code or the
  laws of any state;
    (b) "taxpayer" means any individual, corporation, partnership, limited
  liability partnership or  company,  partner,  member,  manager,  estate,
  trust,  fiduciary or entity, who or which has made an overpayment of tax
  as defined in paragraph (a) of this subdivision;
    (c) "tax debt" means any past due, legally enforceable tax  obligation
  administered by the commissioner.
    (2)  The commissioner may implement procedures under which any cost or
  fee imposed or charged by the United States or any state,  with  respect
  to  payment  or  remittance of a taxpayer's overpayment to satisfy a tax
  debt of the taxpayer, must  not  be  credited  by  the  commissioner  to
  payment  or  satisfaction  of the tax debt, must be deemed to be part of
  the taxpayer's tax debt, and must be eligible  for  offset  against  the
  taxpayer's  overpayment to the extent permitted by law. The commissioner
  may also implement procedures under which any cost  or  fee  imposed  or
  charged  by  the  United  States or any other state, with respect to any
  other payment or remittance of a  taxpayer's  overpayment  or  a  vendor
  payment  to satisfy a debt of the taxpayer or the person who is owed the
  vendor payment as authorized by section  one  hundred  seventy-one-t  of
  this  article,  must not be credited by the state of New York to payment
  or satisfaction of the debt, must be deemed to be part of the taxpayer's
  or person's debt, and must be eligible for offset against the taxpayer's
  overpayment or the person's vendor payment to the  extent  permitted  by
  law.




   §   171-r.   Brownfield   credit  report.  (a)  The  commissioner,  in
  consultation with the commissioner of environmental  conservation,  must
  publish a brownfield credit report annually by January thirty-first. The
  first  report  must  be  published by January thirty-first, two thousand
  nine.
    (b)  The  brownfield  credit  report  must   contain   the   following
  information   about  the  credits  claimed  under  sections  twenty-one,
  twenty-two and twenty-three of this chapter during the previous calendar
  year:
    (1) the name of each taxpayer claiming a credit; provided however,  if
  the  taxpayer  claims  a  credit  because  the taxpayer is a member of a
  limited liability company, a partner in a partnership or  a  shareholder
  in  a  subchapter  S  corporation,  the  name  of each limited liability
  company, partnership or subchapter S corporation earning  any  of  those
  credits  must be included in the report instead of information about the
  taxpayer claiming the credit;
    (2) the amount of  each  credit  earned  by  each  taxpayer;  provided
  however,  if  the  taxpayer  claims  a  credit because the taxpayer is a
  member of a limited liability company, a partner in a partnership  or  a
  shareholder  in  a subchapter S corporation, the amount of credit earned
  by each entity must be included in the  report  instead  of  information
  about the taxpayer claiming the credit;
    (3)  information  identifying  the  project for which a certificate of
  completion was issued and the credit claimed under  section  twenty-one,
  twenty-two  or  twenty-three  of this chapter, including the name of the
  project and municipality, including the county, in which the project  is
  located; and
    (4)  the  number of credits by each credit type and the amount of such
  credits granted, claimed and earned on a brownfield site, statewide  and
  department of environmental conservation region basis; and of those, the
  number  of  credits  and  the  average amount of such credits allowed to
  taxpayers  in  each  county,  brownfield  opportunity  area   designated
  pursuant  to section nine hundred seventy-r of the general municipal law
  and in each environmental zone as defined in subdivision (b) of  section
  twenty-one of this chapter.
    (5) copies of all reports received from developers pursuant to section
  one  hundred  seventy-one-s  of  this  article or, in the commissioner's
  discretion, a summary of the contents of such reports.
    (c) The information included in the brownfield credit report  will  be
  based  on  the information filed with the department during the previous
  calendar year, to  the  extent  that  it  is  practicable  to  use  that
  information.
    (d) Such report shall also contain any other information received from
  the  commissioner  of  environmental  conservation  with  regard to such
  credits, and any other statistical information  that  such  commissioner
  deems to be useful in analyzing the effects of the program.
    (e)  The  commissioner,  in  consultation  with  the  commissioner  of
  environmental conservation, shall publish by January  thirty-first,  two
  thousand  sixteen a supplemental brownfield credit report containing the
  information required by this section about the credits claimed  for  the
  years two thousand five, two thousand six, and two thousand seven.




   §  171-t. Reciprocal offset agreements with the United States or other
  states. (1) For the purposes of this section, the  definitions  provided
  for  in section one hundred seventy-one-n of this article apply together
  with the following:
    (a) "Claimant" means any state or the United States that enters into a
  reciprocal agreement under this section or  requests  application  of  a
  vendor payment or an overpayment to a debt.
    (b)  "Debt"  means  (i),  for  purposes of state debt, a "tax debt" as
  defined in section one hundred seventy-one-n of  this  article  and  any
  other  past  due  legally  enforceable obligation owed to a state, which
  arises from  (A)  an  enforceable  judgment  of  a  court  of  competent
  jurisdiction  that  is  no  longer subject to judicial review, or (B) an
  enforceable determination of an administrative body that  is  no  longer
  subject  to  administrative  or  judicial review, or (C) a determination
  that has become final or finally and irrevocably  fixed  and  no  longer
  subject  to  administrative or judicial review; or (ii), for purposes of
  federal debt, debt means any amount of money, funds or property that has
  been determined by an appropriate official of the federal government  to
  be  owed  to  the  United  States  by a person, organization, or entity,
  except another federal agency, to the extent such amount is eligible for
  offset under federal law. The term includes debt administered by a third
  party acting as an agent for the federal government.
    (c) "Debtor" means a person who owes a debt.
    (d) "Person" has the same meaning as that term has in subdivision  (a)
  of section eleven hundred one of this chapter.
    (e)  "Vendor  payment"  means  any payment, other than an overpayment,
  made by a state or the United States to any person, and includes but  is
  not  limited to any expense reimbursement to an employee of the state or
  the United States; but does not include  a  person's  salary,  wages  or
  pension.
    (2)  The  commissioner  may,  in  his  or her discretion, enter into a
  collection and offset agreement with another state or  with  the  United
  States secretary of the treasury through the internal revenue service or
  the  financial  management  service of the department of the treasury of
  the United States under which the commissioner, on behalf of  the  state
  of  New  York, may, in his or her discretion, agree to pay to a claimant
  owed a debt by a taxpayer or other  person  the  whole  or  part  of  an
  overpayment  or  a  vendor payment owed by the state to that taxpayer or
  other  person,  provided  the  claimant  grants  substantially   similar
  privileges  to  this  state.  However,  the  United  States  will not be
  required under this section to offset tax overpayments owed by it except
  to the extent that it agrees to do so. An agreement  with  the  claimant
  must  specify  that  a taxpayer or any person owed a vendor payment will
  receive thirty days advance written notice of the  offset  and  will  be
  provided  with  an opportunity to present written or oral evidence about
  the application of the overpayment or vendor  payment  to  the  debt.  A
  proceeding for judicial review of the decision in the manner provided by
  article  seventy-eight  of  the  civil  practice  law  and  rules may be
  commenced by a taxpayer or a person owed a vendor  payment  within  four
  months after a copy of a decision adverse to the taxpayer or that person
  is  mailed to the taxpayer or that person. Article forty of this chapter
  does not apply to any hearing or proceeding on whether an overpayment or
  vendor payment may be applied to a debt under this section.  The  remedy
  provided  by  this section for review of hearings and proceedings is the
  exclusive  remedy  available  to   judicially   determine   whether   an
  overpayment  or  vendor  payment  may  be  applied  to a debt under this
  section. The amount of a debt remaining due as certified by  a  claimant
  will be prima facie evidence of the correct amount of a debt.


   (3)  The  commissioner will calculate the amount of an overpayment and
  interest thereon that is to be credited against the amount of a past due
  legally enforceable debt owed by a taxpayer which is  certified  to  the
  department  for  collection  under  this  section  using  the  rules  in
  subdivision  five  of section one hundred seventy-one-f of this article.
  If a taxpayer or a person owes more than one debt which is certified  to
  the  commissioner  for collection under this section, any overpayment or
  vendor payment will be credited against the debts in the order in  which
  the debts accrued. A debt will be considered to have accrued at the time
  at which the debt became past due.
    (4)  Notwithstanding  any other law, the commissioner is authorized to
  release to a claimant taxpayer information for purposes of  implementing
  and  administering  an  agreement  entered into between the claimant and
  this state under this section.




   §  171-u. Verification of income eligibility for basic STAR exemption.
  (1) On or after August fifteenth of each year, beginning in two thousand
  ten, the commissioner shall procure a report or reports identifying  all
  parcels  receiving  the  basic STAR exemption authorized by section four
  hundred twenty-five of the real property tax law.  The  commissioner  is
  authorized  to  develop procedures necessary to ascertain to the best of
  his or her ability whether the parcels satisfy  the  income  eligibility
  requirements  for such exemption. Such determination shall be based upon
  the affiliated income of the parcel for the applicable income tax  year,
  as  defined  by  paragraph  (b-1)  of  subdivision three of section four
  hundred twenty-five of the real property tax law.
    (2) The commissioner shall further develop procedures  by  which  each
  assessor  shall be notified of his or her findings, stating in each case
  either that the parcel does or does  not  meet  the  income  eligibility
  standard  prescribed  by  law,  or  that  the income-eligibility of such
  parcel cannot be ascertained, whichever is appropriate. The commissioner
  shall provide no other information about the income of any person to  an
  assessor.  Such  reports  shall  be  furnished to assessors prior to the
  applicable taxable status date or as soon thereafter as is possible.
    (3) Upon receiving  such  a  report,  the  assessor  shall  grant  the
  exemption  to  those  parcels  which  the  commissioner determined to be
  income-eligible  (assuming  the  assessor  finds  that   the   remaining
  eligibility  requirements  continue  to  be  satisfied),  shall deny the
  exemption  to  those  which  the  commissioner  determined  not  to   be
  income-eligible,  and shall solicit income documentation from the owners
  of those parcels as to which the  commissioner  was  unable  to  make  a
  determination.  Where  the  assessor denies the exemption based upon the
  commissioner's report, a notice of denial shall be mailed as provided by
  paragraph (b) of subdivision six of section four hundred twenty-five  of
  the  real  property tax law, giving the findings of such department as a
  reason for such denial.
    (4) Where a STAR exemption has been  improperly  granted  on  a  final
  assessment  roll  to  a property where the affiliated income exceeds the
  limitations established by  paragraph  (b-1)  of  subdivision  three  of
  section  four  hundred  twenty-five  of  the  real property tax law, the
  improperly granted exemption shall be corrected in the  manner  provided
  by  subdivision  twelve  of section four hundred twenty-five of the real
  property tax law.
    (5)(a) Notwithstanding any provision  of  law  to  the  contrary,  the
  commissioner  may  adopt rules prescribing a uniform statewide system of
  parcel identification numbers applicable to all  "assessing  units",  as
  that term is defined by section one hundred two of the real property tax
  law, provided that no such rule shall apply to an assessment roll with a
  taxable  status  date  occurring  prior  to  January first, two thousand
  thirteen.
    (b) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subdivision,  the
  commissioner  may,  at  his  or  her  discretion,  adopt  rules that are
  applicable only to "special assessing units," as that term is defined by
  section eighteen hundred  one  of  the  real  property  tax  law,  which
  prescribe  an alternative system of parcel identification numbers solely
  for such special assessing units.




   §  171-v.  Enforcement  of  delinquent  tax  liabilities  through  the
  suspension of drivers' licenses. (1) The commissioner shall enter into a
  written agreement with the commissioner of motor vehicles,  which  shall
  set  forth  the  procedures  for  the  two departments to cooperate in a
  program to improve tax collection through  the  suspension  of  drivers'
  licenses  of  taxpayers  with  past-due  tax  liabilities equal to or in
  excess of ten thousand dollars. For the purposes of  this  section,  the
  term   "tax   liabilities"   shall  mean  any  tax,  surcharge,  or  fee
  administered by the commissioner, or any  penalty  or  interest  due  on
  these  amounts  owed  by an individual with a New York driver's license,
  the term "driver's license" means any license issued by  the  department
  of  motor  vehicles, except for a commercial driver's license as defined
  in section five hundred one-a of the vehicle and traffic  law,  and  the
  term  "past-due  tax liabilities" means any tax liability or liabilities
  which have become fixed and final such that the taxpayer no  longer  has
  any right to administrative or judicial review.
    (2) The agreement shall include the following provisions:
    (a)   the   procedures  by  which  the  department  shall  notify  the
  commissioner  of  motor  vehicles  of  taxpayers   with   past-due   tax
  liabilities,  including  the  procedures by which the department and the
  department of motor vehicles shall share the  information  necessary  to
  identify  individuals with past-due tax liabilities, which shall include
  a taxpayer's name, social security number,  and  any  other  information
  necessary to ensure the proper identification of the taxpayer;
    (b)  the  procedures  by  which  the  commissioner  shall  notify  the
  department of motor vehicles that a taxpayer has satisfied  his  or  her
  past-due  tax  liabilities,  or  has entered into an installment payment
  agreement or has otherwise made payment arrangements satisfactory to the
  commissioner, so that the suspension of the taxpayer's driver's  license
  may be lifted; and
    (c)  any  other  matter  the  department  and  the department of motor
  vehicles shall deem necessary  to  carry  out  the  provisions  of  this
  section.
    (3)  The department shall provide notice to the taxpayer of his or her
  inclusion in the license suspension program no  later  than  sixty  days
  prior  to  the date the department intends to inform the commissioner of
  motor vehicles of the taxpayer's  inclusion.  However,  no  such  notice
  shall  be  issued  to  a taxpayer whose wages are being garnished by the
  department for the payment of past-due tax liabilities or past-due child
  support or combined child and spousal support arrears. Notice  shall  be
  provided  by  first  class  mail to the taxpayer's last known address as
  such address appears  in  the  electronic  systems  or  records  of  the
  department. Such notice shall include:
    (a)  a  clear  statement  of the past-due tax liabilities along with a
  statement that the department shall provide to the department  of  motor
  vehicles  the  taxpayer's  name,  social  security  number and any other
  identifying information necessary for the purpose of suspending  his  or
  her  driver's license pursuant to this section and subdivision four-f of
  section five hundred ten of the vehicle and traffic law sixty days after
  the mailing or sending of such notice to the taxpayer;
    (b) a statement that the taxpayer may avoid suspension of his  or  her
  license  by  fully  satisfying  the  past-due tax liabilities, by making
  payment  arrangements  satisfactory   to   the   commissioner,   or   by
  demonstrating  any of the grounds for challenge set forth in subdivision
  five of this section. Such statement shall include information regarding
  programs through which the taxpayer can pay the past-due tax liabilities
  to  the  department,  enter  into  a  payment  arrangement  or   request
  additional information;


   (c)  a  statement  that  the taxpayer's right to protest the notice is
  limited to raising issues set forth in subdivision five of this section;
    (d) a statement that the suspension of the taxpayer's driver's license
  shall  continue until the past-due tax liabilities are fully paid or the
  taxpayer makes payment arrangements satisfactory  to  the  commissioner;
  and
    (e) any other information that the commissioner deems necessary.
    (4)  After the expiration of the sixty day period, if the taxpayer has
  not challenged the notice pursuant to subdivision five of  this  section
  and  the  taxpayer has failed to satisfy the past-due tax liabilities or
  make  payment  arrangements  satisfactory  to  the   commissioner,   the
  department  shall notify the department of motor vehicles, in the manner
  agreed upon by the two agencies, that the  taxpayer's  driver's  license
  shall  be  suspended  pursuant  to  subdivision  four-f  of section five
  hundred ten of the vehicle and traffic law; provided,  however,  in  any
  case  where  a  taxpayer  fails  to  comply  with the terms of a current
  payment arrangement more than once within a  twelve  month  period,  the
  commissioner  shall  immediately notify the department of motor vehicles
  that the taxpayer's driver's license shall be suspended.
    (5)  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  law,  and  except  as
  specifically  provided  herein,  the  taxpayer  shall  have  no right to
  commence a court action or proceeding or to  any  other  legal  recourse
  against  the  department or the department of motor vehicles regarding a
  notice issued by  the  department  pursuant  to  this  section  and  the
  referral by the department of any taxpayer with past-due tax liabilities
  to  the  department  of  motor vehicles pursuant to this section for the
  purpose of suspending the taxpayer's driver's license.  A  taxpayer  may
  only  challenge  such suspension or referral on the grounds that (i) the
  individual to whom the notice was provided is not the taxpayer at issue;
  (ii) the past-due tax liabilities were satisfied; (iii)  the  taxpayer's
  wages  are  being  garnished  by  the  department for the payment of the
  past-due tax liabilities at issue  or  for  past-due  child  support  or
  combined  child  and  spousal support arrears; (iv) the taxpayer's wages
  are being garnished  for  the  payment  of  past-due  child  support  or
  combined  child  and  spousal  support  arrears  pursuant  to  an income
  execution issued pursuant to section five thousand two hundred forty-one
  of the civil practice law and rules; (v) the taxpayer's driver's license
  is a commercial driver's license as  defined  in  section  five  hundred
  one-a  of  the  vehicle and traffic law; (vi) the department incorrectly
  found that the taxpayer has failed to comply with the terms of a payment
  arrangement made with the commissioner more than once  within  a  twelve
  month  period  for  the  purposes  of subdivision three of this section;
  (vii) the taxpayer receives public assistance or  supplemental  security
  income;  or  (viii)  the  taxpayer  demonstrates  that suspension of the
  taxpayer's driver's license  will  cause  the  taxpayer  undue  economic
  hardship.
    However,  nothing  in this subdivision is intended to limit a taxpayer
  from seeking relief pursuant to  an  offer  in  compromise  pursuant  to
  subdivision fifteenth of section one hundred seventy-one of this article
  or  from  joint  and  several  liability pursuant to section six hundred
  fifty-four of this chapter, to the extent that he  or  she  is  eligible
  pursuant  to  such  section,  or establishing to the department that the
  enforcement of the underlying tax liabilities has  been  stayed  by  the
  filing  of  a  petition  pursuant  to the Bankruptcy Code of 1978 (Title
  Eleven of the United States Code).
    (6) Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the
  department  may  disclose  to  the  department  of  motor  vehicles  the
  information  described  in  this  section that, in the discretion of the


 commissioner, is necessary for the proper identification of  a  taxpayer
  referred  to  the  department  of  motor  vehicles  for  the  purpose of
  suspending the taxpayer's driver's license pursuant to this section  and
  subdivision  four-f  of  section  five  hundred  ten  of the vehicle and
  traffic law. The department of motor vehicles may  not  redisclose  this
  information to any other entity or person, other than for the purpose of
  informing  the  taxpayer  that  his  or  her  driver's  license has been
  suspended.
    (7) Except as otherwise provided in this section,  the  activities  to
  collect  past-due  tax liabilities undertaken by the department pursuant
  to this section shall not in any  way  limit,  restrict  or  impair  the
  department from exercising any other authority to collect or enforce tax
  liabilities under any other applicable provision of law.




   §  171-w. State support for the local enforcement of past-due property
  taxes.  1.  Legislative  findings.  The  legislature  finds  that  local
  governments  have  limited  means  to enforce the collection of past-due
  property taxes. The legislature further finds that it is appropriate for
  the state to support the local enforcement of past-due property taxes by
  authorizing the commissioner to administer a program  to  disallow  STAR
  credits   and   exemptions   to  delinquent  property  owners  based  on
  information reported to him or her by municipal officials.
    2. Definitions. For the purposes of this section:
    (a) "Delinquent property owner" means a STAR recipient  whose  primary
  residence is subject to past-due property taxes.
    (b)  "Past-due  property  taxes"  means  property taxes that have been
  levied upon a property owner's primary residence that remain unpaid  one
  year  after  the  last  date  on which they could have been paid without
  interest, or where such taxes are payable in installments,  those  taxes
  that  remain  unpaid  one  year  after  the last date on which the final
  installment could have been paid without interest.
    (c) "STAR credit" means the basic  STAR  personal  income  tax  credit
  authorized  by  subsection  (eee)  of  section  six  hundred six of this
  chapter.
    (d) "STAR exemption" means the basic STAR exemption from real property
  taxation authorized by section four  hundred  twenty-five  of  the  real
  property tax law.
    (e)  "STAR  recipient"  means  a  property  owner who is registered to
  receive the STAR credit in relation to his or her primary residence,  or
  whose primary residence is receiving the STAR exemption.
    3.  STAR  tax  payment  requirement;  generally.  Notwithstanding  any
  provision of law  to  the  contrary,  a  property  owner  whose  primary
  residence  is subject to past-due property taxes shall not be allowed to
  receive a STAR credit or STAR exemption  unless  the  past-due  property
  taxes   are  paid  in  full  on  or  before  a  date  specified  by  the
  commissioner.
    4. Commissioner's authority. The commissioner is hereby authorized  to
  develop  a program to support the local enforcement of past-due property
  taxes by disallowing STAR credits  and  STAR  exemptions  to  delinquent
  property  owners.  The  commissioner  shall establish procedures for the
  administration of  this  program,  which  shall  include  the  following
  provisions:
    (a)  The procedures by which municipal officials shall report past-due
  property taxes and property tax payments to the department.
    (b) The procedures by which the  department  shall  notify  delinquent
  property  owners  of the impending disallowance of their STAR credits or
  exemptions due to past-due property taxes.
    (c) The date by  which  delinquent  property  owners  must  pay  their
  past-due  property taxes in full in order to avoid disallowance of their
  STAR credits or exemptions.
    (d) The procedures by  which  the  commissioner  shall  disallow  STAR
  credits  and  notify assessors of the disallowance of STAR exemptions if
  past-due property taxes are not paid in full by the specified date.
    (e) Such other procedures as the commissioner shall deem necessary  to
  carry out the provisions of this section.
    5.   Municipal   reports.   The  commissioner's  procedures  regarding
  municipal reporting shall be subject to the following provisions:
    (a) The commissioner may request and shall be entitled to receive from
  any municipal corporation of  the  state,  or  any  agency  or  official
  thereof, such data as the commissioner deems necessary to effectuate the
  purposes  of  this  section.  Such information shall be submitted to the


 department at such time and in  such  manner  as  the  commissioner  may
  direct.
    (b)  In  lieu of requiring municipal officials to submit their reports
  directly to  the  department,  the  commissioner  may,  in  his  or  her
  discretion,  require  that  such  reports  be  submitted  to  the county
  director of real property tax services, who shall integrate the  reports
  into  a  single file and submit it to the department at such time and in
  such manner as the commissioner may direct.  Provided,  that  where  the
  commissioner  institutes  such a procedure, he or she may exclude cities
  with one hundred twenty-five  thousand  inhabitants  or  more,  so  that
  information  about  past-due property taxes and property tax payments in
  such a city shall be reported directly to the department by a designated
  city official at such time and in such manner as  the  commissioner  may
  direct.
    (c)  Reports and other records prepared pursuant to this section shall
  not be subject to the provisions of article six of the  public  officers
  law.
    6.  Notification  of  delinquent  property  owners. The commissioner's
  procedures regarding the  notification  of  delinquent  property  owners
  shall be subject to the following provisions:
    (a) The department shall notify a delinquent property owner by regular
  mail at least thirty days prior to the date by which his or her past-due
  property  taxes  must  be paid in full in order to avoid disallowance of
  his or her STAR credit or exemption.
    (b) Such notice shall include a statement that  the  property  owner's
  STAR  credit  or exemption will be disallowed unless his or her past-due
  property taxes are paid in full by the date specified in the notice.
    (c) To the extent  practicable,  such  notice  shall  provide  contact
  information  for  the  local  official or officials to whom the past-due
  property taxes may be paid.
    (d) Such notice shall further state that the property owner's right to
  protest the disallowance of the STAR credit or exemption is  limited  to
  raising  issues  that  constitute  a  "mistake  of  fact"  as defined in
  subdivision nine of this section.
    (e) Such notice may include such other information as the commissioner
  may deem necessary.
    7. Timely payment of past-due property taxes. If a delinquent property
  owner pays his or her past-due property taxes in full on or  before  the
  date specified in such notice, the official receiving such payment shall
  so  notify  the department at such time and in such manner as prescribed
  by the commissioner. The property  owner  shall  then  be  permitted  to
  receive  the STAR credit or exemption that would have been disallowed if
  timely payment had not been made. However, if the  department  does  not
  learn  of the payment until after it has already directed an assessor to
  deny a STAR exemption to a delinquent property owner, then  in  lieu  of
  directing  the exemption to be restored, the department may remit to the
  property owner payment in an amount that  will  reimburse  the  property
  owner  for  the  increase in his or her school tax bill that is directly
  attributable to the lost STAR exemption.
    8. Failure to make timely payment. (a) If the past-due taxes  are  not
  paid on or before the date specified in the notice that had been sent to
  the  delinquent property owner, his or her STAR credit or STAR exemption
  shall be disallowed in accordance with the procedures established by the
  commissioner.
    (b) The property owner shall not be eligible  to  participate  in  the
  STAR  program  again  as  long  as  the  property is subject to past-due
  property taxes.


   (c) Upon payment of the past-due property taxes in full, the  official
  receiving  such  payment shall notify the department at such time and in
  such manner as may be prescribed by the commissioner.  The  commissioner
  shall then proceed as follows:
    (i)  If  the  property  owner  had  previously been receiving the STAR
  credit, the commissioner shall allow the property owner to resume his or
  her participation in the STAR credit program on a prospective basis,  if
  otherwise  eligible,  effective  with  the first taxable year commencing
  after such payment.
    (ii) If the property owner had  previously  been  receiving  the  STAR
  exemption,   the   commissioner   shall  allow  the  property  owner  to
  participate in the STAR  credit  program  on  a  prospective  basis,  if
  otherwise  eligible,  effective  with  the first taxable year commencing
  after such payment. The property owner shall not be  allowed  back  into
  the STAR exemption program.
    (iii)  The  commissioner shall, when making the first advanced payment
  of a STAR credit to the property taxpayer after payment of the  past-due
  property  taxes in full, also pay to such property taxpayer the value of
  the STAR exemptions or STAR credits that  were  disallowed  pursuant  to
  paragraph a of this subdivision.
    9.  Mistake  of  fact.  Notwithstanding  any other provision of law, a
  disallowance of a STAR credit or STAR exemption pursuant to this section
  may only be challenged before the department on the grounds of a mistake
  of fact as defined in this subdivision. The taxpayer will have no  right
  to  commence a court action, administrative proceeding or any other form
  of legal recourse against an assessor, county director of real  property
  tax  services  or  other local official regarding such disallowance. For
  the purposes of this subdivision, "mistake of fact" is limited to claims
  that: (i) the individual notified is not the taxpayer at issue; or  (ii)
  the  past-due property taxes were satisfied before the date specified in
  the notice described  in  subdivision  six  of  this  section.  However,
  nothing in this subdivision is intended to limit a taxpayer from seeking
  relief  from joint and several liability pursuant to section six hundred
  fifty-four of this chapter to the extent that  he  or  she  is  eligible
  pursuant  to that subdivision or establishing to the department that the
  enforcement of the underlying property taxes  has  been  stayed  by  the
  filing  of  a  petition  pursuant  to the Bankruptcy Code of 1978 (Title
  Eleven of the United States Code).
    10. Assessors.  (a)  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  law  to  the
  contrary,  the  department may disclose to assessors such information as
  the commissioner deems necessary to ensure that the STAR  exemptions  of
  delinquent property owners are disallowed as required by this section.
    (b)  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, an assessor
  shall be  authorized  and  directed  to  deny  a  STAR  exemption  to  a
  delinquent  property  owner  upon being directed by the department to do
  so. If an assessor should receive such a directive after the  applicable
  assessment  roll  has  been filed, the assessor or other official having
  custody and control of that roll shall be  authorized  and  directed  to
  remove  such exemption from such roll prior to the levy of school taxes,
  without regard to the provisions of title three of article five  of  the
  real property tax law or any comparable laws governing the correction of
  administrative errors on assessment rolls and tax rolls.
    11.  Recovery  of STAR benefits in certain cases. The commissioner may
  establish procedures to be followed in cases  where  a  STAR  credit  or
  exemption  was  inadvertently  or  erroneously  provided to a delinquent
  property owner who was sent the notice required by  subdivision  six  of
  this section, and whose past-due property taxes were not paid in full by
  the date specified in the notice. Such procedures shall include, but not


 be  limited  to,  (a)  applying  the  improperly received STAR credit or
  exemption as an offset against future  STAR  credits  or  against  other
  personal  income tax credits or personal income tax refunds to which the
  delinquent  property owner would otherwise be entitled, and (b) pursuing
  any of the other remedies that  are  available  to  enforce  a  personal
  income tax debt under article twenty-two of this chapter.
    (12)  Notwithstanding  any  provision of this section to the contrary,
  the commissioner shall extend the date by which any delinquent  property
  owner  shall  be  required  to pay his or her past-due property taxes in
  full in order to receive STAR credits or STAR  exemptions,  until  after
  the  end  of the COVID-19 state disaster emergency declared by executive
  order number two hundred two and any further amendments or modifications
  thereto, and as may be further extended pursuant to section twenty-eight
  of the  executive  law.  The  department  shall  notify  all  delinquent
  property owners of such extension.




   §  171-z. Information sharing with the comptroller regarding unclaimed
  funds. 1. Notwithstanding any other law, the commissioner is  authorized
  to  release  to  the  comptroller  information regarding fixed and final
  unwarranted debts of taxpayers  for  purposes  of  collecting  unclaimed
  funds  from the comptroller to satisfy fixed and final unwarranted debts
  owed by taxpayers. For purposes of this section, the  term  "unwarranted
  debt"  shall  mean  past-due  tax  liabilities,  including  unpaid  tax,
  interest and penalty, that  the  commissioner  is  required  by  law  to
  collect  and  that have become fixed and final such that the taxpayer no
  longer has any right to administrative or judicial review and a  warrant
  has  not  been filed; and the term "taxpayer" shall mean any individual,
  corporation, partnership,  limited  liability  partnership  or  company,
  partner,  member, manager, sole proprietorship, estate, trust, fiduciary
  or entity, who or which has been identified as owing taxes to the state.
  This section shall not be deemed to abrogate or limit  in  any  way  the
  powers  and authority of the comptroller to set off debts owed the state
  from unclaimed funds, under the constitution of the state or  any  other
  law.
    2.  The  comptroller shall keep all information he or she obtains from
  the commissioner confidential, and any employee, agent or representative
  of  the  comptroller  is  prohibited  from   disclosing   any   taxpayer
  information  received  under  this  section  to  anyone  other  than the
  commissioner or staff of the department or staff of  the  department  of
  audit and control for the purposes described in this section.




   § 171-aa. E-file authorizations collected by tax return preparers. (a)
  For  purposes  of  this  section, the following terms have the following
  meanings:
    (1) "E-file authorization" is a  record  collected  by  a  tax  return
  preparer.
    (2)  "Electronic  signature"  has  the  definition  set  forth  in the
  electronic signatures and records act of the state technology law.
    (3) "Electronic means" is use of computer technology.
    (4)  "Tax"  means  any  tax  or  other  matter  administered  by   the
  commissioner pursuant to this chapter or any other provision of law.
    (5)  "Tax  document"  means  a  return,  report  or any other document
  relating to a tax or other matter administered by the commissioner.
    (6)  "Tax  return  preparer"  means  any  person  who   prepares   for
  compensation,  or  who employs or engages one or more persons to prepare
  for compensation, any tax document. For purposes of  this  section,  the
  term "tax return preparer" also includes a payroll service.
    (b)  If  a  tax document is authorized by the commissioner to be filed
  electronically, then any associated e-file authorization  prescribed  by
  the  commissioner  may be signed using an electronic signature compliant
  with any instructions prescribed by the commissioner.
    (c) An e-file authorization signed electronically in  the  manner  set
  forth  in  subsection  (b) of this section shall have the same force and
  effect as a handwritten signature and may be provided to a tax  preparer
  by electronic means.




   §  172.  Official seal. The commissioner of taxation and finance shall
  have and use an official seal; and  the  records,  its  proceedings  and
  copies  of all papers and documents in his possession and custody may be
  authenticated in the usual form, under such seal and  the  signature  of
  the  commissioner,  deputy  commissioner  or the secretary, and shall be
  received in evidence in the same manner and with like  effect  as  deeds
  regularly acknowledged or proven.




   §  173.  Review  by  commissioner.  The  commissioner  shall act as an
  individual in exercising the powers and performing the duties  conferred
  or  imposed  by  section  two  hundred  sixty  of  this  chapter  on the
  commissioner in relation to the apportionment of mortgage taxes unless a
  hearing is demanded.




   §  173-a.  Hearing rights upon notice and demand. 1. Applicability and
  construction. (a) Applicability. Except as otherwise  provided  in  this
  section,  this  section  shall  apply  with  respect to any tax which is
  administered by the commissioner and which is imposed by  or  authorized
  to  be  imposed  pursuant  to  this  chapter  or any other law. Unless a
  different meaning is clearly required, any reference to "tax" or "taxes"
  in this section shall be deemed also to refer  to  special  assessments,
  fees,  interest,  additions to tax, penalties or other impositions which
  are administered by the commissioner.
    (b) Exceptions to applicability. This section shall not apply  to  any
  tax which is administered by the commissioner and which is imposed by or
  authorized to be imposed pursuant to:
    (i) Article ten of this chapter (taxable transfers - residents).
    (ii) Article eleven of this chapter (tax on mortgages).
    (iii)  Article  twelve  of this chapter (tax on transfers of stock and
  other corporate certificates).
    (c) Construction. The provisions of this section shall  supplement  or
  be   in   addition   to   the   procedures  relating  to  collection  or
  administration provided with respect to any tax covered by this section.
  Where a  provision  of  this  section  is  inconsistent  with  any  such
  provision with respect to such tax, the provisions of this section shall
  apply.
    2.  Corporate and personal income taxes. With respect to any tax which
  incorporates or otherwise utilizes the procedures set forth in  part  VI
  of   article   twenty-two  or  article  twenty-seven  of  this  chapter,
  provisions of law which authorize the issuance of a  notice  and  demand
  for  an  amount  without the issuance of a notice of deficiency for such
  amount, including any interest, additions to tax  or  penalties  related
  thereto,  in  cases of mathematical or clerical errors or failure to pay
  tax shown on a  return,  or  authorize  the  issuance  of  a  notice  of
  additional  tax  due,  including  any  interest,  additions  to  tax  or
  penalties related thereto, shall be construed  as  specifically  denying
  and modifying the right to a hearing with respect to any such notice and
  demand  or notice of additional tax due for purposes of subdivision four
  of section two thousand six of this chapter. Any such notice and  demand
  or notice of additional tax due shall not be construed as a notice which
  gives  a  person  the  right  to  a  hearing under article forty of this
  chapter.
    3. Sales and compensating use and miscellaneous taxes. With respect to
  any tax to which this section  applies  and  which  is  not  covered  by
  subdivision two of this section:
    (a)  Final  determination.  The amount of tax which a return or report
  shows to be due, the amount of tax which a return or report  would  have
  shown  to  be  due  but for a mathematical or clerical error (including,
  with respect to a tax payable by the purchase of stamps, the  amount  of
  stamps  purchased)  or  the  amount  of penalty and any interest due for
  failing to file a return or report or to pay or pay over any tax (or  to
  pay  for  any  stamps  purchased)  to  the  commissioner within the time
  required by or pursuant to any such tax  (but  not  including  any  such
  penalty  or  interest  attributable to any amount of tax with respect to
  which a notice of determination is  required  to  be  issued)  shall  be
  deemed  to be finally determined to be due not later than on the date of
  the filing of such return or report (including  any  amended  return  or
  report  showing  an  increase  of  tax or in the case of the purchase of
  stamps, such date of purchase). Such amount of tax, penalty or  interest
  shall  be  paid  upon notice and demand and shall be assessed, collected
  and paid in the manner provided for in each of the several taxes covered
  under  this  subdivision  and  such  notice  and  demand  shall  not  be


 considered  as  a  notice  of  determination  for  purposes of the taxes
  covered under this subdivision. If a notice of  determination  has  been
  mailed  with respect to a tax covered under this subdivision, the amount
  of the determination shall be deemed to be finally and irrevocably fixed
  on  the date specified in any such tax if no petition to the division of
  tax appeals is filed, or, if a petition is filed,  then  upon  the  date
  when a determination or decision rendered in the division of tax appeals
  establishing  the  amount  of  the notice of determination becomes final
  pursuant to article forty of this chapter.
    (b) Notice  and  demand.  (1)  The  commissioner  shall,  as  soon  as
  practicable,  give  notice  to each person liable for any amount of tax,
  addition to tax, penalty or interest, which has been finally  determined
  to  be  due or which has been finally and irrevocably fixed, as the case
  may be, but remains unpaid, stating the  amount  and  demanding  payment
  thereof.  Such  notice  shall  be left at the dwelling or usual place of
  business of such person or shall be sent by mail to such  person's  last
  known  address. Except where the commissioner determines that collection
  would be jeopardized by delay and the applicable tax contains provisions
  authorizing a jeopardy procedure, if any tax is finally determined to be
  due or  is  finally  and  irrevocably  fixed  prior  to  the  last  date
  (including  any  date fixed by extension) prescribed for payment of such
  tax, payment of such tax shall not be demanded until after such date. If
  the commissioner finds that the determination, assessment or  collection
  of  tax,  addition  to  tax,  penalty or interest is in jeopardy and the
  applicable tax  contains  provisions  authorizing  procedures  regarding
  early  determination,  the  commissioner  may  immediately determine the
  amount of such tax, addition to tax, penalty or interest (whether before
  or after the due date of any return or report required to show such tax,
  addition to tax, penalty or interest)  and  assess  the  same  and  give
  notice and demand for the payment thereof.
    (2)  If  notice  and  demand  is  made for payment of any amount under
  subparagraph one of this paragraph, and if such amount  is  paid  within
  twenty-one calendar days (ten business days if the amount for which such
  notice  and  demand  is  made  equals  or  exceeds  one hundred thousand
  dollars) after the date of such notice and demand,  interest  under  the
  applicable tax on the amount so paid shall not be imposed for the period
  after the date of such notice and demand.
    (c)  Hearing  rights  upon  notice and demand. Provisions of law which
  authorize the issuance of a notice and demand for an amount without  the
  issuance  of  a  notice  of determination for such amount, including any
  interest  or  penalties  related  thereto,   shall   be   construed   as
  specifically  denying  and modifying the right to a hearing with respect
  to any such notice and  demand  for  purposes  of  subdivision  four  of
  section  two  thousand  six  of this chapter in cases of mathematical or
  clerical errors or failure to pay the tax due shown on the return or for
  any stamps purchased, and any interest or penalties related thereto. Any
  such notice and demand shall not be construed as a notice which gives  a
  person the right to a hearing under article forty of this chapter.




   §  174.  Oaths,  acknowledgments,  subpoenas  and  commissions to take
  testimony. 1. The commissioner, his deputies, secretary  and  any  other
  officer  or  employee  of  the  department  of taxation and finance duly
  designated and  authorized  by  resolution  of  the  commissioner,  duly
  entered  upon  the  minutes,  shall have power: (i) to administer oaths,
  take affidavits and certify acknowledgments in relation to any matter or
  proceeding in the exercise of the powers or duties of  the  commissioner
  under this chapter and in relation to any written instrument required or
  permitted  to  be  filed  with the commissioner and (ii) to subpoena and
  require the  attendance  of  witnesses  and  the  production  of  books,
  accounts, records, memoranda, documents or other papers pertinent to the
  investigations  and  inquiries which he is authorized to conduct, and to
  examine them in relation to any matter which he has power to investigate
  and to issue commissions for the examination of witnesses who are out of
  the state or unable to attend before the commissioner  or  excused  from
  attendance.  A  subpoena issued under this section shall be regulated by
  the civil practice law and rules.
    2. Any person who shall testify falsely in any material matter pending
  before the commissioner shall be guilty of and punishable for perjury.
    3. Cross-reference: For criminal penalties, see  article  thirty-seven
  of this chapter.






	   §  174-b.  Limitation  on  the  time  to  collect  tax liabilities. 1.
  Notwithstanding any provision of law  to  the  contrary  and  except  as
  otherwise  provided  in  this  section,  a  tax  liability  shall not be
  enforceable and every tax liability shall be extinguished  after  twenty
  years  from the first date a warrant could be filed by the commissioner,
  without regard to whether the warrant is filed. The first date a warrant
  could be filed means the day after the last day specified for payment by
  the notice and demand issued for the tax liability  where  there  is  no
  right to a hearing with respect to such notice and demand. The first day
  a  warrant  could  be  filed  shall  be  determined  without  regard  to
  subsection (c) of section  six  hundred  ninety  or  subsection  (c)  of
  section  one  thousand  ninety  of this chapter, unless the commissioner
  assesses the liability under either such subsection (c). When there is a
  right to a hearing with respect  to  a  notice  and  demand  for  a  tax
  liability,  the  first  date a warrant could be filed means the day that
  opportunity for a hearing or review has been exhausted.
    2. This section shall apply to any tax that  is  administered  by  the
  commissioner.  Any  reference  to  "tax" in this section shall be deemed
  also to refer to special assessments, fees, interest, additions to  tax,
  penalties   and   other   impositions   that  are  administered  by  the
  commissioner.
    3. When, before the expiration of the time prescribed in this  section
  to enforce the collection of tax, both the commissioner and the taxpayer
  have  consented  in  writing  to its collection after such time, the tax
  liability shall not be extinguished and the tax may be collected at  any
  time  prior  to  the expiration of the period agreed upon. The period so
  agreed upon may be extended by any subsequent agreement in writing  made
  before the expiration of the period previously agreed upon.
    4.  The  provisions of this section shall supplement or be in addition
  to the procedures relating to collection or administration provided with
  respect to any tax covered by this section. Where a  provision  of  this
  section  is  inconsistent  with  any such provision with respect to such
  tax, the provisions  of  this  section  shall  apply.  For  purposes  of
  subsection  (c)  of section six hundred ninety-two and subsection (c) of
  section one thousand ninety-two of this  chapter,  if  the  commissioner
  does  not  file  a  warrant  within  six  years  of assessment, the time
  limitations in this section shall not apply and  the  tax  liability  is
  extinguished.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the
  commissioner from  accepting  any  payment  for  a  tax  liability  made
  voluntarily  by  a taxpayer after the time to collect such liability has
  expired and the liability is extinguished. When a warrant is filed,  the
  commissioner  may  include  a  date on that warrant indicating when such
  warrant expires and tax liability is extinguished.
    5. If a tax liability could  have  been  first  warranted  before  the
  effective  date of this section, such liability shall not be enforceable
  and shall be extinguished after twenty years from  the  first  date  the
  warrant could have been filed by the commissioner.






	   * §  174-c.  Service  of income execution without filing a warrant. 1.
  Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, if any  individual
  liable  for  the  payment of any tax or other imposition administered by
  the commissioner, including any additions to tax, penalties and interest
  in connection therewith, fails to pay or to collect or pay over the same
  within twenty-one calendar days after  notice  and  demand  therefor  is
  given to such individual (ten business days if the amount for which such
  notice  and  demand  is  made  equals  or  exceeds  one hundred thousand
  dollars), the commissioner is authorized to serve an income execution on
  the individual or on the person from whom the individual  is  receiving,
  or  will  receive,  money, without filing a warrant in the office of the
  clerk of the appropriate  county  or  in  the  department  of  state  as
  provided  for  in  this  chapter.  For  purposes  of  serving  an income
  execution pursuant to this section, the commissioner shall, in the right
  of the people of the state of New  York,  be  deemed  to  have  obtained
  judgment against the individual for the tax or other imposition, and the
  additions  to  tax,  penalties  and  interest in connection thereof, and
  there shall be a lien on the amount of the individual's income that  may
  be  garnished.  If the commissioner chooses to serve an income execution
  without filing a warrant pursuant to this section, the commissioner must
  serve the income execution within six  years  after  the  first  date  a
  warrant could be filed pursuant to section one hundred seventy-four-b of
  this  article.  When serving an income execution without the filing of a
  warrant, the commissioner shall  follow  the  procedures  set  forth  in
  section  five  thousand two hundred thirty-one of the civil practice law
  and rules, with the references in such section to "sheriff" to  be  read
  as referring to the commissioner or the department. The income execution
  shall  specify the name and address of the person from whom the taxpayer
  is receiving or will receive money; the amount of money,  the  frequency
  of  its  payment  and  the  amount  of  the installments to be collected
  therefrom; and shall contain a notice to the taxpayer that the  taxpayer
  shall  commence  payment  of  the  installments  specified in the notice
  within a specified period of time that is no less than  twenty-one  days
  after  the  notice  is  mailed  to  the  taxpayer,  and  that,  upon the
  taxpayer's default, the execution will be served upon  the  person  from
  whom  the  taxpayer  is  receiving  or  will  receive money. Such income
  execution shall continue  to  be  in  effect  until  such  liability  is
  satisfied  or  until twenty years from the first date a warrant could be
  filed by the commissioner pursuant to section one hundred seventy-four-b
  of this article, whether or not a warrant is filed for that liability.
    2. The provisions  of  this  section  shall  be  in  addition  to  the
  procedures  relating  to  collection  or  administration  provided  with
  respect to any tax or other imposition administered by the commissioner.
  Where a  provision  of  this  section  is  inconsistent  with  any  such
  provision  with  respect to such tax or other imposition, the provisions
  of this section will apply. Nothing in this section  shall  prevent  the
  commissioner  from timely filing a warrant in order to pursue any of the
  collection methods authorized  under  article  fifty-two  of  the  civil
  practice law and rules.
    3.  The  commissioner  shall periodically, but no less frequently than
  quarterly, electronically file with the department of state  a  list  of
  the  names  of the taxpayers who have been served with income executions
  under the authority of this section during that period. The commissioner
  shall also include in this list the  names  of  taxpayers  whose  income
  executions   are   cancelled  or  discharged  during  that  period.  The
  department of state shall  upon  receipt  post  such  a  list  to  their
  website.
    * NB Repealed April 1, 2025




   §  175.  Manner  of  execution  of  instruments  by  the commissioner.
  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  law,  whenever   a   statute
  authorizes  or  requires the commissioner to execute an instrument, such
  instrument shall be  executed  by  having  the  name  or  title  of  the
  commissioner  appear  on  such  instrument  and, underneath such name or
  title, such instrument shall be signed  by  the  commissioner  or  by  a
  deputy  tax  commissioner  or by the secretary to such commissioner, and
  the seal of such commissioner shall be affixed or shall appear  on  such
  instrument  as  a  facsimile which is engraved, printed or reproduced in
  any other manner.  No  acknowledgment  of  the  execution  of  any  such
  instrument shall be necessary for the purpose of the recordation thereof
  or for any other purpose.




   §  175.  Manner  of  execution  of  instruments  by  the commissioner.
  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  law,  whenever   a   statute
  authorizes  or  requires the commissioner to execute an instrument, such
  instrument shall be  executed  by  having  the  name  or  title  of  the
  commissioner  appear  on  such  instrument  and, underneath such name or
  title, such instrument shall be signed  by  the  commissioner  or  by  a
  deputy  tax  commissioner  or by the secretary to such commissioner, and
  the seal of such commissioner shall be affixed or shall appear  on  such
  instrument  as  a  facsimile which is engraved, printed or reproduced in
  any other manner.  No  acknowledgment  of  the  execution  of  any  such
  instrument shall be necessary for the purpose of the recordation thereof
  or for any other purpose.




   §  176.  Transfer  of  the  powers  and  duties  of the comptroller in
  relation to the assessment or collection of certain taxes. On and  after
  July  first,  nineteen hundred twenty-one, all the powers and duties now
  conferred or imposed upon the  state  comptroller  in  relation  to  the
  taxation of corporations under articles nine and nine-A of this chapter,
  in  relation to the taxation of transfers of property, under article ten
  of this chapter, in relation to the  taxation  of  transfers  of  stock,
  under  article  twelve of this chapter, and in relation to taxation upon
  and with respect to personal  income,  under  article  sixteen  of  this
  chapter  (as  such article was in effect on December thirtieth, nineteen
  hundred  sixty),  shall  be  transferred  to  and  thereafter  shall  be
  exercised and performed by the commissioner, except as powers and duties
  under  any such article are expressly conferred upon or continued in the
  state comptroller  by  acts  of  the  legislature  of  nineteen  hundred
  twenty-one, enacted subsequent to chapter ninety of the laws of nineteen
  hundred twenty-one.




   §  177. Construction. Wherever the terms "board of tax commissioners,"
  "state board of tax commissioners," "state tax commissioners" or  "state
  tax  commission," "state comptroller" or "comptroller" occur in any law,
  or wherever in any law reference is made to such board or  commissioners
  or  commission  or  officer,  such  term or reference shall be deemed to
  refer to the state tax department as established by this article, to the
  commissioner of taxation and finance as established by this  article  or
  to  the  tax  appeals  tribunal  as established by article forty of this
  chapter, so far as such law pertains to matters  which  are  within  the
  jurisdiction  of  such  tax  department,  such  commissioner or such tax
  appeals tribunal.




   §  179.  Definitions. 1. For purposes of this article, Internet access
  service shall not constitute a telecommunication service, nor shall  the
  provision  of  Internet  access  service constitute the carrying on of a
  telephone, local telephone, telegraph, or transmission business.
    2. The term "Internet access service" shall have the meaning  ascribed
  thereto  in  subdivision  (v)  of section eleven hundred fifteen of this
  chapter.




   §  180. Independent analysis. 1. The department shall contract with an
  economic impact firm for the provision of an independent, comprehensive,
  analysis  of  each  tax  credit,  tax  deduction,  and   tax   incentive
  established  in  this  chapter  or  any  other  chapter of the law which
  relates  to  increasing  economic   development   including,   but   not
  necessarily  limited  to,  increasing employment, developing the state's
  workforce, and increasing business activity. Such analysis shall include
  the relevant programs run at the state agency level, including  relevant
  programs  administered  by executive agencies, authorities, commissions,
  and other government run entities, and shall not include an analysis  of
  individual private entities or individual taxpayers. Such analysis shall
  include,  but need not be limited to, a complete and thorough evaluation
  of the return on investment for each tax credit, tax deduction, and  tax
  incentive,  the  economic  impact  of  each  relevant program, including
  direct and  indirect  benefits,  including  the  creation  of  temporary
  project  hires,  the  fiscal  impact of each relevant program, including
  revenues received and forgone by municipalities and New York  state,  as
  applicable.  For  the  purposes  of this section, "return on investment"
  shall mean: (a) total job creation, including  temporary  project  hires
  resulting  from  each  project  supported  by each relevant program, and
  retained jobs; (b) whether the expenditures by the  state  on  each  tax
  credit, tax deduction or tax incentive result in an increase or decrease
  in  tax  revenues for New York state municipalities, and New York state;
  (c) other estimated quantifiable economic benefits,  including  but  not
  necessarily  limited  to  personal income; indirect, induced, long term,
  and temporary job creation; and private investment for each tax  credit,
  tax  deduction  and  tax  incentive; (d) whether similar job creation or
  private investment would have occurred without the existence of a  state
  tax  incentive; and (e) other qualitative economic benefits that improve
  the economy, and provide opportunities  for  advancement  for  New  York
  residents,  including: (i) global media exposure; (ii) increased tourism
  attraction and positioning of  New  York  as  a  destination,  providing
  quality   of  life  amenities  to  assist  with  community  development,
  placemaking,  positioning  communities   for   add-on   private   sector
  investment,  making  New York competitive on the basis of cost and other
  attraction amenities; and (iii) contributing to the positive  perception
  of  the  state  and  its  regions to assist with business attraction and
  creating economic opportunity for New Yorkers.
    2. Prior to the analysis pursuant to subdivision one of this  section,
  the  economic impact firm that the department contracts with may solicit
  input from leaders  in  the  business  community,  organized  labor  and
  economic   development  stakeholders,  including,  but  not  necessarily
  limited to representatives from nonprofits, academic  institutions,  and
  leading New York state community development experts.
    3. Such analysis shall be completed and submitted to the department no
  later  than  January first, two thousand twenty-four and shall be posted
  publicly on the department's website within thirty days of submission to
  the department. The analysis shall also be submitted  to  the  governor,
  the  temporary president of the senate, the speaker of the assembly, and
  the chair of the senate finance committee and the chair of the  assembly
  ways and means committee.
    4.  The  economic impact firm providing the department's comprehensive
  analysis  shall  adhere  to  the  requirements  in   this   subdivision.
  Notwithstanding  this  subdivision,  the  department may contract with a
  firm upon a written determination by the commissioner which shall detail
  that such firm was awarded such contract on the basis that no firm meets
  the requirements set forth in this subdivision.


   (a) Such economic impact  firm  shall  be  prohibited  from  providing
  analysis  services  to  the  department  if  the analysis partner having
  primary  responsibility  for  the  analysis,  or  the  analysis  partner
  responsible  for reviewing the analysis, has performed analysis services
  for the department in the past three fiscal years.
    (b)  Such economic impact firm shall be prohibited from performing any
  non-analysis services  to  the  department  contemporaneously  with  the
  analysis,  including:  (i)  bookkeeping or other services related to the
  accounting records or financial  statements  of  such  department;  (ii)
  financial information systems design and implementation; (iii) appraisal
  or   valuation  services,  fairness  opinions,  or  contribution-in-kind
  reports; (iv) actuarial  services;  (v)  internal  analysis  outsourcing
  services;  (vi)  management functions or human services; (vii) broker or
  dealer, investment advisor, or investment banking services;  and  (viii)
  legal services and expert services unrelated to the analysis.
    (c)  Such  economic  impact  firm  shall  be prohibited from providing
  analysis services to the department  if  an  employee  assigned  to  the
  analysis  has performed analysis services for the department or has been
  employed by the department in the past three fiscal years.




   §   182.  Additional  franchise  tax  on  certain  oil  companies.  1.
  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter,  or  of  any  other
  law,  for  taxable  years  ending  on or after June eighteenth, nineteen
  hundred  eighty  but  before  December  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred
  eighty-three,  an  annual  tax  is hereby imposed upon every oil company
  equal to two per centum of its gross receipts from all sources,  or  the
  portion  thereof allocated within the state as hereinafter provided, for
  the privilege  of  exercising  its  corporate  franchise,  or  of  doing
  business,  or  of employing capital, or of owning or leasing property in
  this state in a corporate or organized capacity, or  of  maintaining  an
  office  in this state, for all or any part of each of its taxable years.
  In no event shall the tax imposed by  this  section  be  less  than  two
  hundred fifty dollars.
    2.  As  used  in  this section: (a) The term "oil company" means every
  vertically integrated petroleum corporation or affiliate thereof  formed
  for  or  engaged  in the business of importing or causing to be imported
  into this state for sale in this state, extracting, producing, refining,
  manufacturing, compounding or selling petroleum. For  purposes  of  this
  section, petroleum shall include, but shall not be limited to, gasoline,
  aviation  fuel,  kerosene,  diesel motor fuel, benzol, distillate fuels,
  residual oil, crude oil or any similar product; a vertically  integrated
  petroleum corporation or affiliate thereof means any domestic or foreign
  corporation,  which,  either for its own account or with affiliates: (i)
  extract or produces in excess of one hundred thousand average barrels of
  crude oil per day, (ii) has a refining capacity in excess of one hundred
  seventy-five thousand average barrels of crude oil per  day,  and  (iii)
  market  or  distributors for marketing gasoline, motor fuels, fuel oils,
  and similar products derived from the refining or manufacture  of  crude
  oil,  whether  such  activities are carried on directly or indirectly in
  conjunction with  or  by  means  of  an  affiliate  or  affiliates;  and
  affiliate means a corporation in which more than fifty per centum of the
  number  of shares of stock entitling the holders thereof to vote for the
  election of directors or trustees is owned, directly or  indirectly,  by
  the vertically integrated petroleum corporation or affiliate thereof.
    (b)  The term "gross receipts" means all receipts, whether from within
  or without the United States, whether in cash, credits  or  property  of
  any  kind  or  nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the
  cost of the  property  sold,  the  cost  of  materials  used,  labor  or
  services,  or  other  costs,  interest  or  discount  paid, or any other
  expense  whatsoever  but  excluding  such  receipts   which   constitute
  consideration  received  by  the oil company for the issuance or sale of
  shares of its capital stock or money  lent  to  such  company.  Receipts
  received by reason of any sale of fuel oil (excluding diesel motor fuel)
  used  for  residential purposes shall not be included in gross receipts.
  Provided, however, gross receipts shall not include  the  receipts  from
  any  sale  for  resale to a purchaser which is an oil company subject to
  tax under this section. It  shall  be  presumed  that  no  receipts  are
  receipts  from a sale for resale to such purchaser unless such purchaser
  furnishes the oil company with a resale certificate  in  such  form  and
  under  such terms and conditions as the tax commission may prescribe and
  such certificate is accepted in good faith by such oil company.
    (c) The term "corporation" includes a corporation, joint stock company
  or association and any business  conducted  by  a  trustee  or  trustees
  wherein  interest  or  ownership  is  evidenced  by certificate or other
  written instrument.
    (d) The term "taxable year" means the oil company's taxable  year  for
  federal  income  tax purposes, or the part thereof during which such oil
  company is subject to tax under this section.


   3. (a) The portion of the gross receipts  of  an  oil  company  to  be
  allocated  within the state shall be determined as follows: multiply its
  gross  receipts  by  an  allocation  percentage  to  be  determined   by
  ascertaining  the  percentage  which  the  receipts of such oil company,
  computed  on  the  cash  or  accrual  basis  according  to the method of
  accounting used in the computation of its gross receipts, arising during
  the period covered by its report from (1) sales of its tangible personal
  property where shipments are made  to  points  within  this  state,  (2)
  services performed within the state, (3) rentals from property situated,
  and  royalties  from the use of patents or copyrights, within the state,
  and (4) all other business receipts earned within the state, bear to the
  total amount of the oil company's receipts, similarly computed,  arising
  during  such  period  from  all sales of its tangible personal property,
  services,  rentals,  royalties  and  all  other  business  transactions,
  whether  within or without the state. Receipts received by reason of any
  sale of fuel oil used for residential purposes  and  receipts  from  any
  sale  for  resale  to a purchaser which is an oil company subject to tax
  under this section shall be included as a receipt in the computation  of
  the allocation percentage.
    (b)  Where  the  tax commission decides that with respect to a certain
  oil company the method prescribed above does not  fairly  and  equitably
  reflect  its  gross  receipts from all sources within the state, the tax
  commission shall  prescribe  methods  of  allocation  which  fairly  and
  equitably reflect gross receipts from all sources within the state.
    4. Every oil company subject to tax under this section shall keep such
  records  of its business in such form as the tax commission may require,
  and such records shall be preserved for a period of three years,  except
  that  the  tax  commission  may consent to their destruction within that
  period or may require that they be kept longer.
    5. Every oil company subject to tax hereunder shall annually  file  on
  or  before  the  fifteenth day of the third month following the close of
  its taxable year a return which shall state the gross receipts  for  the
  period  covered  by  such  return.  Returns  shall be filed with the tax
  commission in a form prescribed by it setting forth such information  as
  the  tax  commission  may  prescribe.  Every  oil company subject to tax
  hereunder which ceases to exercise its franchise or to be subject to the
  tax imposed by this section shall  transmit  to  the  tax  commission  a
  return  on  the  date of such cessation or at such other time as the tax
  commission may require covering each year or period for which no  return
  was  theretofore filed. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
  subdivision, the tax commission may require any oil company to  file  an
  annual  return, which shall contain any data specified by it, regardless
  of whether the oil company is subject to tax under this section.
    6. If any provision of this section conflicts with any other provision
  contained in this article, the provisions of this section shall control,
  but the provisions of this  article  which  do  not  conflict  with  the
  provisions  of  this section shall apply with respect to the taxes under
  this section, insofar as they are, or may be made, applicable.
    7. Any corporation which is subject to tax under section  one  hundred
  eighty-three,  one  hundred  eighty-four, one hundred eighty-five or one
  hundred eighty-six of this chapter shall not be  subject  to  tax  under
  this section.
    8.  An  oil  company  which is not incorporated or organized under the
  laws of this state shall not be deemed to be doing  business,  employing
  capital,  owning  or  leasing property, or maintaining an office in this
  state,  for  the  purposes  of  this  section,  by  reason  of  (a)  the
  maintenance  of  cash  balances  with  banks  or trust companies in this
  state, or (b) the ownership of shares of stock  or  securities  kept  in


 this  state,  if  kept  in  a  safe  deposit  box,  safe, vault or other
  receptacle rented for the purpose, or if pledged as collateral security,
  or if deposited with one or more banks or trust  companies,  or  brokers
  who  are  members  of  a recognized security exchange, in safekeeping or
  custody accounts, or (c) the taking of any action by any  such  bank  or
  trust  company  or  broker,  which  is  incidental  to  the rendering of
  safekeeping or custodian  service  to  such  oil  company,  or  (d)  the
  maintenance  of  an  office  in  this  state  by one or more officers or
  directors of the oil company who are not employees of the oil company if
  the company otherwise is not doing business in this state, and does  not
  employ  capital  or  own  or  lease  property  in this state, or (e) the
  keeping of books or records of an oil company  in  this  state  if  such
  books  or records are not kept by employees of such oil company and such
  oil company does not otherwise do business, employ capital, own or lease
  property or maintain an office in this state, or (f) any combination  of
  the foregoing activities.
    9. Any receiver, referee, trustee, assignee or other fiduciary, or any
  officer  or  agent  appointed by any court, who conducts the business of
  any oil company shall be subject to the tax imposed by this  section  in
  the same manner and to the same extent as if the business were conducted
  by  the  agents or officers of such oil company. A dissolved oil company
  which continues to conduct business shall also be  subject  to  the  tax
  imposed by this section.
    10.  Where a false or fraudulent resale certificate has been furnished
  to an oil company, the corporation furnishing such certificate shall  be
  subject  to  a  penalty  equal to three per centum of the gross receipts
  which would have otherwise been taxable to  such  oil  company  if  such
  certificate  had  not been furnished to such company. Such penalty shall
  be assessed, collected and paid in the same manner as  the  addition  to
  tax with respect to a deficiency due to fraud provided for in subsection
  (e)  of  section  one  thousand eighty-five of this chapter is assessed,
  collected and paid.
    11. If any amount of tax imposed by this section is not paid prior  to
  September  first, nineteen hundred eighty-three, interest on such amount
  at double the underpayment rate set by the commissioner of taxation  and
  finance  pursuant to section one thousand ninety-six of this chapter, or
  if no rate is set, at the rate of twelve percent per annum shall be paid
  for the period from such date to the  date  paid,  whether  or  not  any
  extension  of  time for payment was granted; provided, however, that the
  rate charged shall not exceed  the  maximum  rate  allowed  pursuant  to
  section  190.42  of  the  penal  law.  This subdivision shall apply with
  respect to taxes, or any portion thereof, which are overdue on or  after
  September first, nineteen hundred eighty-three and shall apply only with
  respect  to  interest  computed or computable for periods or portions of
  periods occurring on or after such date.
    12. All taxes, interest and penalties collected or received by the tax
  commission under the taxes and penalties imposed by this  section  shall
  be  deposited  daily in one account with such responsible banks, banking
  houses or trust companies as may be designated by  the  comptroller,  to
  the credit of the comptroller. Such an account may be established in one
  or  more  of such depositories. Such deposits shall be kept separate and
  apart from all other money in the possession  of  the  comptroller.  The
  comptroller  shall require adequate security from all such depositories.
  Of the total revenue collected  or  received  under  this  section,  the
  comptroller shall retain in his hands such amount as the commissioner of
  taxation  and  finance  may  determine to be necessary for refunds under
  this section, out of which amount the comptroller shall pay any  refunds
  to  which  oil  companies shall be entitled under the provisions of this


 section. After reserving the amount required to pay  such  refunds,  the
  comptroller   shall  deposit  all  remaining  revenue  pursuant  to  the
  provisions of subdivision one of section one  hundred  seventy-one-a  of
  this chapter.




   §  182-a.  Franchise  tax on certain oil companies. 1. Notwithstanding
  any other provision of this chapter, or of any other law, for the period
  beginning with taxable years commencing on or after  the  first  day  of
  July,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-one,  but including that portion of any
  taxable year commencing prior thereto to the extent of that  portion  of
  such  year  which includes the period which commences with the first day
  of July, nineteen hundred eighty-one, and ending with but not  including
  taxable  years  commencing  on  or after the first day of July, nineteen
  hundred eighty-three, but including that portion  of  any  taxable  year
  commencing  prior  thereto  to  the  extent of that portion of such year
  which includes the period which terminates with  the  thirtieth  day  of
  June,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-three,  an annual tax is hereby imposed
  upon every oil company equal to three-quarters of one per centum of  its
  gross receipts from sales of petroleum, or the portion thereof allocated
  within   the  state  as  hereinafter  provided,  for  the  privilege  of
  exercising  its  corporate  franchise,  or  of  doing  business,  or  of
  employing  capital,  or of owning or leasing property in this state in a
  corporate or organized capacity, or of maintaining  an  office  in  this
  state,  for  all  or  any part of each of its taxable years. In no event
  shall the tax imposed by this section be less  than  two  hundred  fifty
  dollars.
    2.  As  used  in  this section: (a) The term "oil company" means every
  corporation formed for or  engaged  in  the  business  of  importing  or
  causing  to be imported (by a person other than a corporation subject to
  tax under this  section)  into  this  state  for  sale  in  this  state,
  extracting,   producing,   refining,   manufacturing,   or   compounding
  petroleum. Provided, however, a corporation which is principally engaged
  in selling fuel oil (excluding diesel motor fuel) used  for  residential
  purposes  shall  not  be considered an oil company. For purposes of this
  section, petroleum shall include, but shall not be limited to, gasoline,
  aviation fuel, kerosene, diesel motor fuel,  benzol,  distillate  fuels,
  residual oil, crude oil or any similar product.
    (b)  The  term  "gross  receipts  from  sales  of petroleum" means all
  receipts from sales of petroleum, whether from  within  or  without  the
  United  States,  whether  in  cash,  credits  or property of any kind or
  nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the  cost  of  the
  property  sold,  the cost of materials used, labor or services, or other
  costs, interest or discount  paid,  or  any  other  expense  whatsoever.
  Receipts  received  by  reason of any sale of fuel oil (excluding diesel
  motor fuel) or liquified or  liquifiable  gases  (except  when  sold  in
  containers  of  less  than  one  hundred  pounds)  used  for residential
  purposes shall not be included in gross receipts.
    However, to prevent the multiple application of  the  tax  imposed  by
  this  section,  gross  receipts  shall not include the receipts from any
  sale for resale to a purchaser which is an oil company  subject  to  tax
  under  this  section. It shall be presumed that no receipts are receipts
  from a sale for resale to such purchaser unless such purchaser furnishes
  the oil company with a resale certificate in such form  and  under  such
  terms  and  conditions  as  the  tax  commission  may prescribe and such
  certificate is accepted in good faith by such oil company. In  addition,
  it shall be presumed that no receipts are receipts received by reason of
  any  sale  of  fuel  oil  (excluding  diesel motor fuel) or liquified or
  liquifiable gases (except when sold  in  containers  of  less  than  one
  hundred  pounds)  used  for  residential  purposes  unless the purchaser
  furnishes the oil company with a residential use  certificate,  in  such
  form,  at  such  times  and  under  such terms and conditions as the tax
  commission may prescribe, and such certificate is accepted in good faith
  by such oil company.  Provided, however, where a purchaser is a consumer


 of such fuel oil or liquified or liquifiable gases, such purchaser shall
  not be required to furnish such certificate and the oil  company  making
  such  sale shall be required to maintain records of such transactions in
  such  form  and  manner as the tax commission may prescribe. In order to
  assist the purchaser from an oil company in completing  its  residential
  use certificate, the tax commission may require such other purchasers of
  petroleum  as  it  deems  necessary  to  furnish  their  suppliers  with
  residential use certificates.
    (c) The term "corporation" includes a corporation, joint-stock company
  or association and any business  conducted  by  a  trustee  or  trustees
  wherein  interest  or  ownership  is  evidenced  by certificate or other
  written instrument.
    (d) The term "taxable year" means the oil company's taxable  year  for
  federal  income  tax purposes, or the part thereof during which such oil
  company is subject to tax under this section.
    (e) The term "petroleum"  shall  mean  crude  oil,  plant  condensate,
  gasoline,   aviation   fuel,   kerosene,   diesel  motor  fuel,  benzol,
  petrochemical feedstocks, distillate fuels, residual oil, and  liquified
  or liquifiable gases such as butane, ethylene, or propane.
    3. The portion of the gross receipts from sales of petroleum of an oil
  company  to  be  allocated  within  the  state  shall  be  determined by
  multiplying such gross receipts by the ratio which  the  gross  receipts
  from  sales  of  petroleum where shipments are made to points within the
  state bear to the gross receipts from  sales  of  petroleum  within  and
  without  the  state. Receipts received by reason of any sale of fuel oil
  or liquified or liquifiable gases  used  for  residential  purposes  and
  receipts  received  from a sale for resale as described in paragraph (b)
  of subdivision two of this section shall be included as a receipt in the
  computation of the allocation percentage.
    4. Every oil company subject to tax under this section shall keep such
  records of its business in such form as the tax commission may  require,
  and  such records shall be preserved for a period of three years, except
  that the tax commission may consent to  their  destruction  within  that
  period or may require that they be kept longer.
    5.  Every  oil company subject to tax hereunder shall annually file on
  or before the fifteenth day of the third month following  the  close  of
  its  taxable  year  a  return  which shall state the gross receipts from
  sales of petroleum for the period covered by such return. Returns  shall
  be  filed  with  the  tax  commission in a form prescribed by it setting
  forth such information as the tax commission may  prescribe.  Every  oil
  company  subject to tax hereunder which ceases to exercise its franchise
  or to be subject to the tax imposed by this section  shall  transmit  to
  the  tax  commission  a  return on the date of such cessation or at such
  other time as the tax commission  may  require  covering  each  year  or
  period  for  which  no return was theretofore filed. Notwithstanding the
  foregoing provisions of this subdivision, the tax commission may require
  any oil company to file an annual return, which shall contain  any  data
  specified by it, regardless of whether the oil company is subject to tax
  under this section.
    6. If any provision of this section conflicts with any other provision
  contained in this article, the provisions of this section shall control,
  but  the  provisions  of  this  article  which  do not conflict with the
  provisions of this section shall apply with respect to the  taxes  under
  this section, insofar as they are, or may be made, applicable.
    7.  Any  corporation which is subject to tax under section one hundred
  eighty-three, one hundred eighty-four, one hundred  eighty-five  or  one
  hundred  eighty-six  of  this  article shall not be subject to tax under
  this section.


   8. An oil company which is not incorporated  or  organized  under  the
  laws  of  this state shall not be deemed to be doing business, employing
  capital, owning or leasing property, or maintaining an  office  in  this
  state,  for  the  purposes  of  this  section,  by  reason  of  (a)  the
  maintenance  of  cash  balances  with  banks or trusts companies in this
  state, or (b) the ownership of shares of stock  or  securities  kept  in
  this  state,  if  kept  in  a  safe  deposit  box,  safe, vault or other
  receptacle rented for the purpose, or if pledged as collateral security,
  or if deposited with one of banks or trust companies, or brokers who are
  members of a recognized security exchange,  in  safekeeping  or  custody
  accounts,  or  (c)  the  taking  of any action by any such bank or trust
  company or broker, which is incidental to the rendering  of  safekeeping
  or  custodian  service to such oil company, or (d) the maintenance of an
  office in this state by one or more officers or  directors  of  the  oil
  company  who  are  not  employees  of  the  oil  company  if the company
  otherwise is not doing business in  this  state,  and  does  not  employ
  capital  or  own  or lease property in this state, or (e) the keeping of
  books or records of an oil company  in  this  state  if  such  books  or
  records  are  not  kept  by  employees  of such oil company and such oil
  company does not otherwise do business, employ  capital,  own  or  lease
  property  or maintain an office in this state, or (f) any combination of
  the foregoing activities.
    9. Any receiver, referee, trustee, assignee or other fiduciary, or any
  officer or agent appointed by any court, who conducts  the  business  of
  any  oil  company shall be subject to the tax imposed by this section in
  the same manner and to the same extent as if the business were conducted
  by the agents or officers of such oil company. A dissolved  oil  company
  which  continues  to  conduct  business shall also be subject to the tax
  imposed by this section.
    10. (a) Where a false or fraudulent resale certificate or  residential
  use  certificate  has  been  furnished to an oil company or to any other
  person, the corporation or person furnishing such certificate  shall  be
  subject  to  a  penalty  equal to three per centum of the gross receipts
  which would have otherwise been taxable to  such  oil  company  if  such
  certificate  had  not  been  furnished  to such company or to such other
  person. Such penalty shall be assessed, collected and paid in  the  same
  manner  as the addition to tax with respect to a deficiency due to fraud
  provided for in subsection (e) of section one  thousand  eighty-five  of
  this chapter is assessed, collected and paid.
    (b)  If  a purchaser which is required by paragraph (b) of subdivision
  two of section one hundred eighty-two-a to provide  an  oil  company  or
  other  supplier with a residential use certificate fails to provide such
  certificate or provides a certificate which understates  the  amount  of
  fuel oil (excluding diesel motor fuel) or liquified or liquifiable gases
  (except  when  sold  in containers of less than one hundred pounds) used
  for residential purposes, unless  it  is  shown  that  such  failure  or
  understatement  is  due  to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect,
  there shall, upon notice and demand by the tax  commission  and  in  the
  same  manner  as tax, be paid by such purchaser a penalty of one hundred
  dollars for each such failure or for each  certificate  containing  such
  understatement;  provided,  however,  in  no  event  may  more than five
  thousand dollars in such penalties be imposed against such purchaser  in
  any calendar year.
    11.  All  taxes,  interest  and penalties collected or received by the
  commissioner under the taxes and penalties imposed by this section shall
  be deposited daily in one account with such responsible  banks,  banking
  houses  or  trust  companies as may be designated by the comptroller, to
  the credit of the comptroller. Such an account may be established in one


 or more of such depositories. Such deposits shall be kept  separate  and
  apart  from  all  other  money in the possession of the comptroller. The
  comptroller shall require adequate security from all such  depositories.
  Of  the  total  revenue  collected  or  received under this section, the
  comptroller shall retain in his hands such amount  as  the  commissioner
  may  determine  to  be  necessary for refunds under this section, out of
  which amount  the  comptroller  shall  pay  any  refunds  to  which  oil
  companies  shall be entitled under the provisions of this section. After
  reserving the amount required to pay such refunds, the comptroller shall
  prior to April  first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-four,  deposit  weekly
  forty-five  percent  of all remaining revenue in the mass transportation
  operating assistance fund to the credit  of  the  public  transportation
  systems  operating assistance account therein, and fifty-five percent of
  such revenue in such  fund  to  the  credit  of  the  metropolitan  mass
  transportation  operating  assistance  account  therein,  established by
  section eighty-eight-a of the state finance law, and on and after  April
  first,  nineteen  hundred ninety-four, after reserving the amount to pay
  such refunds, the comptroller shall  deposit  weekly  all  the  revenues
  remaining  in  such mass transportation operating assistance fund to the
  credit  of  such  public  transportation  systems  operating  assistance
  account  therein.  After  reserving  the amount to pay such refunds, the
  comptroller shall on and after April first, nineteen hundred ninety-six,
  deposit weekly forty-five percent of all remaining revenue in such  mass
  transportation  operating  assistance  fund to the credit of such public
  transportation  systems  operating  assistance  account   therein,   and
  fifty-five  percent  of  such revenue in such fund to the credit of such
  metropolitan mass transportation operating assistance account therein.




   §  183.  Franchise tax on transportation and transmission corporations
  and associations.--1. (a) The term "corporation" as used in this section
  shall include an association, within the meaning of paragraph  three  of
  subsection  (a)  of  section  seventy-seven  hundred one of the internal
  revenue code (including a limited liability company), a publicly  traded
  partnership  treated  as  a  corporation  for  purposes  of the internal
  revenue code pursuant to section seventy-seven hundred four thereof  and
  any  business  conducted  by  a  trustee or trustees wherein interest or
  ownership is evidenced by certificates or other written instruments.
    (b) For the privilege of exercising its  corporate  franchise,  or  of
  doing  business,  or  of  employing  capital,  or  of  owning or leasing
  property in this state in a  corporate  or  organized  capacity,  or  of
  maintaining  an  office  in  this  state,  every  domestic  corporation,
  joint-stock company or association formed for or principally engaged  in
  the conduct of canal, steamboat, ferry (except a ferry company operating
  between  any  of  the  boroughs  of  the  city of New York under a lease
  granted by the city), express, navigation, pipe line, transfer,  baggage
  express,  omnibus,  taxicab, telegraph, or telephone business, or formed
  for or principally engaged in  the  conduct  of  two  or  more  of  such
  businesses,  and  every  domestic  corporation,  joint-stock  company or
  association formed for or  principally  engaged  in  the  conduct  of  a
  railroad, palace car, sleeping car or trucking business or formed for or
  principally engaged in the conduct of two or more of such businesses and
  which  has made an election pursuant to subdivision ten of this section,
  and every other domestic corporation, joint-stock company or association
  principally engaged in the conduct of a transportation  or  transmission
  business,  except  a  corporation,  joint-stock  company  or association
  formed for or principally engaged in the conduct of a  railroad,  palace
  car,  sleeping  car  or  trucking  business or formed for or principally
  engaged in the conduct of two or more of such businesses and  which  has
  not  made  the election provided for in subdivision ten of this section,
  and except a corporation, joint-stock company or association principally
  engaged in the conduct of aviation  (including  air  freight  forwarders
  acting  as  principal  and  like  indirect  air  carriers)  and except a
  corporation principally engaged in providing telecommunication  services
  between  aircraft  and  dispatcher,  aircraft and air traffic control or
  ground station and ground station (or any combination of the foregoing),
  at least ninety percent of the voting  stock  of  which  corporation  is
  owned,  directly  or indirectly, by air carriers and which corporation's
  principal function is to fulfill the requirements  of  (i)  the  federal
  aviation   administration   (or  the  successor  thereto)  or  (ii)  the
  international civil aviation organization (or  the  successor  thereto),
  relating to the existence of a communication system between aircraft and
  dispatcher,  aircraft  and  air  traffic  control  or ground station and
  ground station (or any combination of the foregoing) for the purposes of
  air safety and navigation shall pay, in advance, an  annual  tax  to  be
  computed  upon  the basis of the amount of its capital stock within this
  state during the preceding year, and upon each dollar  of  such  amount.
  Provided,  however,  a  corporation,  joint-stock company or association
  formed for or principally engaged in the transportation, transmission or
  distribution of gas, electricity or steam shall not be  subject  to  tax
  under this section or section one hundred eighty-four of this article.
    (c)   Notwithstanding   the   provisions  of  paragraph  (b)  of  this
  subdivision, during the  period  that  the  state  tax  on  motor  fuel,
  computed  without  regard to any reimbursement allowable under paragraph
  (d) of subdivision three of section two hundred  eighty-nine-c  of  this
  chapter,  exceeds two cents per gallon, the corporations, herein classed
  as  "taxicab"  and  "omnibus,"  other  than  corporations  described  in


 subdivision nine of this section, shall be taxed under the provisions of
  article nine-a of this chapter and not under this section.
    2. The measure of the amount of capital stock in this state, except as
  hereinafter  provided,  shall  be  such  a portion of the issued capital
  stock as the gross assets, exclusive of obligations issued by the United
  States and cash on hand and on deposit, employed in any business  within
  this state, bear to the gross assets, exclusive of obligations issued by
  the  United States and cash on hand and on deposit, wherever employed in
  business. Provided, however, that in the case of a  corporation  taxable
  hereunder  only for the privilege of holding property, the measure shall
  be such a portion of the issued  capital  stock  as  the  gross  assets,
  exclusive  of  obligations  issued by the United States and cash on hand
  and on deposit, located within the state,  bear  to  the  gross  assets,
  exclusive  of  obligations  issued by the United States and cash on hand
  and on deposit, wherever located. The capital of a corporation  invested
  in the stock of another corporation shall be deemed to be assets located
  where  the  assets  of  the  issuing  corporation,  other  than patents,
  copyrights, trademarks, contracts and good will, are located.
    3. Every corporation, joint-stock company or association,  subject  to
  taxation  under this section shall, in any event, pay annually a minimum
  tax of not  less  than  seventy-five  dollars  nor  less  than  one  and
  five-tenths  mills  on each dollar of such a portion of the net value of
  its issued capital stock, which net  value  for  the  purposes  of  this
  section  shall  be deemed to be not less than five dollars per share, as
  may be determined upon  such  of  the  bases  herein  provided  for  the
  measurement  thereof  as  is applicable. The term "net value" as used in
  this section shall be construed to mean not  less  than  the  difference
  between  a  corporation's  assets and liabilities, and not less than the
  average price at which such stock sold during the year  covered  by  the
  report  which  forms the basis for the tax. But if the dividends paid on
  the par value of any kind of capital stock during any year  ending  with
  the  thirty-first  day of December amount to six per centum or more, the
  tax  upon  such  kind  of  capital  stock  shall  be  at  the  rate   of
  three-eighths  of  a  mill for each one per centum of dividends paid and
  shall be computed upon the par value of such capital stock, unless  such
  a  tax  be  less  than  the  minimum  tax  hereinbefore provided in this
  section, and the tax commission shall, for such purpose, make a fair and
  equitable apportionment of the assets of  the  corporation,  joint-stock
  company  or  association, between or among the different kinds of stock,
  provided, however, that the provisions of this sentence shall not  apply
  to  any  corporation,  joint  stock company or association formed for or
  principally engaged in the conduct of  a  telephone  business  which  is
  subject  to  the  provisions  of section one hundred eighty-four of this
  article and which has a total number of access lines in the state of one
  million or less.
    4. If such corporation, joint stock company or association shall  have
  more than one kind of capital stock, and upon one of such kinds of stock
  a  dividend  or  dividends  amounting to six or more than six per centum
  upon the par value thereof,  has  been  paid,  and  upon  the  other  no
  dividend has been paid, or the dividend or dividends paid thereon amount
  to  less  than  six  per centum upon the par value thereof, then the tax
  shall be fixed upon each kind as hereinbefore provided.
    5. The dividend rate for a corporation having stock without nominal or
  par value shall be determined by dividing the amount paid as a  dividend
  or dividends during the year by the amount paid in on such stock and, if
  the  rate is six per centum or more, the rate of three-eighths of a mill
  for each one per centum of dividends shall be applied to the amount paid
  in on such  stock,  unless  such  tax  be  less  than  the  minimum  tax


 hereinbefore  in this section provided for. The amount of earned surplus
  at the time of change of classification of a corporation formerly  taxed
  under  article  nine-a  of this chapter shall be excluded in determining
  the  amount  of dividends paid. Any consideration given by a corporation
  for the purchase of  its  own  stock  in  excess  of  the  consideration
  received  by  it for the issuance of such stock, shall, for the purposes
  of this section, be considered as a dividend.
    6.  Every  like  corporation,  joint-stock  company   or   association
  organized,  incorporated  or  formed  under the laws of any other state,
  country or sovereignty shall  pay  a  like  tax  for  the  privilege  of
  exercising  its  corporate  franchise,  or  of  doing  business,  or  of
  employing capital, or of owning or leasing property in this state  in  a
  corporate  or  organized  capacity,  or of maintaining an office in this
  state, to be computed upon the basis of the measurement herein  provided
  for the taxation of domestic corporations.
    7. The owning or holding in this state by a foreign corporation, or by
  a  trustee or trustees included under this section within the meaning of
  the term  corporation  as  herein  before  defined,  of  property  shall
  constitute  doing  business  within this state within the intent of this
  section; provided, however, that the owning or holding in this state  by
  a   railroad,   palace   car  or  sleeping  car  corporation,  business,
  navigation, canal, ferry, (except a ferry company operating between  any
  of  the  boroughs  of  the city of New York under a lease granted by the
  city), or steamboat or any other corporation formed for  or  principally
  engaged  in  the operation of vessels included under this section within
  the meaning of  the  term  corporation  as  herein  before  defined,  of
  property  used  exclusively  in interstate or foreign commerce shall not
  constitute doing business in  this  state  within  the  intent  of  this
  section.  However,  a  foreign corporation or such a trustee or trustees
  shall not be deemed to be doing business, employing capital,  owning  or
  leasing  property,  or  maintaining  an  office  in  this state, for the
  purposes of this article, by reason  of  (a)  the  maintenance  of  cash
  balances  with  banks  or  trust  companies  in  this  state, or (b) the
  ownership of shares of stock or securities kept in this state,  if  kept
  in  a  safe  deposit box, safe, vault or other receptacle rented for the
  purpose, or if pledged as collateral security, or if deposited with  one
  or  more  banks  or  trust  companies,  or  brokers who are members of a
  recognized security exchange, in safekeeping or custody accounts, or (c)
  the taking of any action by any such bank or trust  company  or  broker,
  which is incidental to the rendering of safekeeping or custodian service
  to  such  corporation, or (d) the maintenance of an office in this state
  by one or more officers or directors of  the  corporation  who  are  not
  employees  of  the corporation if the corporation otherwise is not doing
  business in this state, and does not employ  capital  or  own  or  lease
  property  in  this  state,  or  (e) the keeping of books or records of a
  corporation in this state if such books  or  records  are  not  kept  by
  employees of such corporation and such corporation does not otherwise do
  business, employ capital, own or lease property or maintain an office in
  this state, or (f) any combination of the foregoing activities.
    8.  The  measure  of  the capital stock in this state of a corporation
  engaged in the operation of vessels in foreign commerce  shall  be  such
  portion  of  the issued capital stock as the aggregate number of working
  days in New York territorial waters of all such  vessels  bears  to  the
  aggregate  number of working days of all such vessels. The dividend rate
  for such a corporation shall be determined by dividing the  amount  paid
  as  a  dividend  or dividends on all classes of stock during the year by
  the amount of paid-in capital and, if the rate  is  six  per  centum  or


 more,  the  rate  of  three-eighths of a mill for each one per centum of
  dividends shall be applied to the amount of such paid-in capital.
    9. (a) A corporation, classed as a "taxicab" or "omnibus",
    (1)  which  is organized, incorporated or formed under the laws of any
  other state, country or sovereignty, and
    (2) which neither  owns  nor  leases  property  in  this  state  in  a
  corporate or organized capacity, nor
    (3)  maintains  an  office  in  this state in a corporate or organized
  capacity, but
    (4) which is doing business or employing  capital  in  this  state  by
  conducting  at  least  one  but  fewer than twelve trips into this state
  during the calendar year,
  shall be exempt from the tax imposed under this  section.  If  the  only
  property  a  corporation  owns  or  leases in this state is a vehicle or
  vehicles used to conduct trips, it shall not be considered, for purposes
  of subparagraph two of this paragraph, to be owning or leasing  property
  in this state.
    (b)  For  purposes  of  this  subdivision,  a corporation classed as a
  "taxicab" or "omnibus" shall be considered to be conducting a trip  into
  New  York  state  when  one  of  its  vehicles enters New York state and
  transports passengers to, from, or to and from a location  in  New  York
  state.  A  corporation  shall  not be considered to be conducting a trip
  into New York state if  its  vehicle  only  makes  incidental  stops  at
  locations in the state while in transit from a location outside New York
  state  to another location outside New York state. The number of trips a
  corporation  conducts  into  New  York  state  shall  be  calculated  by
  determining  the  number of trips each vehicle owned, leased or operated
  by the corporation conducts into New York state and adding those numbers
  together.
    10. Election. Every corporation, joint-stock  company  or  association
  formed  for  or  principally  engaged  in  the  conduct  of  a  railroad
  (including surface railroad, whether or not operated  by  steam,  subway
  railroad  or  elevated  railroad),  palace car, sleeping car or trucking
  business or formed for or principally engaged in the conduct of  two  or
  more  of  such  businesses,  which would be subject to article nine-A of
  this chapter if the election provided for under  this  subdivision  were
  not made, may elect to be subject to the provisions of this section and,
  as  applicable,  section one hundred eighty-four of this article, rather
  than  the  provisions  of  such  article   nine-A.   Such   corporation,
  joint-stock  company or association must make such election by the first
  day on which such corporation, joint-stock company or association  would
  be  required  to  file a return or report (without regard to extensions)
  under this section or section one hundred eighty-four of  this  article,
  or  section  one  hundred eighty-three-a or one hundred eighty-four-a of
  this article, or article  nine-A  of  this  chapter.  An  election  made
  pursuant  to  this  subdivision  shall  continue  to  be in effect until
  revoked by the taxpayer. A revocation of the election to be  subject  to
  this section and, as applicable, section one hundred eighty-four of this
  article,  shall be irrevocable. Such election, and a revocation thereof,
  shall be made in the manner prescribed by the commissioner,  whether  by
  regulation or otherwise. Such revocation shall apply as of the first day
  of  January  next  following  the  end of a taxable year with respect to
  which the taxpayer had been subject to this section and, as  applicable,
  section  one  hundred  eighty-four  of  this  article,  by  reason of an
  election made pursuant to this subdivision.




   §   183-a.  Metropolitan  transportation  business  tax  surcharge  on
  transportation and transmission corporations and associations.
    1. The term "corporation" as used in this  section  shall  include  an
  association,  within the meaning of paragraph three of subsection (a) of
  section  seventy-seven  hundred  one  of  the  internal   revenue   code
  (including  a  limited liability company), a publicly traded partnership
  treated as a corporation for  purposes  of  the  internal  revenue  code
  pursuant  to section seventy-seven hundred four thereof and any business
  conducted by a trustee or trustees  wherein  interest  or  ownership  is
  evidenced   by   certificates   or   other  written  instruments.  Every
  corporation,  joint-stock  company  or   association   formed   for   or
  principally  engaged in the conduct of canal, steamboat, ferry (except a
  ferry company operating between any of the boroughs of the city  of  New
  York under a lease granted by the city), express, navigation, pipe line,
  transfer,  baggage  express,  omnibus,  taxicab, telegraph, or telephone
  business, or formed for or principally engaged in the conduct of two  or
  more  such  businesses,  and  every  corporation, joint-stock company or
  association formed for or  principally  engaged  in  the  conduct  of  a
  railroad, palace car, sleeping car or trucking business or formed for or
  principally engaged in the conduct of two or more of such businesses and
  which  has  made  an election pursuant to subdivision ten of section one
  hundred eighty-three of  this  article,  and  every  other  corporation,
  joint-stock company or association principally engaged in the conduct of
  a   transportation  or  transmission  business,  except  a  corporation,
  joint-stock company or association formed for or principally engaged  in
  the conduct of a railroad, palace car, sleeping car or trucking business
  or  formed  for  or principally engaged in the conduct of two or more of
  such businesses and which has not made  the  election  provided  for  in
  subdivision ten of section one hundred eighty-three of this article, and
  except  a  corporation,  joint-stock  company or association principally
  engaged in the conduct of aviation  (including  air  freight  forwarders
  acting  as  principal  and  like  indirect  air  carriers)  and except a
  corporation principally engaged in providing telecommunication  services
  between  aircraft  and  dispatcher,  aircraft and air traffic control or
  ground station and ground station (or any combination of the foregoing),
  at least ninety percent of the voting  stock  of  which  corporation  is
  owned,  directly  or indirectly, by air carriers and which corporation's
  principal function is to fulfill the requirements  of  (i)  the  federal
  aviation   administration   (or  the  successor  thereto)  or  (ii)  the
  international civil aviation organization (or  the  successor  thereto),
  relating to the existence of a communication system between aircraft and
  dispatcher,  aircraft  and  air  traffic  control  or ground station and
  ground station (or any combination of the foregoing) for the purposes of
  air safety and navigation, shall pay for the privilege of exercising its
  corporate franchise, or of doing business, or of employing  capital,  or
  of   owning   or   leasing   property   in   the  metropolitan  commuter
  transportation district in such corporate or organized capacity,  or  of
  maintaining  an  office  in  such  district,  a tax surcharge, which tax
  surcharge, in addition  to  the  tax  imposed  by  section  one  hundred
  eighty-three of this article, shall be computed at the rate of seventeen
  percent of the tax imposed under such section for such years or any part
  of  such  years  after  the deduction of any credits otherwise allowable
  under this article; provided, however, that such rates of tax  surcharge
  shall  be  applied only to that portion of the tax imposed under section
  one hundred eighty-three of this article  after  the  deduction  of  any
  credits  otherwise allowable under this article which is attributable to
  the taxpayer's business activity  carried  on  within  the  metropolitan


 commuter   transportation  district  as  so  determined  in  the  manner
  prescribed by the rules and regulations promulgated by the commissioner.
    2.  The  owning or holding in the metropolitan commuter transportation
  district by a corporation, or by a trustee or  trustees  included  under
  this  section within the meaning of the term corporation as hereinbefore
  defined, of property shall constitute doing business in the metropolitan
  commuter transportation district within the  meaning  of  this  section;
  provided,  however,  that  the  owning  or holding in such district by a
  railroad, palace car or sleeping car corporation, business,  navigation,
  canal,  ferry,  (except  a  ferry  company  operating between any of the
  boroughs of the city of New York under a lease granted by the city),  or
  steamboat  or any other corporation formed for or principally engaged in
  the operation of vessels included under this section within the  meaning
  of  the  term  corporation  as  hereinbefore  defined,  of property used
  exclusively in interstate or foreign commerce shall not constitute doing
  business in such district within the intent of this section. However,  a
  corporation  or such trustee or trustees shall not be deemed to be doing
  business, employing capital, owning or leasing property, or  maintaining
  an  office in the metropolitan commuter transportation district, for the
  purposes of this section, by reason  of  (a)  the  maintenance  of  cash
  balances  with  banks  or  trust  companies in the metropolitan commuter
  transportation district, or (b) the ownership  of  shares  of  stock  or
  securities kept in the metropolitan commuter transportation district, if
  kept  in  a safe deposit box, safe, vault or other receptacle rented for
  the purpose, or if pledged as collateral security, or if deposited  with
  one  or  more  banks or trust companies, or brokers who are members of a
  recognized security exchange, in safekeeping or custody accounts, or (c)
  the taking of any action by any such bank or trust  company  or  broker,
  which is incidental to the rendering of safekeeping or custodian service
  to  such  corporation,  or  (d)  the  maintenance  of  an office in such
  district by one or more officers or directors of the corporation who are
  not employees of the corporation if the  corporation  otherwise  is  not
  doing  business  in such district, and does not employ capital or own or
  lease property in such district, or (e) the keeping of books or  records
  of  a corporation in such district if such books or records are not kept
  by employees of such corporation and such corporation does not otherwise
  do business, employ capital, own or lease property or maintain an office
  in such district, or (f) any combination of  the  foregoing  activities.
  Provided,   further,  that  a  railroad,  palace  car  or  sleeping  car
  corporation, navigation, canal, ferry (except a ferry company  operating
  between  any  of  the  boroughs  of  the  city of New York under a lease
  granted by the city), steamboat, or any other corporation formed for  or
  principally  engaged  in the operation of vessels whose only activity in
  the metropolitan commuter transportation district is (i) the maintenance
  of an office in such district and for the employing of capital  in  such
  district  and  (ii)  the  use  of  property exclusively in interstate or
  foreign commerce, shall not be subject to the tax surcharge  imposed  by
  this section.
    3.  The  term metropolitan commuter transportation district as used in
  this section  shall  be  defined  pursuant  to  section  twelve  hundred
  sixty-two of the public authorities law.
    4.  Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of state or local law, the
  tax surcharge imposed under this section  shall  not  be  allowed  as  a
  deduction  in  the  computation  of any state or local tax imposed under
  this chapter or any chapter  or  local  law.  Furthermore,  the  credits
  otherwise  allowable under this article shall not be allowed against the
  tax surcharge imposed by this section.


   5. The report covering the tax  surcharge  which  must  be  calculated
  pursuant to this section based upon the tax reportable on the report due
  by March fifteenth of any year under section one hundred eighty-three of
  this  article,  for  taxable  years  beginning before January first, two
  thousand seventeen, and on the report due by April fifteenth of any year
  under  section  one  hundred  eighty-three  of this article, for taxable
  years beginning on or after January first, two thousand seventeen, shall
  be filed on or before March fifteenth of the year next  succeeding  such
  year,  for  taxable  years  beginning before January first, two thousand
  seventeen, and on or before April fifteenth of the year next  succeeding
  such  year,  for  taxable years beginning on or after January first, two
  thousand  seventeen.  An  extension  pursuant  to  section  one  hundred
  ninety-three  of  this article shall be allowed only if a taxpayer files
  with the commissioner an application for extension in such form as  said
  commissioner  may prescribe by regulation and pays on or before the date
  of such filing in addition to any  other  amounts  required  under  this
  article,  either  ninety percent of the entire tax surcharge required to
  be paid under this section for the applicable period, or not  less  than
  the tax surcharge shown on the taxpayer's report for the preceding year,
  if  such  preceding  year  consisted of twelve months. The tax surcharge
  imposed by this section shall be payable to the commissioner in full  at
  the  time  the report is required to be filed, and such tax surcharge or
  the balance thereof, imposed on any taxpayer which  ceases  to  exercise
  its franchise or be subject to the tax surcharge imposed by this section
  shall  be payable to the commissioner at the time the report is required
  to be filed, provided such tax surcharge of a domestic corporation which
  continues to possess its franchise shall be subject to adjustment as the
  circumstances  may  require;  all  other  tax  surcharges  of  any  such
  taxpayer,  which  pursuant  to  the foregoing provisions of this section
  would otherwise be  payable  subsequent  to  the  time  such  report  is
  required to be filed, shall nevertheless be payable at such time. All of
  the  provisions  of  this  article  presently  applicable to section one
  hundred eighty-three of this article are applicable to the tax surcharge
  imposed by this section except for section  one  hundred  ninety-two  of
  this article.




   §  184.  Additional  franchise  tax on transportation and transmission
  corporations and associations.-- 1. The term "corporation"  as  used  in
  this  section  shall  include  an  association,  within  the  meaning of
  paragraph three of subsection (a) of section seventy-seven  hundred  one
  of  the internal revenue code (including a limited liability company), a
  publicly traded partnership treated as a corporation for purposes of the
  internal revenue code pursuant to  section  seventy-seven  hundred  four
  thereof.
    Every  corporation,  joint-stock  company or association formed for or
  principally engaged in the conduct of canal, steamboat, ferry (except  a
  ferry  company  operating between any of the boroughs of the city of New
  York under a lease granted by the city), express, navigation, pipe line,
  transfer,  baggage  express,  omnibus,  taxicab,  telegraph   or   local
  telephone  business, or formed for or principally engaged in the conduct
  of two or more of such businesses, and  every  corporation,  joint-stock
  company  or association formed for or principally engaged in the conduct
  of surface railroad, whether or not operated by steam, subway  railroad,
  elevated  railroad,  palace  car,  sleeping  car or trucking business or
  formed for or principally engaged in the conduct of  two  or  more  such
  businesses and which has made an election pursuant to subdivision ten of
  section  one  hundred  eighty-three  of  this  article,  and every other
  corporation,  joint-stock  company  or   association   formed   for   or
  principally  engaged  in the conduct of a transportation or transmission
  business (other  than  a  telephone  business),  except  a  corporation,
  joint-stock  company or association formed for or principally engaged in
  the conduct of a surface railroad, whether or  not  operated  by  steam,
  subway railroad, elevated railroad, palace car, sleeping car or trucking
  business  or  formed for or principally engaged in the conduct of two or
  more of such businesses and which has not made the election provided for
  in subdivision ten of section one hundred eighty-three of this  article,
  and,   except   a   corporation,   joint-stock  company  or  association
  principally engaged in the conduct of aviation  (including  air  freight
  forwarders  acting  as  principal  and  like  indirect air carriers) and
  except a corporation principally engaged in providing  telecommunication
  services  between  aircraft  and  dispatcher,  aircraft  and air traffic
  control or ground station and ground station (or any combination of  the
  foregoing),  at  least  ninety  percent  of  the  voting  stock of which
  corporation is owned, directly or indirectly, by air carriers and  which
  corporation's  principal  function is to fulfill the requirements of (i)
  the federal aviation administration (or the successor thereto)  or  (ii)
  the   international   civil  aviation  organization  (or  the  successor
  thereto), relating to the existence of a  communication  system  between
  aircraft  and  dispatcher,  aircraft  and  air traffic control or ground
  station and ground station (or any combination of the foregoing) for the
  purposes  of  air  safety  and  navigation  and  for  the  privilege  of
  exercising  its  corporate  franchise,  or  of  doing  business,  or  of
  employing capital, or of owning or leasing property in this state  in  a
  corporate or organized capacity, or maintaining an office in this state,
  shall  pay  a franchise tax which shall be equal to three-eighths of one
  percent for taxable years commencing after two thousand, upon its  gross
  earnings  from  all  sources within this state; except that, for taxable
  years commencing on or after January  first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety,
  every  corporation,  joint-stock  company  or  association formed for or
  principally engaged in the  conduct  of  local  telephone  business,  or
  telegraph  business  shall  pay  a franchise tax which shall be equal to
  three-eighths of one percent for  taxable  years  commencing  after  two
  thousand,  upon  its  gross earnings from all sources within this state,
  except that a corporation, joint-stock company or association formed for


 or principally engaged in the conduct  of  a  local  telephone  business
  shall  exclude  the  following  earnings  (but not in any event earnings
  derived by such taxpayer from the provision of carrier access  services)
  derived  by  such  taxpayer  from  sales  for  ultimate  consumption  of
  telecommunications service  to  its  customers  (i)  thirty  percent  of
  separately  charged  intra-LATA  toll  service (which shall also include
  interregion regional calling plan service) and (ii) one hundred  percent
  of   separately   charged   inter-LATA,   interstate   or  international
  telecommunications service; and except  that  corporations,  joint-stock
  companies  or  associations  formed  for  or  principally engaged in the
  conduct of canal, steamboat, ferry (except  a  ferry  company  operating
  between  any  of  the  boroughs  of  the  city of New York under a lease
  granted by the city),  navigation  or  any  corporation  formed  for  or
  principally  engaged  in the operation of vessels, shall pay a franchise
  tax which shall be equal to three-quarters of one per  centum  upon  its
  gross  earnings  from  all sources within this state, excluding earnings
  derived from business of an interstate or foreign character; except that
  for  taxable  years  beginning  in  nineteen  hundred  ninety-seven   or
  thereafter,  in  the  case  of  a  corporation,  joint-stock  company or
  association  which,  with  respect  to  taxable  years  beginning  after
  nineteen   hundred  ninety-seven,  has  made  an  election  pursuant  to
  subdivision ten of section one hundred eighty-three of this article  and
  which  is  formed  for  or principally engaged in the conduct of surface
  railroad, whether or not operated by steam,  subway  railroad,  elevated
  railroad, palace car, sleeping car or trucking business or formed for or
  principally  engaged  in  the conduct of two or more of such businesses,
  such  corporation,  joint-stock  company  or  association  shall  pay  a
  franchise  tax  which shall be equal to three-eighths of one percent for
  taxable years commencing after two thousand,  upon  its  gross  earnings
  from  all  sources  within  this  state,  provided that in the case of a
  corporation,  joint-stock  company  or   association   formed   for   or
  principally  engaged  in the conduct of surface railroad, whether or not
  operated by steam, subway railroad, elevated  railroad,  palace  car  or
  sleeping  car  business,  or  formed  for  or principally engaged in the
  conduct of two or more of such businesses, such gross earnings shall not
  include earnings derived from  business  of  an  interstate  or  foreign
  character.
    Provided, however, with respect to railroad, elevated railroad, palace
  car  or  sleeping  car  business  or any other corporation formed for or
  principally engaged in the conduct of a  railroad  business  and  canal,
  steamboat,  ferry  (except  a ferry company operating between any of the
  boroughs of the city of New York under a lease  granted  by  the  city),
  navigation  or  any corporation formed for or principally engaged in the
  operation of vessels where the gross earnings from  such  transportation
  business   both  originating  and  terminating  within  this  state  and
  traversing both this state and another state or states or country  shall
  be  subject  to  the franchise tax imposed by this section (except where
  such corporation, joint-stock company or association is  formed  for  or
  principally  engaged  in  the  conduct  of a railroad (including surface
  railroad, whether or not operated by steam, subway railroad or  elevated
  railroad),  palace  car  or  sleeping  car  business  or  formed  for or
  principally engaged in the conduct of two or more  of  such  businesses,
  and  has  not  made  the  election provided for under subdivision ten of
  section one hundred eighty-three of  this  article)  and  such  earnings
  shall  be  allocated  to  this  state in the same ratio that the mileage
  within the state bears to the total mileage of such business.  Provided,
  further, a corporation, joint-stock company or association formed for or
  principally  engaged in the transportation, transmission or distribution


 of gas, electricity or steam shall not be  subject  to  tax  under  this
  section or section one hundred eighty-three of this article.
    The  term "local telephone business" means the provision or furnishing
  of telecommunication services for hire wherein the service furnished  by
  the  provider  thereof consists of carrier access service or the service
  originates and terminates within the same  local  access  and  transport
  area  ("LATA"),  a local access and transport area being that geographic
  area as established and approved, and as so set and in existence on July
  first, nineteen hundred ninety-four, pursuant  to  the  modification  of
  final  judgment  in  United  States  v.  Western Electric Company (civil
  action no. 82-0192) in the United States district court for the District
  of Columbia or within the LATA-like Rochester non-associated independent
  area.
    The term "telecommunication services" shall have the meaning  ascribed
  to such term in section one hundred eighty-six-e of this article.
    1-a.  Where a taxpayer is a partner, member or associate of a publicly
  traded partnership or an association which is subject to the tax imposed
  under this section, the amount to be included in such  taxpayer's  gross
  earnings  with  respect  to such partnership or association shall be the
  amount received with respect to such partnership or association which is
  required to be reported as  dividends  to  the  United  States  treasury
  department.
    2.  (a)  During  the period that the state tax on motor fuel, computed
  without regard to any reimbursement allowable  under  paragraph  (d)  of
  subdivision  three of section two hundred eighty-nine-c of this chapter,
  exceeds  two  cents  per  gallon  the  corporations  herein  classed  as
  "taxicab"  and "omnibus", other than corporations described in paragraph
  (b) of this subdivision, shall be taxed under the provisions of  article
  nine-a  of  the tax law and as other business corporations are taxed and
  not upon their gross receipts.
    (b) (1) A corporation classed as a "taxicab" or "omnibus",
    (i) which is organized, incorporated or formed under the laws  of  any
  other state, country or sovereignty, and
    (ii)  which  neither  owns  nor  leases  property  in  this state in a
  corporate or organized capacity, nor
    (iii) maintains an office in this state in a  corporate  or  organized
  capacity, but
    (iv)  which  is  doing  business or employing capital in this state by
  conducting at least one but fewer than  twelve  trips  into  this  state
  during  the  calendar  year,  shall not be taxed under the provisions of
  this article. If the only property a corporation owns or leases in  this
  state  is  a  vehicle or vehicles used to conduct trips, it shall not be
  considered, for purposes of clause (ii)  of  this  subparagraph,  to  be
  owning or leasing property in this state.
    (2)  For  purposes  of  this  subdivision,  a corporation classed as a
  "taxicab" or "omnibus" shall be considered to be conducting a trip  into
  New  York  state  when  one  of  its  vehicles enters New York state and
  transports passengers to, from, or to and from a location  in  New  York
  state.  A  corporation  shall  not be considered to be conducting a trip
  into New York state if  its  vehicle  only  makes  incidental  stops  at
  locations in the state while in transit from a location outside New York
  state  to another location outside New York state. The number of trips a
  corporation  conducts  into  New  York  state  shall  be  calculated  by
  determining  the  number of trips each vehicle owned, leased or operated
  by the corporation conducts into New York state and adding those numbers
  together.
    3. Any corporation, joint-stock company or association formed  for  or
  principally   engaged  in  the  conduct  of  subway  railroad,  elevated


 railroad, or surface railroad not operated  by  steam,  business,  whose
  property  is  leased  to  another  railroad  corporation,  shall only be
  required under this section to pay an annual tax at the rate of four and
  one-half  per  centum  upon the dividends paid during the year ending on
  the thirty-first day of December in excess of four per centum  upon  the
  amount of its capital stock, provided, however, that for the year ending
  on  the  thirty-first  day  of December nineteen hundred seventy-six, as
  described in subdivision two of section one hundred ninety-two  of  this
  chapter,  the tax shall be paid upon dividends paid during the months of
  July through December of such year in excess of two per centum upon  the
  amount  of  its  capital stock, except that where the property leased is
  operated by a receiver and the gross earnings are not included with  the
  gross  earnings  of  the  lessee for the purposes of taxation under this
  section, then such receiver shall be required to pay the tax upon  gross
  earnings as hereinbefore provided.
    4.  Allocation  of gross earnings from transportation and transmission
  services.--(a) General. A  transportation  or  transmission  corporation
  shall  determine its gross earnings from transportation and transmission
  services within this state (except as otherwise  provided  for  in  this
  subdivision)  by  multiplying its gross earnings from transportation and
  transmission within and without the state by a fraction,  the  numerator
  of which is the taxpayer's mileage within this state and the denominator
  of  which is the taxpayer's mileage within and without this state during
  the period covered by the report or reports required by this chapter.
    (b) Corporations engaged in the operation of  vessels.  A  corporation
  principally  engaged  in  the  operation  of vessels shall determine its
  gross earnings from transportation services within this state during the
  period covered by the report or reports  required  by  this  chapter  by
  multiplying  its  gross earnings from transportation services within and
  without this state by a percentage which represents  the  ratio  of  the
  aggregate number of working days of the vessels it owns or leases in all
  navigable lakes, rivers, streams and waters within this state and in New
  York  territorial  waters to the aggregate number of working days of all
  the vessels it owns or leases during such period.
    (c) Telephone and telegraph corporations.  A  telephone  or  telegraph
  corporation   shall  determine  its  gross  earnings  from  transmission
  services within this state during the period covered by  the  report  or
  reports required by this chapter by totaling its gross operating revenue
  from  transmission  services performed wholly within this state plus the
  portion of revenue from  interstate  and  foreign  transmission  service
  attributable to this state during such report period.
    (d) All other gross earnings, if any, shall be allocated to this state
  in the manner prescribed by rules and regulations promulgated by the tax
  commission.
    (e)  With  respect  to  other types of transportation and transmission
  corporations or where the tax commission decides that with respect to  a
  certain  corporation  the  method  prescribed  above does not fairly and
  equitably reflect gross earnings from all sources within this state, the
  tax commission shall prescribe methods of  allocation  or  apportionment
  which  fairly  and  equitably  reflect  gross  earnings from all sources
  within this state. Also, the tax commission may, in  order  to  properly
  reflect gross earnings, determine the report period in which any item of
  gross  earnings  shall  be  included  without  regard  to  the method of
  accounting employed by a corporation taxable hereunder.
    7-a. A railroad, palace car or sleeping car  corporation,  navigation,
  canal,  ferry  (except  a  ferry  company  operating  between any of the
  boroughs of the city of New York under a lease  granted  by  the  city),
  steamboat, or any other corporation formed for or principally engaged in


 the  operation  of  vessels whose only activity in this state is (i) the
  maintenance of an office in this state and for the employing of  capital
  in  this state and (ii) the use of property exclusively in interstate or
  foreign  commerce,  shall  not  be  subject  to  the tax imposed by this
  section.




   § 184-a. Additional metropolitan transportation business tax surcharge
  on   transportation   and  transmission  corporations  and  associations
  services.
    1. The term "corporation" as used in this  section  shall  include  an
  association,  within the meaning of paragraph three of subsection (a) of
  section  seventy-seven  hundred  one  of  the  internal   revenue   code
  (including   a   limited  liability  company),  and  a  publicly  traded
  partnership treated as  a  corporation  for  purposes  of  the  internal
  revenue  code  pursuant  to  section seventy-seven hundred four thereof.
  Every corporation, joint-stock company  or  association  formed  for  or
  principally  engaged in the conduct of canal, steamboat, ferry (except a
  ferry company operating between any of the boroughs of the city  of  New
  York under a lease granted by the city), express, navigation, pipe line,
  transfer,   baggage   express,  omnibus,  taxicab,  telegraph  or  local
  telephone business, or formed for or principally engaged in the  conduct
  of  two  or  more  such  businesses,  and every corporation, joint-stock
  company or association formed for or principally engaged in the  conduct
  of  a  surface  railroad,  whether  or  not  operated  by  steam, subway
  railroad, elevated  railroad,  palace  car,  sleeping  car  or  trucking
  business  or  principally  engaged  in  the  conduct of two or more such
  businesses and which has made an election pursuant to subdivision ten of
  section one hundred  eighty-three  of  this  article,  and  every  other
  corporation,   joint-stock   company   or   association  formed  for  or
  principally engaged in the conduct of a transportation  or  transmission
  business  (other  than  a  telephone  business)  except  a  corporation,
  joint-stock company or association formed for or principally engaged  in
  the  conduct  of  a  surface railroad, whether or not operated by steam,
  subway railroad, elevated railroad, palace car, sleeping car or trucking
  business or principally engaged in the  conduct  of  two  or  more  such
  businesses  and  which  has  not  made  the  election  provided  for  in
  subdivision ten of section one hundred eighty-three of this article, and
  except a corporation, joint-stock  company  or  association  principally
  engaged  in  the  conduct  of aviation (including air freight forwarders
  acting as principal  and  like  indirect  air  carriers)  and  except  a
  corporation  principally engaged in providing telecommunication services
  between aircraft and dispatcher, aircraft and  air  traffic  control  or
  ground station and ground station (or any combination of the foregoing),
  at  least  ninety  percent  of  the voting stock of which corporation is
  owned, directly or indirectly, by air carriers and  which  corporation's
  principal  function  is  to  fulfill the requirements of (i) the federal
  aviation  administration  (or  the  successor  thereto)  or   (ii)   the
  international  civil  aviation  organization (or the successor thereto),
  relating to the existence of a communication system between aircraft and
  dispatcher, aircraft and air  traffic  control  or  ground  station  and
  ground station (or any combination of the foregoing) for the purposes of
  air safety and navigation, shall pay for the privilege of exercising its
  corporate  franchise,  or of doing business, or of employing capital, or
  of  owning  or   leasing   property   in   the   metropolitan   commuter
  transportation  district  in such corporate or organized capacity, or of
  maintaining an office in such  district,  a  tax  surcharge,  which  tax
  surcharge,  in  addition  to  the  tax  imposed  by  section one hundred
  eighty-four of this article, shall be computed at the rate of  seventeen
  percent  of the tax imposed under such section for such taxable years or
  any part of such taxable  years  after  the  deduction  of  any  credits
  otherwise  allowable  under  this  article; provided, however, that such
  rates of tax surcharge shall be applied only to that portion of the  tax
  imposed  under section one hundred eighty-four of this article after the
  deduction of any credits otherwise allowable under this article which is


 attributable to the taxpayer's business activity carried on  within  the
  metropolitan  commuter  transportation district. Provided, however, that
  for taxable years beginning in two thousand and thereafter, for purposes
  of   this   subdivision  the  tax  imposed  under  section  one  hundred
  eighty-four of this article shall be deemed to have been imposed at  the
  rate  of  three-quarters  of  one  percent, except that in the case of a
  corporation, joint-stock  company  or  association  which  has  made  an
  election pursuant to subdivision ten of section one hundred eighty-three
  of  this article, for purposes of this subdivision the tax imposed under
  section one hundred eighty-four of this article shall be deemed to  have
  been imposed at the rate of six-tenths of one percent.
    The  term  "local  telephone  business" shall have the same meaning as
  such term is used in section one hundred eighty-four  of  this  article.
  The term "telecommunication services" shall have the meaning ascribed to
  such term in section one hundred eighty-six-e of this article.
    2.  (a)  A transportation and transmission corporation shall determine
  the portion of its tax attributable to business activity carried  on  in
  the  metropolitan  commuter transportation district (except as otherwise
  provided for in this subdivision) by multiplying the tax  imposed  under
  section  one  hundred  eighty-four  of  this  article by a fraction, the
  numerator of which is the taxpayer's  mileage  within  the  metropolitan
  commuter  transportation  district,  and the denominator of which is the
  taxpayer's mileage within the entire state during the period covered  by
  the report or reports required by this article.
    (b)  A  corporation  principally  engaged  in the operation of vessels
  shall determine the portion of its tax attributable to business activity
  carried on in the metropolitan commuter transportation  district  during
  the  period covered by the report or reports required by this section by
  multiplying the tax imposed under section  one  hundred  eighty-four  of
  this article by a percentage which represents the ratio of the aggregate
  number of working days of the vessels it owns or leases in all navigable
  lakes,  rivers,  streams  and  waters  within  the metropolitan commuter
  transportation district to the aggregate number of working days  of  all
  the  vessels  it  owns  or leases within the entire state and in the New
  York territorial waters during such period.
    (c) A telephone or telegraph corporation shall determine  the  portion
  of  its  tax  attributable  to  business  activity carried on within the
  metropolitan commuter transportation district  by  multiplying  the  tax
  imposed  under  section  one  hundred eighty-four of this article by the
  ratio of its total gross operating revenue  from  transmission  services
  performed   wholly   within  the  metropolitan  commuter  transportation
  district to its total gross operating revenue from transmission services
  performed within the entire state  during  the  period  covered  by  the
  report or reports required under this article.
    (d)  With  respect  to  other types of transportation and transmission
  corporations or where the tax commission decides that with respect to  a
  certain  corporation  the  method  prescribed  above does not fairly and
  equitably  reflect  gross  earnings  from   all   sources   within   the
  metropolitan  commuter transportation district, the tax commission shall
  prescribe methods  of  allocation  or  apportionment  which  fairly  and
  equitably  reflect gross earnings from all sources within such district.
  Also, the tax  commission  may,  in  order  to  properly  reflect  gross
  earnings,  determine  the  report  period  in  which  any  item of gross
  earnings shall be included without regard to the  method  of  accounting
  employed by a corporation taxable hereunder.
    3.  The  term metropolitan commuter transportation district as used in
  this section  shall  be  defined  pursuant  to  section  twelve  hundred
  sixty-two of the public authorities law.


   4.  Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of state or local law, the
  tax surcharge imposed under this section  shall  not  be  allowed  as  a
  deduction  in  the  computation  of any state or local tax imposed under
  this chapter or any chapter  or  local  law.  Furthermore,  the  credits
  otherwise  allowable under this article shall not be allowed against the
  tax surcharge imposed by this section.
    5.  The  provisions  concerning  reports  under  section  one  hundred
  ninety-two  of  this  article  shall  be  applicable to this section. An
  extension pursuant to section one hundred ninety-three shall be  allowed
  only  if  a  taxpayer  files  with  the  commissioner an application for
  extension in such form as said commissioner may prescribe by  regulation
  and  pays  on or before the date of such filing in addition to any other
  amounts required under this article, either ninety percent of the entire
  tax surcharge required to be paid under this section for the  applicable
  period,  or  not  less  than  the  tax surcharge shown on the taxpayer's
  report for the preceding taxable year, if such  preceding  taxable  year
  was  a  taxable year of twelve months. The tax surcharge imposed by this
  section shall be payable to the commissioner in full  at  the  time  the
  report  is  required  to be filed, and such tax surcharge or the balance
  thereof, imposed on any taxpayer which ceases to exercise its  franchise
  or  be  subject  to  the  tax surcharge imposed by this section shall be
  payable to the commissioner at the time the report  is  required  to  be
  filed,  provided  such  tax  surcharge  of  a domestic corporation which
  continues to possess its franchise shall be subject to adjustment as the
  circumstances  may  require;  all  other  tax  surcharges  of  any  such
  taxpayer,  which  pursuant  to  the foregoing provisions of this section
  would otherwise be  payable  subsequent  to  the  time  such  report  is
  required to be filed, shall nevertheless be payable at such time. All of
  the  provisions  of  this  article  presently  applicable to section one
  hundred eighty-four of this article are applicable to the tax  surcharge
  imposed by this section.




   § 186-a. Tax on the furnishing of utility services. 1. Notwithstanding
  any  other  provision  of  this  chapter, or of any other law, (a) a tax
  equal to three and one-quarter percent  through  December  thirty-first,
  nineteen  hundred ninety-nine, and two and one-half percent on and after
  January first, two thousand of its gross income is hereby  imposed  upon
  every  provider  of  telecommunication  services  doing business in this
  state which is subject to the supervision of  the  state  department  of
  public  service  which  has  a gross income for the year ending December
  thirty-first in excess of five hundred dollars;
    (b) a tax equal to (1)  two  and  five-tenths  percent  on  and  after
  January first, two thousand through December thirty-first, two thousand,
  two  and  forty-five  one  hundredths  percent  from  January first, two
  thousand one through December thirty-first, two thousand  one,  two  and
  four-tenths  percent  from  January  first,  two  thousand  two  through
  December  thirty-first,  two  thousand  two,  two  and  twenty-five  one
  hundredths  percent  from  January  first,  two  thousand  three through
  December  thirty-first,  two  thousand  three,  two  and   one   hundred
  twenty-five  one  thousandths  percent  from January first, two thousand
  four through December thirty-first, two thousand four  and  two  percent
  commencing  January  first,  two  thousand  five  and thereafter of that
  portion  of  its  gross  income   derived   from   the   transportation,
  transmission or distribution of gas or electricity by means of conduits,
  mains, pipes, wires, lines or the like and (2) two and one-tenth percent
  from  January  first,  two  thousand  through December thirty-first, two
  thousand, two percent from  January  first,  two  thousand  one  through
  December  thirty-first,  two  thousand  one, one and nine-tenths percent
  from January first, two thousand two through December thirty-first,  two
  thousand  two,  eighty-five  one  hundredths of one percent from January
  first, two thousand three through December  thirty-first,  two  thousand
  three,  four-tenths of one percent from January first, two thousand four
  through December  thirty-first,  two  thousand  four  and  zero  percent
  commencing  January  first,  two thousand five of all of its other gross
  income, is hereby imposed upon every utility not taxed  under  paragraph
  (a) of this subdivision doing business in this state which is subject to
  the  supervision  of  the state department of public service which has a
  gross income for the year ending December thirty-first in excess of five
  hundred dollars, except  motor  carriers  or  brokers  subject  to  such
  supervision under the public service law; and
    (c)  a  tax  equal  to  three and one-quarter percent through December
  thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine, two  and  one-tenth  percent
  from  January  first,  two  thousand  through December thirty-first, two
  thousand, two percent from  January  first,  two  thousand  one  through
  December  thirty-first,  two  thousand  one, one and nine-tenths percent
  from January first, two thousand two through December thirty-first,  two
  thousand  two,  eighty-five  one  hundredths of one percent from January
  first, two thousand three through December  thirty-first,  two  thousand
  three,  four-tenths of one percent from January first, two thousand four
  through December  thirty-first,  two  thousand  four  and  zero  percent
  commencing  January  first,  two  thousand  five  of its gross operating
  income is hereby imposed upon every other utility doing business in this
  state which has a gross operating income for the  year  ending  December
  thirty-first  in excess of five hundred dollars, which taxes shall be in
  addition to any and all other  taxes  and  fees  imposed  by  any  other
  provision of law for the same period.
    2.  As  used  in  this  section, (a) the word "utility" includes every
  person (including every provider of telecommunication services)  subject
  to  the  supervision  of  the state department of public service, except
  persons engaged in the business of operating on the public  highways  of


 this state one or more omnibuses, having a seating capacity of more than
  seven  persons,  and  persons  engaged  in  the business of operating or
  leasing sleeping and parlor railroad  cars  or  of  operating  railroads
  other than street surface, rapid transit, subway and elevated railroads,
  and also includes every person (whether or not such person is subject to
  such   supervision)   who   sells  gas,  electricity,  steam,  water  or
  refrigeration, delivered through mains, pipes  or  wires,  or  furnishes
  gas,  electric, steam, water or refrigerator service, by means of mains,
  pipes, or wires; regardless of whether  such  activities  are  the  main
  business  of  such  person or are only incidental thereto, or of whether
  use is made of the public streets;
    (b)  the  word  "person"  means  persons,   corporations,   companies,
  associations,  joint-stock  companies  or associations, partnerships and
  limited liability companies, estates,  assignee  of  rents,  any  person
  acting  in a fiduciary capacity, or any other entity, and persons, their
  assignees, lessees,  trustees  or  receivers,  appointed  by  any  court
  whatsoever,  or  by  any  other means, except the state; municipalities,
  political and civil subdivisions of the state or municipality and public
  districts (provided, however, that with respect to gas, electricity  and
  gas  or  electric  service,  including  the  sale of the transportation,
  transmission or distribution of gas or electricity, such municipalities,
  political and civil subdivisions and public districts shall be  excluded
  from the definition of "person" if they own and operate facilities which
  are  used  to  generate  or distribute electricity or distribute gas and
  they distribute and sell such  gas  or  electricity  solely  at  retail,
  solely  within their respective jurisdiction; or provided, further, with
  respect to the sale of electricity or the  transportation,  transmission
  or  distribution  of  electricity, a municipality shall be excluded from
  the definition of "person" if it sells electricity at retail  where  all
  such  electricity (excluding temporary substitution power during outages
  or periods of reduced output) has been generated solely by and purchased
  solely from the state or a public authority of the state);  corporations
  and  associations  which  are  organized  and  operated  exclusively for
  religious, charitable or  educational  purposes,  no  part  of  the  net
  earnings  of  which  inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or
  individual, and which are described in paragraph four of subdivision (a)
  of  section  eleven  hundred  sixteen  of  this   chapter   where   such
  organization  resells such gas or electricity or gas or electric service
  as landlord to its tenants in buildings owned by such organization;  and
  excepting  a  corporation  organized  and  operated  exclusively for the
  purpose of leasing from a  city  in  this  state  a  water-works  system
  designed  to supply water at cost to users thereof for discharge, either
  before or after industrial use, into a river within such city  in  order
  to improve the flow and condition of such river and thereby to provide a
  means to relieve such river from pollution;
    (c)  the words "gross income" mean and include receipts received in or
  by  reason  of  any  sale,  conditional  or  otherwise,  (except   sales
  hereinafter  referred  to  with  respect  to  which  it is provided that
  profits from the sale shall be included in gross income) made or service
  rendered for ultimate consumption or use by the purchaser in this state,
  including cash, credits and property of any kind or nature  (whether  or
  not  such  sale is made or such service is rendered for profit), without
  any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the
  cost of materials used, labor or services or other  costs,  interest  or
  discount paid, or any other expense whatsoever.
    (1)   Provided,   however,   that  all  receipts  from  sales  of  the
  transportation, transmission or distribution of gas  or  electricity  by
  means  of  conduits, mains, pipes, wires, lines or the like, rendered or


 performed in this state,  shall  be  included  in  gross  income  except
  receipts   from   (i)  sales  of  the  transportation,  transmission  or
  distribution of gas or electricity to (A) a utility (excluding a  public
  authority)  which  is  supervised  by this state or another jurisdiction
  (where an element of such supervision includes rate regulation and,  for
  a  utility supervised by another jurisdiction, such supervision includes
  rate regulation and such gas or electricity is  delivered  for  ultimate
  consumption  or  use  outside this state), (B) a municipality which owns
  and operates  facilities  which  are  used  to  generate  or  distribute
  electricity  or  distribute  gas  and  which  distributes and sells such
  electricity or gas  solely  at  retail,  solely  within  its  respective
  jurisdiction,  or (C) a public authority of this state where such public
  authority is primarily engaged in the  generation  and  transmission  or
  distribution  of  electricity  or the distribution of electricity or gas
  and at least ninety-five percent of the assets of which are so  devoted,
  provided, that, if the service area or district of the authority is less
  than the entire state, the excluded receipt shall be limited to receipts
  derived from the sale of transportation, transmission or distribution of
  gas  or  electricity,  which  electricity  or  gas  will be sold by such
  authority at retail within its service area or district; where,  as  the
  case  may  be, such utility or authority purchasing such transportation,
  transmission or distribution sells  the  gas  or  electricity  being  so
  transported,   transmitted   or   distributed,   (ii)   sales   of   the
  transportation,  transmission  or  distribution  of  electricity  to   a
  municipality  where the electricity being transported has been purchased
  by such municipality and has been  generated  solely  by  and  purchased
  solely  from  the state or a public authority of the state (except where
  the electricity being  transported  constitutes  temporary  substitution
  power  being  supplied  during outages or periods of reduced output) and
  where such municipality purchasing such transportation, transmission  or
  distribution,  sells  solely  at  retail,  solely  within its respective
  jurisdiction, the  electricity  being  so  transported,  transmitted  or
  distributed,   (iii)   sales  of  the  transportation,  transmission  or
  distribution of gas or  electricity  to  corporations  and  associations
  which  are  organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable
  or educational purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures  to
  the  benefit  of  any  private  shareholder or individual, and which are
  described in paragraph four of subdivision (a) of section eleven hundred
  sixteen  of  this  chapter  where   such   organization   resells   such
  transportation, transmission or distribution as part of a bundled gas or
  electric  service  as landlord to its tenants in buildings owned by such
  organization, or (iv)  sales  of  the  transportation,  transmission  or
  distribution   of   gas  or  electricity,  not  otherwise  excluded,  to
  nonresidential customers, but only  in  accordance  with  the  following
  schedule:  for  the sales during the calendar years two thousand and two
  thousand one, zero percent of the receipts  from  such  sales  shall  be
  excluded;  for  the  sales  during  the  calendar year two thousand two,
  twenty-five percent of the receipts from such sales shall  be  excluded;
  for  sales during the calendar year two thousand three, fifty percent of
  the receipts from such sales shall be excluded;  for  sales  during  the
  calendar  year  two  thousand four, seventy-five percent of the receipts
  from such sales shall be excluded; and for sales thereafter, one hundred
  percent of such sales shall  be  excluded.  For  the  purposes  of  this
  clause,  the term "nonresidential customers" means those customers whose
  use of gas or electricity, or gas or electric service does  not  qualify
  for  the  reduced  rate  of  sales  and  compensating  use  tax  on gas,
  electricity, or gas or electric service  under  section  eleven  hundred
  five-A of article twenty-eight of this chapter.


   (2)  Provided,  further,  receipts  received  from  the  sale  of  the
  transportation, transmission or distribution of gas or electricity shall
  mean the receipts received from customers representing the  noncommodity
  charges for gas or electric service.
    (3)  Provided,  further,  gross  income  with respect to a provider of
  telecommunication services shall not include receipts from the  sale  of
  telecommunication  services  as such services are defined in section one
  hundred eighty-six-e of this article.
    (4) Provided, further, sales of  gas,  electricity,  steam,  water  or
  refrigeration  or gas, electric, steam, water or refrigerator service to
  a landlord that is a person as defined in this subdivision for resale by
  such landlord to a tenant, for consumption by such tenant as an incident
  to such landlord's activity of renting premises to such tenant, shall be
  subject to the tax imposed under this section even though such sales are
  not for  ultimate  consumption  by  such  landlord.  Provided,  further,
  receipts   derived   by  a  landlord  from  the  resale  for  such  gas,
  electricity, steam, water or refrigeration or furnishing gas,  electric,
  steam,   water   or   refrigerator  service  to  such  tenant  shall  be
  conclusively presumed to be equal to such landlord's cost of  the  same,
  and,  if  the  tax  under  this  section was imposed on the sale to such
  landlord, no additional tax under this section shall  be  owing  on  the
  sale  by  such  landlord to such tenant. If, however, the tax under this
  section was not imposed on such sale to the landlord, then such landlord
  on the sale to its tenant shall file a return hereunder  based  on  such
  landlord's  cost  (including any associated transportation cost) of such
  gas, electricity, steam, water or refrigeration or gas, electric, steam,
  water or refrigerator service.
    (5) "Gross income" also includes profits from the sale of  securities;
  also profits from the sale of real property growing out of the ownership
  or  use  of  or  interest in such property; also profit from the sale of
  personal property (other than property of a kind which would properly be
  included in the inventory of the taxpayer if on hand at the close of the
  period for which  a  return  is  made);  also  receipts  from  interest,
  dividends,  and  royalties, derived from sources within this state other
  than such as are received from a corporation a majority of whose  voting
  stock is owned by the taxpaying utility, without any deduction therefrom
  for  any  expenses  whatsoever  incurred  in connection with the receipt
  thereof, also profits from any transaction (except sales for resale  and
  rentals) within this state whatsoever;
    (d)  the  words  "gross  operating  income"  mean and include receipts
  received in or by reason of any sale, conditional or otherwise, made for
  ultimate consumption or use by the purchaser of gas, electricity, steam,
  water or refrigeration, or in or by reason of the  furnishing  for  such
  consumption  or  use  of  gas,  electric,  steam,  water or refrigerator
  service in this state, including cash, credits and property of any  kind
  or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the
  property  sold,  the  cost of materials used, labor or services or other
  costs, interest or discount paid,  or  any  other  expenses  whatsoever.
  Provided,  however,  there shall be excluded from gross operating income
  receipts representing  the  amount  received  from  the  resale  of  the
  transportation,  transmission  or  distribution of gas or electricity in
  this state where such transportation, transmission or distribution being
  resold is provided by a utility subject to tax under  paragraph  (b)  of
  subdivision  one  of  this section; the receipts representing the amount
  received  from  resale   of   such   transportation,   transmission   or
  distribution  shall  be  the  amount  received  for such transportation,
  transmission or distribution by such utility  which  initially  provided
  such  transportation,  transmission or distributions. Provided, further,


 sales of  gas,  electricity,  steam,  water  or  refrigeration  or  gas,
  electric,  steam,  water or refrigerator service to a landlord that is a
  person as defined in this subdivision for resale by such landlord  to  a
  tenant, for consumption by such tenant as an incident to such landlord's
  activity of renting premises to such tenant, shall be subject to the tax
  imposed  under  this section even though such sales are not for ultimate
  consumption by such landlord. Provided, further, receipts derived  by  a
  landlord  from  the  resale  of  such  gas, electricity, steam, water or
  refrigeration or furnishing gas, electric, steam, water or  refrigerator
  service  to  such  tenant  shall be conclusively presumed to be equal to
  such landlord's cost of the same, and, if the tax under this section was
  imposed on the sale to such  landlord,  no  additional  tax  under  this
  section  shall  be owing on the sale by such landlord to such tenant. If
  the tax under this section was not imposed on such sale to the landlord,
  then such landlord on the  sale  to  its  tenant  shall  file  a  return
  hereunder  based  on  such  landlord's  cost  (including  any associated
  transportation  cost)  of  such  gas,  electricity,  steam,   water   or
  refrigeration or gas, electric, steam, water or refrigerator service;
    (e)  the term "telecommunication services" shall have the same meaning
  as such term is defined in section  one  hundred  eighty-six-e  of  this
  article;
    (f)  The  word "premises" means and includes any real property or part
  thereof, and any structure thereon or space therein; and
    (g) the word "tenant" means and includes a person paying, or  required
  to   pay,  rent  for  premises  as  a  lessee,  sublessee,  licensee  or
  concessionaire.
    2-a. Tax adjustment for utilities with financial  resource  asset  for
  taxable  years  commencing  on and after January first, nineteen hundred
  ninety-two.  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  this  section  to  the
  contrary,  in  the  event  that  a  utility  which is taxable under this
  section is an electric corporation, as defined in  subdivision  thirteen
  of  section  two  of  the  public  service  law, which, on or before the
  effective date of this subdivision, has been  permitted  by  the  public
  service  commission  to  establish  for  ratemaking purposes a financial
  resource asset (which asset shall represent, in an  amount  approved  by
  the  public  service  commission on or before the effective date of this
  subdivision, the present value of a stream of future cash flows,  rather
  than  actual  land,  land  rights,  physical structures, improvements or
  other physical items, franchises or intangible plant), such an  electric
  corporation  shall be allowed an adjustment by way of the allowance of a
  deduction from its gross income subject to tax under subdivision one  of
  this  section  equal  to  the  amount by which (a) that portion of gross
  income received in any year  after  nineteen  hundred  ninety-one  which
  represents  the total return authorized by the public service commission
  to be recovered in rates on  the  financial  resource  asset,  including
  amortization,  exceeds  (b) that portion of gross income received in the
  twelve-month  period  immediately  preceding  the  month  in  which  the
  financial resource asset is established pursuant to authorization of the
  public  service  commission  and  which represents (i) the total revenue
  derived from any financial  stability  adjustment  and  (ii)  the  total
  return  on  interest-bearing  construction  work in progress in the rate
  base permitted by the public service commission. No electric corporation
  shall be allowed the tax adjustment authorized by this subdivision until
  it shall file, together with the return required to be filed pursuant to
  subdivision four of this section, a certificate for the  period  covered
  by  the  return from the department of public service verifying that the
  calculation of such tax adjustment complies with this  subdivision.  The
  adjustment  to  gross  income  allowed  by this subdivision shall not be


 applicable in calculating any other tax  imposed  or  authorized  to  be
  imposed  by  this  chapter  or  any  other  law,  and  the amount of tax
  surcharge equal to seventeen per centum imposed pursuant to section  one
  hundred  eighty-six-c  of  this  article,  and  the  amount  of  the tax
  surcharge  imposed  under  section  one  hundred  eighty-eight  of  this
  article,  shall  be calculated and payable as if the adjustment provided
  in this subdivision were not allowed.
    3. Every utility subject to tax under this  section  shall  keep  such
  records  of  its  business  and  in  such form as the tax commission may
  require, and such records shall be  preserved  for  a  period  of  three
  years,  except  that the tax commission may consent to their destruction
  within that period or may require that they be kept longer.
    4. Every utility subject to tax hereunder shall  file,  on  or  before
  March  fifteenth  of  each  year,  a  return  for  the year ended on the
  preceding December thirty-first,  for  taxable  years  beginning  before
  January  first,  two  thousand  sixteen,  except  that the year ended on
  December thirty-first, nineteen hundred seventy-six shall be deemed, for
  the purposes of this subdivision,  to  have  commenced  on  June  first,
  nineteen  hundred  seventy-six,  and  shall  file,  on  or  before April
  fifteenth of each year, a return for the year  ended  on  the  preceding
  December  thirty-first,  for taxable years beginning on or after January
  first, two thousand sixteen, including any  period  for  which  the  tax
  imposed  hereby  or  by any amendment hereof is effective, each of which
  returns shall state the gross income or gross operating income  for  the
  period  covered  by  each  such  return. Returns shall be filed with the
  commissioner of taxation and finance on a form to be  furnished  by  the
  commissioner  for  such  purpose  and  shall  contain  such  other data,
  information or matter as the commissioner may  require  to  be  included
  therein.  Notwithstanding  the foregoing provisions of this subdivision,
  the commissioner may require any utility to file an annual return, which
  shall contain any data specified  by  the  commissioner,  regardless  of
  whether  the  utility  is  subject  to  tax  under this section; and the
  commissioner may require a landlord selling to a tenant  gas,  electric,
  steam,  water or refrigeration or furnishing gas, electric, steam, water
  or refrigerator service, where the same has been subjected to tax  under
  this  section  on  the  sale to such landlord, to file, on or before the
  fifteenth day of March of each year, for taxable years beginning  before
  January  first, two thousand sixteen, and on or before the fifteenth day
  of April of each year, for taxable years beginning on or  after  January
  first, two thousand sixteen, an information return for the year ended on
  the preceding December thirty-first, covering such year in such form and
  containing such data as the commissioner may specify. Every return shall
  have  annexed  thereto a certification by the head of the utility making
  the same, or of the owner or of a co-partner thereof, or of a  principal
  officer  of  the  corporation,  if  such  business  be  conducted  by  a
  corporation, to the effect that the  statements  contained  therein  are
  true.
    5. If any provision of this section conflicts with any other provision
  contained  in this article, the provision of this section shall control,
  but the provisions of this  article  which  do  not  conflict  with  the
  provisions  of  this section shall apply with respect to the taxes under
  this section, so far as they are, or may be made applicable.
    6. The tax imposed by this section shall be  charged  against  and  be
  paid  by  the  utility  and  may  be  added  as a separate item to bills
  rendered by the utility to customers. Upon  request  the  utility  shall
  furnish  a statement of the amount of tax imposed by this section to its
  customers for bills rendered on or after January first, two thousand.


   7. Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this or any  other
  law,  in the event the city of New York shall enact a local law imposing
  a tax on utilities, such as it imposed by this section, except as to the
  rate of tax, the tax commission, in its discretion, may arrange with the
  chief  fiscal  officer of said city for the collection by him of the tax
  imposed by this section with respect to items that enter  into  the  tax
  base  for both the tax imposed by said city and that imposed pursuant to
  this section, and for the remittance by him of the tax imposed  by  this
  section  to  the  tax  commission  for  disposition  as  in this article
  provided. If such an arrangement be made,  all  the  provisions  of  the
  local  law  of said city imposing the local tax shall apply with respect
  to the tax imposed by this section in the same manner as  if  the  local
  tax rate had included the tax imposed by this section.
    9.  Notwithstanding  any  other provision contained in this chapter or
  any other  law,  any  surcharge  collected  or  any  administrative  fee
  retained  by  any telephone corporation acting as collection agent for a
  municipality pursuant to the provisions of article six of the county law
  shall not be considered as nor included in the  determination  of  gross
  income or gross operating income of or by such corporation.




   § 186-c. Metropolitan transportation business tax surcharge on utility
  services and excise tax on sale of telecommunication services.
    1.  (a)  (1) Every utility doing business in the metropolitan commuter
  transportation district shall pay a tax surcharge, in  addition  to  the
  tax  imposed  by section one hundred eighty-six-a of this article, to be
  computed at the rate of seventeen percent of the tax imposed under  such
  section  after  the  deduction of credits otherwise allowable under this
  article except any utility credit provided for by article thirteen-A  of
  this  chapter; provided, however, that such rates of tax surcharge shall
  be applied only to that portion of the tax  imposed  under  section  one
  hundred  eighty-six-a  of  this  article  after the deduction of credits
  otherwise allowable  under  this  article,  except  any  utility  credit
  provided   for   by   article  thirteen-A  of  this  chapter,  which  is
  attributable to the taxpayer's gross income or  gross  operating  income
  from  business  activity  carried  on  within  the metropolitan commuter
  transportation district.
    (2) Provided however, that in  the  case  of  the  tax  imposed  under
  paragraph  (a) of subdivision one of section one hundred eighty-six-a of
  this article (relating to providers of telecommunications services) such
  tax surcharge shall be calculated as if the tax  imposed  under  section
  one hundred eighty-six-a of this article were imposed at a rate of three
  and one-half percent.
    (b)  (1) In addition to the surcharge imposed by paragraph (a) of this
  subdivision, there is hereby imposed a surcharge on the  gross  receipts
  from  telecommunication  services,  except  for  the gross receipts from
  mobile  telecommunication  services  that  are  subject  to  tax   under
  subparagraph  two  of  this  paragraph,  relating  to  the  metropolitan
  commuter transportation district at the rate of seventeen percent of the
  state tax rate under section one hundred eighty-six-e of  this  article.
  All  the  definitions  and  other  provisions  of  section  one  hundred
  eighty-six-e of this article shall apply to  the  tax  imposed  by  this
  subparagraph  with  such modification and limitation as may be necessary
  (including substituting the words "metropolitan commuter  transportation
  district"  for "state" where appropriate) in order to adapt the language
  of such  section  one  hundred  eighty-six-e  of  this  article  to  the
  surcharge imposed by this subparagraph within such metropolitan commuter
  transportation   district  so  as  to  include  (i)  any  intra-district
  telecommunication services, (ii)  any  inter-district  telecommunication
  services  which  originate or terminate in such district and are charged
  to a service address therein regardless of where the amounts charged for
  such services are billed or ultimately paid, and (iii) as apportioned to
  such district, private  telecommunication  services.  Provided  however,
  such  tax  surcharge  shall  be  calculated  as if the tax imposed under
  section one hundred eighty-six-e of this article were imposed at a  rate
  of three and one-half percent.
    (2)  In  addition  to  the  surcharge imposed by paragraph (a) of this
  subdivision, there is hereby imposed a surcharge on the  gross  receipts
  from  mobile  telecommunication  services  relating  to the metropolitan
  commuter  transportation  district  at  the  rate  of  seven-tenths  and
  two-hundredths  and  one-thousandth  percent on and after May first, two
  thousand fifteen. All the definitions and other  provisions  of  section
  one  hundred eighty-six-e of this article shall apply to the tax imposed
  by this subparagraph with such modification and  limitation  as  may  be
  necessary  (including  substituting  the  words  "metropolitan  commuter
  transportation district" for "state"  where  appropriate)  in  order  to
  adapt  the  language  of  such  section one hundred eighty-six-e of this
  article to the  surcharge  imposed  by  this  subparagraph  within  such
  metropolitan  commuter  transportation  district  so  as  to include any


 mobile telecommunications service provided by a  home  service  provider
  where  the  mobile telecommunications customer's place of primary use is
  within such metropolitan commuter transportation district.
    2.  If  the tax imposed under section one hundred eighty-six-a of this
  article is on the taxpayer's  gross  income,  the  portion  of  the  tax
  attributable  to  gross  income from business activity carried on within
  the metropolitan commuter transportation district shall be determined by
  multiplying the tax imposed under section one  hundred  eighty-six-a  of
  this  article  by  the  ratio  of  the  taxpayer's gross income from all
  sources within the metropolitan commuter transportation district to  its
  gross income from all sources within the entire state.
    3.  If  the tax imposed under section one hundred eighty-six-a of this
  article is on the taxpayer's gross operating income, the portion of  the
  tax  attributable  to  gross  operating  income  from  business activity
  carried on within  the  metropolitan  commuter  transportation  district
  shall  be  determined  by  multiplying the tax imposed under section one
  hundred eighty-six-a of this article by  the  ratio  of  the  taxpayer's
  gross operating income from all sources within the metropolitan commuter
  transportation  district  to its gross operating income from all sources
  within the entire state.
    4. The provisions concerning reports  and  returns  under  subdivision
  four  of section one hundred eighty-six-a and subdivision six of section
  one hundred eighty-six-e of this article, as the case may be,  shall  be
  applicable to this section. An extension pursuant to section one hundred
  ninety-three  of  this article shall be allowed only if a taxpayer files
  with the commissioner an application for  extension  in  such  form  and
  manner  as  said commissioner may prescribe by regulation and pays on or
  before the date of such filing in addition to any other amounts required
  under this article, either ninety percent of the  entire  tax  surcharge
  required to be paid under this section for the applicable period, or not
  less  than  the  tax  surcharge  shown  on the taxpayer's report for the
  preceding taxable year, if such preceding taxable  year  was  a  taxable
  year  of  twelve months. The tax surcharge imposed by this section shall
  be payable to the commissioner  in  full  at  the  time  the  report  is
  required  to  be  filed,  and such tax surcharge or the balance thereof,
  imposed on any taxpayer which ceases to exercise  its  franchise  or  be
  subject to the tax surcharge imposed by this section shall be payable to
  the  commissioner  at  the  time  the  report  is  required to be filed,
  provided such tax surcharge of a domestic corporation which continues to
  possess  its  franchise  shall  be  subject   to   adjustment   as   the
  circumstances  may  require;  all  other  tax  surcharges  of  any  such
  taxpayer, which pursuant to the foregoing  provisions  of  this  section
  would  otherwise  be  payable  subsequent  to  the  time  such report is
  required to be filed, shall nevertheless be payable at such time. All of
  the provisions of this  article  presently  applicable  to  section  one
  hundred  eighty-six-a  and  section  one  hundred  eighty-six-e  of this
  article, as the case may be, are applicable to the tax surcharge imposed
  by this section.
    5. Notwithstanding any other provision of state or local law, the  tax
  surcharge  imposed  by  this section shall not be allowed as a deduction
  and shall, to the extent  deductible  in  determining  federal  adjusted
  gross  income,  be  added  to  federal  adjusted  gross  income,  in the
  computation of any tax imposed under this chapter or any  other  chapter
  of  state  or  local  law.  Furthermore, the credits otherwise allowable
  under this article shall  not  be  allowed  against  the  tax  surcharge
  imposed by this section.


   6.  The  term metropolitan commuter transportation district as used in
  this section  shall  be  defined  pursuant  to  section  twelve  hundred
  sixty-two of the public authorities law.




   §  186-d.  Transportation  business  tax  on  utility services in Erie
  county. 1. Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the  contrary,
  the county of Erie, acting through its local legislative body, is hereby
  authorized  and empowered to adopt and amend local laws imposing in such
  county a tax such as is imposed by section one hundred  eighty-six-a  of
  this  chapter,  except  that  the  rate  thereof  shall not be less than
  one-half of one per centum, and shall not exceed three-quarters  of  one
  per  centum,  of  gross income or of gross operating income, as the case
  may be, and shall make provision  for  the  collection  thereof  by  the
  comptroller of such county. A tax imposed pursuant to this section shall
  apply  to  gross  income  or gross operating income, as the case may be,
  attributable to such county and shall be in  addition  to  any  and  all
  other taxes.
    2.  Revenue  resulting from the imposition of taxes authorized by this
  section heretofore or hereafter imposed shall be paid into the  treasury
  of  such  county,  and  shall  be  credited  to  and deposited in a mass
  transportation operating assistance fund.
    3. The county shall, not later than the fifteenth  day  following  the
  termination  of a calendar quarter for which tax revenue is received, or
  at such other times as may be agreed by  the  county  of  Erie  and  the
  Niagara  Frontier  transportation authority, pay to the Niagara Frontier
  transportation authority a sum equal to the amount of the transportation
  business tax on utility services actually collected by said county  less
  any   amount  actually  refunded  during  such  quarter,  and  less  any
  reasonable costs incurred by  said  county  in  the  administration  and
  collection of the tax authorized by this section. Payments made from the
  mass  transportation  operating  assistance fund to the Niagara Frontier
  transportation authority shall be  used  only  for  operations  of  mass
  transportation  services provided by the Niagara Frontier transportation
  authority within the county of Erie. All such payments shall be made  in
  accordance  with the provisions of a contract between the county of Erie
  and the Niagara Frontier transportation authority.
    4. All of the provisions of section one hundred eighty-six-a  of  this
  chapter,  so  far  as  the same are or can be made applicable, with such
  limitations as are set forth in this section, and such modifications  as
  may  be necessary in order to adapt such taxes to local conditions shall
  apply to the taxes authorized by this section.
    5. Any final determination of the amount of any tax payable  hereunder
  shall  be reviewable for error, illegality or unconstitutionality or any
  other reason whatsoever by a proceeding under article  seventy-eight  of
  the  civil practice law and rules if application therefor is made to the
  supreme court within ninety days after the giving of the notice of  such
  final  determination,  provided, however, that any such proceeding under
  article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules shall  not  be
  instituted unless the amount of any tax sought to be reviewed, with such
  interest  and  penalties  thereon as may be provided for by local law or
  regulation, shall be first deposited and an undertaking filed,  in  such
  amount  and  with  such sureties as a justice of the supreme court shall
  approve to the effect that if such proceeding be dismissed  or  the  tax
  confirmed,  the  petitioner  will  pay  all  costs and charges which may
  accrue in such proceeding.
    6. Where any  tax  imposed  hereunder  shall  have  been  erroneously,
  illegally or unconstitutionally collected and application for the refund
  thereof  duly  made  to  the proper fiscal officer or officers, and such
  officer or officers shall have made a determination denying such refund,
  such determination shall be reviewable by  a  proceeding  under  article
  seventy-eight  of  the  civil practice law and rules; provided, however,
  that such proceeding is instituted within thirty days after  the  giving


 of  the notice of such denial, that a final determination of tax due was
  not previously made, and that an undertaking is filed  with  the  proper
  fiscal  officer  or  officers in such amount and with such sureties as a
  justice  of  the  supreme court shall approve to the effect that if such
  proceeding be dismissed or the tax confirmed, the  petitioner  will  pay
  all costs and charges which may accrue in such proceeding.




   §  186-e. Excise tax on telecommunication services. 1. Definitions. As
  used in this section,  where  not  otherwise  specifically  defined  and
  unless a different meaning is clearly required:
    (a)  (1)  "Gross receipt" means the amount received in or by reason of
  any sale, conditional or otherwise, of telecommunication services or  in
  or  by  reason  of  the  furnishing of telecommunication services. Gross
  receipt from the sale of mobile telecommunications service provided by a
  home   service   provider   shall   include    "charges    for    mobile
  telecommunications service" as described in paragraph one of subdivision
  (l)  of  section  eleven  hundred  eleven of this chapter, regardless of
  where the mobile telecommunications service  originates,  terminates  or
  passes  through.    Gross receipt is expressed in money, whether paid in
  cash, credit or property of any kind or nature, and shall be  determined
  without  any  deduction  therefrom on account of the cost of the service
  sold or the cost of materials, labor or services used  or  other  costs,
  interest  or discount paid, or any other expenses whatsoever except that
  there shall, however, be allowed a deduction for bad debts with  respect
  to  charges  previously subjected to the tax hereunder when the debt has
  become  worthless  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting
  principles  consistently  applied by the taxpayer. "Amount received" for
  the purpose of the definition  of  gross  receipt,  as  the  term  gross
  receipt  is  used  throughout this article, means the amount charged for
  the provision of a telecommunication service.
    (2) (A) Any charge for a service or property billed by or for a mobile
  telecommunications customer's home service provider shall be  deemed  to
  be  provided  by  such mobile telecommunications customer's home service
  provider.
    (B) Charges for mobile telecommunications service that are provided or
  deemed to be provided by a  mobile  telecommunications  customer's  home
  service  provider  shall be sourced to the taxing jurisdiction where the
  mobile telecommunications customer's place of primary  use  is  located,
  regardless  of  where  the mobile telecommunications service originates,
  terminates or passes through.
    (b)(1) "Interexchange carrier" means any provider of telecommunication
  services between two or  more  exchanges  that  qualifies  as  a  common
  carrier. Common carrier means any person engaged as a common carrier for
  hire in intrastate, interstate or foreign telecommunication services.
    (2)  "Local  carrier" means any provider of telecommunication services
  for hire to the public, which is  subject  to  the  supervision  of  the
  public  service  commission  and  is engaged in providing carrier access
  service to a switched network. For the sole purpose of  the  application
  of  the sale for resale exclusion under paragraph (b) of subdivision two
  of this section, a reference to an  "interexchange  carrier"  or  "local
  carrier"   shall   include   a   cellular  common  carrier  which  is  a
  facilities-based  cellular  common   carrier   without   regard   to   a
  determination   of   whether   such   carrier   is  providing  local  or
  interexchange service as such.
    (c) "Person" means  persons,  corporations,  companies,  associations,
  joint-stock companies or associations, partnerships or limited liability
  companies,  estates, assignee of rents, any person acting in a fiduciary
  capacity, or any other entity, and persons,  their  assignees,  lessees,
  trustees  or  receivers,  appointed  by  any court whatsoever, or by any
  other means, except  the  state,  municipalities,  political  and  civil
  subdivisions   of  the  state  or  municipality,  public  districts  and
  corporations and associations organized  and  operated  exclusively  for
  religious,  charitable  or  educational  purposes,  no  part  of the net
  earnings of which inures to the benefit of any  private  shareholder  or
  individual.


   (d)    "Private   telecommunication   service"   means   a   dedicated
  telecommunication service  that  entitles  the  user  or  users  to  the
  exclusive  or  priority  use  of  a  communications  channel or group of
  channels  from  one  or  more  locations  to  one  or  more   locations.
  "Exclusive" as used herein means that the user-subscribers have use of a
  communications  channel  to  the  exclusion  of  all  others who are not
  authorized to use such channel, and "priority" as used herein means that
  only authorized user-subscribers, as opposed  to  unauthorized  persons,
  receive   preferential   use   of  a  communications  channel,  but  not
  necessarily a preference to the use of such channel with respect to each
  other.
    (e) "Provider of telecommunication  services"  means  any  person  who
  furnishes  or  sells  telecommunications  services regardless of whether
  such activities are the  main  business  of  such  person  or  are  only
  incidental  thereto.  Where  a  reference is made to a "utility" in this
  chapter in regard to the tax imposed by this section or by this  section
  and  section one hundred eighty-six-a of this article, such reference to
  "utility" shall be deemed to  include  a  reference  to  a  provider  of
  telecommunication services.
    (f)  "Service  address"  means  the  location of the telecommunication
  equipment from which the telecommunication is originated or at which the
  telecommunication is received from  the  provider  of  telecommunication
  services.  The  foregoing  rule  is  amplified,  but not limited, by the
  following special provisions, which are listed in order of  priority  of
  application  so  that  only  the first applicable special provision will
  apply,  if   more   than   one   potentially   applies:   (i)   if   the
  telecommunication originates or terminates in this state and the service
  is  charged  to telecommunication equipment which is not associated with
  the origination or termination of the telecommunication (for example, by
  the use of a calling card or third party billing) and  the  location  of
  such   equipment   is   in  this  state,  the  service  address  of  the
  telecommunication will be deemed to  be  in  this  state;  (ii)  if  the
  service  is  obtained  through  the use of a credit or payment mechanism
  such as a bank, travel, credit or  debit  card  or  if  the  service  is
  obtained by charging telecommunication equipment which is not associated
  with  the  origination  or  termination  of  the  telecommunication (for
  example, by the use of a calling card or third party  billing)  and  the
  equipment  is  not  located  in the state of origination or termination,
  then the service address is deemed to be the location of the origination
  of the telecommunication; and (iii) if the  service  address  is  not  a
  defined  location,  as in the case of mobile telephones, paging systems,
  maritime systems, air-to-ground systems and the  like,  service  address
  shall  mean  the  location  of  the  subscriber's  primary  use  of  the
  telecommunication   equipment   as   defined   by   telephone    number,
  authorization  code,  or  location  in  this state where bills are sent,
  provided, however, the location of the mobile telephone switching office
  or similar facility in  this  state  that  receives  and  transmits  the
  signals  of  the  telecommunication  will  be deemed the service address
  where the mobile telephone  switching  office  or  similar  facility  is
  outside the subscriber's assigned service area.
    (g)  "Telecommunication  services"  means  telephony or telegraphy, or
  telephone or telegraph service,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  any
  transmission  of voice, image, data, information and paging, through the
  use of wire, cable, fiber-optic, laser, microwave, radio wave, satellite
  or similar media or any combination thereof and shall  include  services
  that  are  ancillary to the provision of telephone service (such as, but
  not limited to, dial tone, basic service,  directory  information,  call
  forwarding,  caller-identification,  call-waiting and the like) and also


 include any equipment and services  provided  therewith.  Provided,  the
  definition  of  telecommunication services shall not apply to separately
  stated charges for any service which alters the substantive  content  of
  the message received by the recipient from that sent.
    (h)  For  the  purpose  of  applying the provisions of this section to
  mobile telecommunications service, the  following  terms  when  used  in
  relation  to  mobile telecommunications service shall be defined as such
  terms are defined in section eleven hundred one of this chapter: "mobile
  telecommunications service," "mobile telecommunications customer," "home
  service  provider,"  "licensed  service  area,"   "reseller,"   "serving
  carrier," "place of primary use" and "taxing jurisdiction".
    2.  Imposition.  (a)  (1) There is hereby imposed an excise tax on the
  sale of telecommunication  services,  except  for  the  sale  of  mobile
  telecommunication  services  that  are subject to tax under subparagraph
  two  of  this  paragraph,  by  any  person  which  is  a   provider   of
  telecommunication  services,  to  be paid by such person, at the rate of
  three and one-half percent prior  to  October  first,  nineteen  hundred
  ninety-eight, three and one-quarter percent from October first, nineteen
  hundred  ninety-eight  through  December  thirty-first, nineteen hundred
  ninety-nine, and two and one-half percent on and  after  January  first,
  two thousand of gross receipt from: (i) any intrastate telecommunication
  services;   (ii)  any  interstate  and  international  telecommunication
  services   (other   than   interstate    and    international    private
  telecommunication  services)  which originate or terminate in this state
  and which telecommunication services are charged to a service address in
  this state, regardless of where the amounts charged  for  such  services
  are  billed  or  ultimately paid; and (iii) interstate and international
  private telecommunication services, the gross receipt to which  the  tax
  shall  apply  shall  be determined as prescribed in subdivision three of
  this section.
    (2) There is hereby imposed an  excise  tax  on  the  sale  of  mobile
  telecommunication  services,  by  any  person  which  is  a  provider of
  telecommunication services, to be paid by such person, at  the  rate  of
  two and nine-tenths percent on and after May first, two thousand fifteen
  of gross receipts from any mobile telecommunications service provided by
  a  home  service provider where the mobile telecommunications customer's
  place of primary use is within this state.
    (b) (1) Sale for resale exclusion. There shall be  excluded  from  the
  tax  imposed by this section the sale of telecommunication services to a
  provider of telecommunication services where such services are purchased
  by such  provider  for  resale  as  telecommunication  services  to  its
  purchasers. (i) All gross receipts are deemed taxable to the provider of
  telecommunication  services  under  this  section,  unless the provider,
  within ninety days after the provision  of  telecommunication  services,
  has  taken  from  the  purchaser a certificate of resale in the form the
  commissioner has prescribed,  to  document  that  the  telecommunication
  services were purchased for resale as telecommunication services. If the
  provider  of  telecommunication  services  obtains  a properly completed
  certificate of resale from the purchaser within ninety  days  after  the
  provision  of  telecommunication  services, that certificate constitutes
  conclusive proof that the  telecommunication  services  covered  by  the
  certificate  were  sold  for  resale  as telecommunication services, the
  provider is relieved of liability for the tax due on the sale  of  those
  services,  and  the  burden  of  proving  that  the gross receipt is not
  taxable is on the purchaser. Where a certificate of resale  is  received
  within  the  time  prescribed, but is deficient in some material manner,
  and that deficiency is later removed, the  receipt  of  the  certificate
  will be deemed to have satisfied all of the requirements of this clause.


 Where  a  certificate of resale is not received within ninety days after
  the provision of telecommunication services, the  provider  may,  within
  sixty  days  after  a request by the commissioner, either prove that the
  telecommunication  services  were  sold  for resale as telecommunication
  services, or obtain a fully completed certificate of exemption from  the
  purchaser.  A  certificate  of  exemption obtained within this sixty day
  period  constitutes  evidence,  but  not  conclusive  proof,  that   the
  telecommunication  services  covered  by  the  certificate were sold for
  resale as telecommunication services. The certificate of exemption  will
  be  administered  in a manner consistent with subdivision (c) of section
  eleven hundred thirty-two of this chapter.
    (ii) A certificate of resale is not properly completed if it does  not
  include  the purchaser's certificate of authority number issued pursuant
  to section eleven  hundred  thirty-four  of  this  chapter,  or  if  the
  purchaser's  certificate  of authority has expired or is invalid because
  it has been suspended or revoked as provided in section  eleven  hundred
  thirty-four of this chapter and the commissioner has furnished providers
  of   telecommunication  services  registered  under  that  section  with
  information identifying those persons whose  certificates  of  authority
  have expired or have been suspended or revoked.
    (iii)  The  relief  provided  by this subparagraph does not apply to a
  provider of telecommunication services that fraudulently  fails  to  pay
  tax or solicits a purchaser or purchasers to submit one or more unlawful
  certificates of exemption.
    (iv) Any person who issues a false or fraudulent certificate of resale
  with  intent  to evade tax is, in addition to any other penalty imposed,
  subject to a penalty of one hundred percent of the tax that  would  have
  been due had there not been a misuse of that certificate, plus a penalty
  of fifty dollars for each false or fraudulent certificate.
    (v)  For any other sale of telecommunication services by a provider of
  telecommunication services to a purchaser who resells those services  as
  telecommunication  services  but  does  not provide a properly completed
  certificate of resale to the provider of telecommunication  services  in
  accordance  with the provisions of this subparagraph, the credit allowed
  in subparagraph one of paragraph (a) of subdivision four of this section
  shall be allowed.
    (2) Cable television service exclusion. The sale of  cable  television
  service  shall  in no event constitute a telecommunications service, and
  the receipts from the sale of such service are without the scope of  the
  tax  imposed  by  this section. The provision of such service shall mean
  the transmitting to subscribers of programs broadcast  by  one  or  more
  television  or  radio  stations  or any other programs originated by any
  person by means of wire, cable, microwave or any other means.
    (3) Air safety and navigation exclusion. There shall be excluded  from
  the  tax imposed by this section, the sale of telecommunication services
  to air carriers solely for the purpose  of  air  safety  and  navigation
  where  such telecommunication service is provided by an organization, at
  least ninety percent of which (if a corporation, ninety percent  of  the
  voting  stock  of  which)  is  owned,  directly  or  indirectly,  by air
  carriers, and which organization's principal function is to fulfill  the
  requirements   of  (i)  the  federal  aviation  administration  (or  the
  successor thereto) or (ii) the international civil aviation organization
  (or the successor thereto), relating to the existence of a communication
  system between aircraft and dispatcher, aircraft and air traffic control
  or ground  station  and  ground  station  (or  any  combination  or  the
  foregoing) for the purposes of air safety and navigation.
    (4) With respect to services or property described in subparagraph (B)
  of  paragraph one of subdivision (1) of section eleven hundred eleven of


 this chapter and internet access service, a home service provider  shall
  pay tax on the gross receipt from any charge that is aggregated with and
  not  separately  stated from other charges for mobile telecommunications
  service.  Provided,  however,  if  such  home  service  provider uses an
  objective, reasonable and verifiable standard for  identifying  each  of
  the components of the charge for mobile telecommunications service, then
  such  home  service provider may separately account for and quantify the
  amount of each such component charge. If a home service provider chooses
  to so separately account for  and  quantify  and  separately  sells  the
  subparagraph  (B)  property  or service or internet access service, then
  the charge for such property or service shall be based  upon  the  price
  for  such  property  or  service  as  separately sold. If a home service
  provider chooses to so separately account for and quantify and does  not
  separately  sell  such  property  or  service,  then the charge for such
  property or service shall be based upon the prevailing retail  price  of
  comparable  property  or  service  sold separately by other home service
  providers. In any case, the charge for such property or service shall be
  reasonable  and  proportionate  to  the  total  charge  to  the   mobile
  telecommunications  customer.  Such  charges  for  such subparagraph (B)
  services or property or internet access service, as  the  case  may  be,
  will   not   constitute   gross   receipts   from   charges  for  mobile
  telecommunications services. Nothing herein shall be construed to exempt
  from tax any service or property otherwise subject  to  tax  under  this
  section.
    (c)  Federal limitations. The tax imposed by this section shall not be
  made  applicable  to  the  sale  of  telecommunication  services   under
  circumstances which would preclude the application of such tax by reason
  of  the  United  States  constitution  and the laws of the United States
  enacted pursuant thereto.
    3. Apportionment for certain private telecommunication  services.  (a)
  General.   With   respect   to   interstate  and  international  private
  telecommunication  services,  the  gross  receipt,  if  not   separately
  ascertainable  for  each  use  of  such  service, shall be determined as
  follows: (1) one hundred percent of the charge imposed at  each  channel
  termination  point  within  this  state,  (2) one hundred percent of the
  charge imposed for the use of  a  channel  between  channel  termination
  points  within  this  state,  and  (3)(i)  if  each segment between each
  termination point is separately billed and the  amounts  so  billed  are
  fairly  reflective  of  New York origination and/or termination traffic,
  then one hundred percent of the charge imposed at each termination point
  in New York and for service in New York between those points  and  fifty
  percent  of the charge imposed for service between a channel termination
  point outside the state and a point inside the  state  measured  by  the
  nearest  termination  point  inside the state to first termination point
  outside the state relative to such point inside the state,  or  (ii)  if
  each  segment  of  the  interstate or international circuit between each
  channel termination point is not separately billed or  if  such  billing
  does  not  fairly  reflect  the  New York origination and/or termination
  traffic handled by such private telecommunication service, an  allocated
  portion  of the interstate and international channel charge with respect
  to points in New York and points outside the state based  on  the  ratio
  which  the  number  of channel termination points in this state bears to
  the total number of channel termination points within  and  without  the
  state.
    (b)  Other  allocation  methods.  Where the commissioner decides that,
  with respect to a certain provider of  telecommunication  services,  the
  method  prescribed  in paragraph (a) of this subdivision does not fairly
  and   equitably   reflect   the   private   telecommunication   services


 attributable  to this state, the commissioner shall prescribe methods of
  allocation   which   fairly   and   equitably   reflect   the    private
  telecommunication   services   attributable  to  this  state.  Provided,
  further,  that  the  commissioner  may  require  that another allocation
  method be used so as to insure that the sum of the allocation factor  of
  this  state and the allocation factor of the other jurisdiction involved
  is not greater than one. In making this determination, the  commissioner
  may take into account the reasonableness of the allocation prescribed by
  other states.
    4.  Credits  against  tax.  (a)  Allowance  of  credits. The following
  credits against the tax imposed under this section shall be allowed:
    (1) Certain resold telecommunication services. A credit equal  to  the
  amount  of  tax  imposed  by  this  section, with respect to the sale of
  telecommunication services, shall be allowed to the purchaser where such
  purchaser is a provider of telecommunication  services,  and  where  the
  telecommunication  service  purchased are later resold by such purchaser
  as telecommunication services, and the exclusion in subparagraph one  of
  paragraph  (b)  of  subdivision  two  of this section is not allowed. To
  accomplish the purpose of the credit, it shall be determined as follows:
  the tax on the resold service shall be computed so that  the  tax  under
  this  section  is  imposed  on  the difference between the amount of the
  charge made by the provider to the  purchaser  and  the  amount  of  the
  charge made by the purchaser for the resold service.
    (2)  Tax  paid  in  another  jurisdiction.  With respect to the tax on
  interstate or international  telecommunication  services  imposed  under
  this section, in order to prevent actual multijurisdictional taxation of
  a  sale  of  telecommunication services which is the subject of taxation
  under this section, any provider of telecommunication services  or  such
  provider's  purchaser,  upon  proof  that such provider or purchaser has
  actually paid a like tax to another state or  country,  or  jurisdiction
  thereof  on  such  telecommunication services, shall be allowed a credit
  against the tax imposed under this section. The  amount  of  the  credit
  shall  be the amount of tax lawfully due and paid to such other state or
  country or jurisdiction, provided, however, the  amount  of  the  credit
  shall in no event exceed the tax due to this state.
    (b)  Refunds-overpayments  of tax. In lieu of the credits set forth in
  paragraph (a) of this subdivision, the taxpayer  may  elect  to  take  a
  refund.  Amounts to be credited or refunded under this subdivision shall
  be considered overpayments of tax in accordance with the  provisions  of
  section  one thousand eighty-six of this chapter; provided, however, the
  provisions of subsection (c) of section  one  thousand  eighty-eight  of
  this chapter notwithstanding, no interest shall be paid on any credit or
  refund   allowed  under  subparagraph  one  of  paragraph  (a)  of  this
  subdivision.
    5.  Record  keeping.  Every  provider  of  telecommunication  services
  subject  to  tax  under  this  section  shall  keep  such records of its
  business and in such form as the  commissioner  may  require,  and  such
  records  shall be preserved for a period of three years, except that the
  commissioner may consent to their destruction within that period or  may
  require that they be kept longer.
    6.  Returns.  Every  provider of telecommunication services subject to
  tax under this section shall file, on or before March fifteenth of  each
  year,  for  taxable  years  beginning before January first, two thousand
  sixteen, and on or before April fifteenth  of  each  year,  for  taxable
  years  beginning  on  or  after  January  first, two thousand sixteen, a
  return for the year ended on the preceding  December  thirty-first,  and
  pay  the  tax  due,  which return shall state the gross receipts for the
  period covered by each such return and the resale exclusions during such


 period. Returns shall be filed with the commissioner on  a  form  to  be
  furnished  by  the  commissioner for such purpose and shall contain such
  other data, information or matter as the commissioner may require to  be
  included  therein.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing  provisions  of this
  subdivision,   the   commissioner   may   require   any   provider    of
  telecommunication services to file an annual return, which shall contain
  any  data  specified  by  the  commissioner,  regardless of whether such
  provider is subject to tax under this section. Every return  shall  have
  annexed  thereto  a  certification  by  the  head  of  the  provider  of
  telecommunication services making the same, or of  the  owner  or  of  a
  partner or member thereof, or of a principal officer of the corporation,
  if  such  business be conducted by a corporation, to the effect that the
  statements contained therein are true.
    7. (a) Applicability of article nine. If any provision of this section
  conflicts with any  other  provision  contained  in  this  article,  the
  provision  of  this  section  shall  control, but the provisions of this
  article which do not conflict with the provisions of this section  shall
  apply  with respect to the taxes under this section, so far as they are,
  or may be made applicable. The taxes  and  surcharges  imposed  by  this
  section and sections one hundred eighty-four, one hundred eighty-four-a,
  one  hundred  eighty-six-a,  one  hundred  eighty-six-c, and one hundred
  eighty-eight of this article may be jointly administered with respect to
  years ending in nineteen hundred  ninety-five  and  thereafter,  in  the
  manner established by the commissioner.
    (b)  Applicability  of  Mobile  Telecommunications  Sourcing  Act. The
  provisions of sections 119(c), 120, 121 and 122 of title 4 of the United
  States Code  as  enacted  and  in  effect  on  July  twenty-eighth,  two
  thousand,  to  the  extent  relevant  and  to  the  extent  required  by
  preemption, shall apply to the provisions of this section  in  the  same
  manner  and  with  the  same force and effect as if the language of such
  sections of such title 4 of the United States Code had been incorporated
  in full into this section and had expressly referred to  the  tax  under
  this  section,  with  such modifications as may be necessary in order to
  adapt the language of  such  provisions  to  the  tax  imposed  by  this
  section.
    8. Enhanced emergency telephone system surcharge fee and public safety
  communications  surcharge. Notwithstanding any other provision contained
  in this chapter or  any  other  law,  any  surcharge  collected  or  any
  administrative   fee  retained  by  any  provider  of  telecommunication
  services acting as collection agent for a municipality pursuant  to  the
  provisions  of  article  six of the county law or acting as a collection
  agent for the state pursuant to the provisions of  section  one  hundred
  eighty-six-f  of this article will not be considered as, nor included in
  the determination of gross receipts of the provider.
    9. Distribution. Seven and six-tenths percent of the monies  collected
  from  the  excise  tax  imposed  by  this  section  shall be distributed
  pursuant to subdivision three  of  section  two  hundred  five  of  this
  chapter.




   §  186-f.  Public safety communications surcharge.  1. Definitions. As
  used in this section,  where  not  otherwise  specifically  defined  and
  unless a different meaning is clearly required:
    (a)  "Place  of  primary  use"  has  the  same meaning as that term is
  defined in paragraph twenty-six of subdivision  (b)  of  section  eleven
  hundred one of this chapter.
    (b) "Wireless communications customer" means mobile telecommunications
  customer  as  defined  in  subparagraph (i) of paragraph twenty-seven of
  subdivision (b) of section eleven  hundred  one  of  this  chapter,  who
  contracts for or is the end user of wireless communications service.
    (c)  "Wireless  communications  device"  means  any  equipment used to
  access a wireless communications service.
    (d) "Wireless communications  service"  means  all  commercial  mobile
  services,  as  that term is defined in section 332(d) of title 47 of the
  United States Code, as amended from time to  time,  including,  but  not
  limited  to,  all  broadband  personal communications services, wireless
  radio telephone  services,  geographic  area  specialized  and  enhanced
  specialized  mobile  radio services, and incumbent-wide area specialized
  mobile radio licensees, which offer real time,  two-way  voice  or  data
  service  that  is  interconnected  with  the  public  switched telephone
  network  or  otherwise  provides  access  to  emergency   communications
  services.
    (e)  "Wireless  communications  service supplier" means a home service
  provider as defined in subparagraph (ii) of  paragraph  twenty-seven  of
  subdivision  (b) of section eleven hundred one of this chapter, provided
  that the home service provider provides wireless communications  service
  and has one or more wireless communications customers in New York state.
    (f)  "Prepaid  wireless communications seller" means a person making a
  retail sale of prepaid wireless communications service.
    (g) "Prepaid wireless communications service" means a  prepaid  mobile
  calling service as defined in paragraph twenty-two of subdivision (b) of
  section eleven hundred one of this chapter.
    2.  Public  safety  communications  surcharge.  (a) (1) A surcharge on
  wireless communications service provided to  a  wireless  communications
  customer  with  a  place  of primary use in this state is imposed at the
  rate of  one  dollar  and  twenty  cents  per  month  on  each  wireless
  communications  device  in  service  during  any part of each month. The
  surcharge must be reflected and made payable on bills  rendered  to  the
  wireless communications customer for wireless communication service.
    (2) A surcharge is imposed on the retail sale of each prepaid wireless
  communications service, whether or not any tangible personal property is
  sold therewith, at the rate of ninety cents per retail sale. A sale of a
  prepaid wireless communications service occurs in this state if the sale
  takes  place  at  a seller's business location in the state. If the sale
  does not take place at the seller's  place  of  business,  it  shall  be
  conclusively  determined  to  take  place  at  the  purchaser's shipping
  address or, if there is no item  shipped,  at  the  purchaser's  billing
  address,  or,  if the seller does not have that address, at such address
  as approved by the commissioner that reasonably reflects the  customer's
  location  at the time of the sale of the prepaid wireless communications
  service.
    (b) The surcharges must be reported and paid to the commissioner on  a
  quarterly  basis  on  or before the twentieth day of the month following
  each quarterly period ending on the last day of  February,  May,  August
  and November, respectively. The payments must be accompanied by a return
  in  the  form  and  containing  the  information  the  commissioner  may
  prescribe.


   (c) The surcharges must be added as a  separate  line  item  to  bills
  furnished   by   a  wireless  communications  service  supplier  to  its
  customers, or must be added as a separate line item  to  a  sales  slip,
  invoice,  receipt,  or  other  statement  of  the price, if any, that is
  furnished  by  a  prepaid wireless communications seller to a purchaser,
  and must be identified as the "public safety communications surcharge".
    (d) Each wireless communications service supplier and prepaid wireless
  communications seller is entitled to retain, as an  administrative  fee,
  an amount equal to three percent of fifty-eight and three-tenths percent
  of  the  total  collections  of  the surcharges imposed by this section,
  provided that the supplier or  seller  files  any  required  return  and
  remits the surcharge due to the commissioner on or before its due date.
    3.  Exemption.  Lifeline consumers shall be exempt from the surcharges
  imposed by this section.
    4. Applicable provisions. (a) Except as  otherwise  provided  in  this
  section, the surcharges imposed under this section shall be administered
  and  collected by the commissioner in a like manner as the taxes imposed
  by article twenty-eight of this chapter. All the provisions  of  article
  twenty-eight  of  this  chapter,  including  the  provisions relating to
  definitions,  exemptions,  returns,  personal  liability  for  the  tax,
  collection   of   tax  from  the  customer,  payment  of  tax,  and  the
  administration of the taxes imposed by such article, shall apply to  the
  surcharges  imposed  under the authority of this section so far as those
  provisions can be made applicable to  the  surcharges  imposed  by  this
  section,  with  such modifications as may be necessary in order to adapt
  the language of those provisions  to  the  surcharges  imposed  by  this
  section.  Those provisions shall apply with the same force and effect as
  if the language of those provisions had been set forth in full  in  this
  section,  except  to  the  extent that any of those provisions is either
  inconsistent with a provision of this section or is not relevant to  the
  surcharge  imposed  by  this  section. For purposes of this section, any
  reference in this chapter to a tax  or  the  taxes  imposed  by  article
  twenty-eight  of  this  chapter  shall  be  deemed  also to refer to the
  surcharges imposed by this section unless a different meaning is clearly
  required.
    (b)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  paragraph   (a)   of   this
  subdivision:
    (1)  the  exemptions provided for in section eleven hundred sixteen of
  this chapter, other than the exemptions in paragraphs one, two and three
  of subdivision (a) of that section, shall not apply  to  the  surcharges
  imposed by this section.
    (2)  the  credit provided in subdivision (f) of section eleven hundred
  thirty-seven of this chapter shall not apply to this section.
    5.   Deposits   of   surcharge   monies   collected   and    received.
  Notwithstanding  any  provision  of  law  to the contrary, all surcharge
  monies collected and received by the  commissioner  under  this  section
  must  be  deposited  daily  to  the credit of the comptroller with those
  responsible banks, banking houses or trust companies the comptroller may
  designate. Those deposits must be kept separate and apart from all other
  monies in the  possession  of  the  comptroller.  The  comptroller  must
  require  adequate  security  from  all  such  depositories. Of the total
  revenue collected or received under this section, the  comptroller  must
  retain   in   the  comptroller's  hands  an  amount  determined  by  the
  commissioner to be necessary for refunds  under  this  section,  out  of
  which  the  comptroller  will  pay  any  refunds  to which taxpayers are
  entitled under the provisions of this section.  The  comptroller,  after
  reserving the amount to pay refunds, must, on or before the tenth day of


 each  month,  pay all surcharge monies collected and received under this
  section and remaining to the comptroller's credit as follows:
    (a)  forty-one and seven-tenths of the revenues collected and received
  under this section into the state general fund; and
    (b) after deducting the  amount  paid  under  paragraph  (a)  of  this
  subdivision and the amount retained by wireless communications suppliers
  pursuant  to  paragraph  (d)  of  subdivision  two  of this section, the
  balance of the revenues collected under this section into the  statewide
  public  safety  communications  account  of  the  miscellaneous  special
  revenue fund, created pursuant to section ninety-seven-qq of  the  state
  finance law.
    6.  Distribution.  The  monies collected from the surcharge imposed by
  this section must be distributed to include the following:
    (a) The sum of twenty-five million five hundred thousand dollars  must
  be  allocated  to  the  state  police  pursuant  to appropriation by the
  legislature annually;
    (b) The sum of one million  five  hundred  thousand  dollars  must  be
  deposited into the New York state emergency services revolving loan fund
  annually;  provided,  however, that such sums shall not be deposited for
  state  fiscal  years  two  thousand  eleven--two  thousand  twelve,  two
  thousand  twelve--two  thousand  thirteen,  two  thousand  fourteen--two
  thousand  fifteen,  two  thousand  fifteen--two  thousand  sixteen,  two
  thousand  sixteen--two  thousand  seventeen, two thousand seventeen--two
  thousand eighteen, two thousand  eighteen--two  thousand  nineteen,  two
  thousand   nineteen--two   thousand  twenty,  two  thousand  twenty--two
  thousand twenty-one, two thousand twenty-one--two  thousand  twenty-two,
  two  thousand  twenty-two--two  thousand  twenty-three, and two thousand
  twenty-three--two thousand twenty-four;
    (c) Up to the sum of seventy-five million dollars annually may be used
  for the provision of  grants  or  reimbursements  to  counties  for  the
  development, consolidation, or operation of public safety communications
  systems   or   networks  designed  to  support  statewide  interoperable
  communications for first  responders,  to  be  distributed  pursuant  to
  standards and guidelines issued by the state. Annual grants may consider
  costs  borne  by  a municipality related to the issuance of local public
  safety communications bonds  pursuant  to  section  twenty-four  hundred
  thirty-two  of  the  public  authorities  law, when the municipality has
  qualified as  an  approved  participant  in  a  statewide  interoperable
  communications  system  under the standards and guidelines issued by the
  state, and maintains compliance with such standards and guidelines.  The
  grant  amount  will  be  prescribed  pursuant  to  an agreement with the
  municipality, and may not exceed thirty percent of the annual cost borne
  by the municipality in relation to such bonds;
    (d) To provide the costs of debt service for bonds and notes issued to
  finance expedited deployment  funding  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of
  section three hundred thirty-three of the county law and section sixteen
  hundred eighty-nine-h of the public authorities law; and
    (e)  services  and expenses that support the operations and mission of
  the division of homeland security and emergency services as appropriated
  by the legislature.
    (g) The sum of ten million dollars annually  shall  be  used  for  the
  provision  of  grants to counties for costs related to the operations of
  public safety dispatch centers, to be distributed  pursuant  to  a  plan
  developed  by  the  commissioner  of  homeland  security  and  emergency
  services and approved by the director  of  the  budget.  Such  plan  may
  consider such factors as population density and emergency call volume.




   § 186-g. Wireless communications surcharge authorized. 1. Definitions.
  As  used  in  this section, where not otherwise specifically defined and
  unless a different meaning is clearly required, all of  the  definitions
  of  section  one hundred eighty-six-f of this article shall apply to the
  surcharges authorized by this section.
    2. Imposition of surcharge. (a) Notwithstanding any other provision of
  law to the contrary, and in addition to any other tax or fee imposed  by
  this  chapter  or any other law, a city having a population of a million
  or more, and a county, other than a county wholly within  such  a  city,
  acting  through  its  local  legislative  body, is hereby authorized and
  empowered to adopt and  amend  local  laws,  ordinances  or  resolutions
  imposing  a  surcharge  within  the  territorial  limits of such city or
  county to take effect on or after December first, two thousand seventeen
  that  shall  include  both  (i)  wireless  communications  service,   as
  described  in  paragraph  (b)  of  this  subdivision;  and  (ii) prepaid
  wireless communications service, as described in paragraph (c)  of  this
  subdivision.
    * (b)  Such surcharge on wireless communications service provided to a
  wireless communications customer with a place of primary use in  a  city
  or  county  authorized to impose the surcharge by this subdivision shall
  be imposed at the rate of  thirty  cents  per  month  on  each  wireless
  communications device in service during any part of the month; provided,
  however, that the county of Broome may impose an additional surcharge at
  the  rate of one dollar and ten cents per month; provided, however, that
  the county of Madison may impose an additional surcharge at the rate  of
  sixty-five  cents  per month; provided however, that the county of Tioga
  may impose an additional surcharge at the rate of one dollar per  month.
  The  surcharge  must  be reflected and made payable on bills rendered to
  the  wireless  communications  customer  for   wireless   communications
  service.
    * NB Effective until November 3, 2031
    * (b)  Such surcharge on wireless communications service provided to a
  wireless communications customer with a place of primary use in  a  city
  or  county  authorized to impose the surcharge by this subdivision shall
  be imposed at the rate of  thirty  cents  per  month  on  each  wireless
  communications device in service during any part of the month; provided,
  however, that the county of Broome may impose an additional surcharge at
  the  rate of one dollar and ten cents per month; provided, however, that
  the county of Madison may impose an additional surcharge at the rate  of
  sixty-five  cents  per  month.  The surcharge must be reflected and made
  payable on bills rendered to the wireless  communications  customer  for
  wireless communications service.
    * NB Effective November 3, 2031 until July 27, 2029
    * (b)  Such surcharge on wireless communications service provided to a
  wireless communications customer with a place of primary use in  a  city
  or  county  authorized to impose the surcharge by this subdivision shall
  be imposed at the rate of  thirty  cents  per  month  on  each  wireless
  communications device in service during any part of the month; provided,
  however,  that  the county of Madison may impose an additional surcharge
  at the rate of sixty-five cents per month; provided, however,  that  the
  county  of  Tioga  may impose an additional surcharge at the rate of one
  dollar per month. The surcharge must be reflected and  made  payable  on
  bills  rendered  to  the  wireless  communications customer for wireless
  communications service.
    * NB Effective July 27, 2029 until December 20, 2029
    * (b) Such surcharge on wireless communications service provided to  a
  wireless  communications  customer with a place of primary use in a city
  or county authorized to impose the surcharge by this  subdivision  shall


 be  imposed  at  the  rate  of  thirty  cents per month on each wireless
  communications device in service during any part of the month; provided,
  however, that the county of Tioga may impose an additional surcharge  at
  the  rate  of  one dollar per month. The surcharge must be reflected and
  made payable on bills rendered to the wireless  communications  customer
  for wireless communications service.
    * NB Effective December 20, 2029
    * (c)  Such  surcharge  on  the  retail  sale of each prepaid wireless
  communications service, whether or not any tangible personal property is
  sold therewith, shall be imposed at the rate of thirty cents per  retail
  sale  within a city or county authorized to impose the surcharge by this
  subdivision; provided, however, that the county of Broome may impose  an
  additional  surcharge at the rate of one dollar and ten cents per retail
  sale; provided, however, that  the  county  of  Madison  may  impose  an
  additional  surcharge  at  the rate of sixty-five cents per retail sale;
  provided, however, that the county of Tioga  may  impose  an  additional
  surcharge at the rate of one dollar per retail sale. A sale of a prepaid
  wireless  communications  service  occurs  in such city or county if the
  sale takes place at a seller's business location in such city or county.
  If the sale does not take place at the seller's place  of  business,  it
  shall  be  conclusively  determined  to  take  place  at the purchaser's
  shipping address in such city or county or, if there is no item shipped,
  at the purchaser's billing address in such city or county,  or,  if  the
  seller  does  not  have  that  address,  at such address that reasonably
  reflects the customer's location at the time of the sale of the  prepaid
  wireless communications service.
    * NB Effective until November 3, 2031
    * (c)  Such  surcharge  on  the  retail  sale of each prepaid wireless
  communications service, whether or not any tangible personal property is
  sold therewith, shall be imposed at the rate of thirty cents per  retail
  sale  within a city or county authorized to impose the surcharge by this
  subdivision; provided, however, that the county of Broome may impose  an
  additional  surcharge at the rate of one dollar and ten cents per retail
  sale; provided, however, that  the  county  of  Madison  may  impose  an
  additional surcharge at the rate of sixty-five cents per retail sale.  A
  sale of a prepaid wireless communications service occurs in such city or
  county  if  the sale takes place at a seller's business location in such
  city or county. If the sale does not take place at the seller's place of
  business, it shall be conclusively  determined  to  take  place  at  the
  purchaser's  shipping  address in such city or county or, if there is no
  item shipped, at the purchaser's billing address in such city or county,
  or, if the seller does not have  that  address,  at  such  address  that
  reasonably  reflects  the customer's location at the time of the sale of
  the prepaid wireless communications service.
    * NB Effective November 3, 2031 until July 27, 2029
    * (c) Such surcharge on the  retail  sale  of  each  prepaid  wireless
  communications service, whether or not any tangible personal property is
  sold  therewith, shall be imposed at the rate of thirty cents per retail
  sale within a city or county authorized to impose the surcharge by  this
  subdivision; provided, however, that the county of Madison may impose an
  additional  surcharge  at  the rate of sixty-five cents per retail sale;
  provided, however, that the county of Tioga  may  impose  an  additional
  surcharge at the rate of one dollar per retail sale. A sale of a prepaid
  wireless  communications  service  occurs  in such city or county if the
  sale takes place at a seller's business location in such city or county.
  If the sale does not take place at the seller's place  of  business,  it
  shall  be  conclusively  determined  to  take  place  at the purchaser's
  shipping address in such city or county or, if there is no item shipped,


 at the purchaser's billing address in such city or county,  or,  if  the
  seller  does  not  have  that  address,  at such address that reasonably
  reflects the customer's location at the time of the sale of the  prepaid
  wireless communications service.
    * NB Effective July 27, 2029 until December 20, 2029
    * (c)  Such  surcharge  on  the  retail  sale of each prepaid wireless
  communications service, whether or not any tangible personal property is
  sold therewith, shall be imposed at the rate of thirty cents per  retail
  sale  within a city or county authorized to impose the surcharge by this
  subdivision; provided, however, that the county of Tioga may  impose  an
  additional  surcharge  at the rate of one dollar per retail sale. A sale
  of a prepaid wireless communications service  occurs  in  such  city  or
  county  if  the sale takes place at a seller's business location in such
  city or county. If the sale does not take place at the seller's place of
  business, it shall be conclusively  determined  to  take  place  at  the
  purchaser's  shipping  address in such city or county or, if there is no
  item shipped, at the purchaser's billing address in such city or county,
  or, if the seller does not have  that  address,  at  such  address  that
  reasonably  reflects  the customer's location at the time of the sale of
  the prepaid wireless communications service.
    * NB Effective December 20, 2029
    * (d) In addition to the surcharge on wireless communications  service
  authorized to be imposed under paragraph (b) of this subdivision and the
  surcharge  on  the  retail  sale of each prepaid wireless communications
  service  authorized  to  be  imposed  under  paragraph   (c)   of   this
  subdivision,  the county of Albany may impose an additional surcharge at
  the rate of: (i) ninety-five cents per month for  surcharges  authorized
  under  paragraph (b) of this subdivision; and (ii) ninety-five cents per
  retail sale for  surcharges  authorized  under  paragraph  (c)  of  this
  subdivision.
    * NB Repealed June 30, 2032
    3.  Any  such  local  law, ordinance or resolution adopted pursuant to
  this section shall state the amount of the surcharges and  the  date  on
  which  both  the wireless communications service supplier shall begin to
  add such surcharge to the billings of  its  customers  and  the  prepaid
  wireless  communications  seller  shall  begin to collect such surcharge
  from its customers. No such local law, ordinance or resolution shall  be
  effective  unless  a certified copy of such law, ordinance or resolution
  is mailed by  registered  or  certified  mail  to  the  commissioner  in
  accordance  with  the  provisions of subdivisions (d) and (e) of section
  twelve hundred ten of this chapter.
    4. Exemption. Lifeline consumers shall be exempt from  the  surcharges
  imposed by this section.
    5.  The  surcharges must be reported and paid to the commissioner on a
  quarterly basis on or before the twentieth day of  the  month  following
  each  quarterly  period  ending on the last day of February, May, August
  and November, respectively. The payments must be accompanied by a return
  in  the  form  and  containing  the  information  the  commissioner  may
  prescribe.
    6.  The  surcharges  must  be  added  as a separate line item to bills
  furnished  by  a  wireless  communications  service  supplier   to   its
  customers,  or  must  be  added as a separate line item to a sales slip,
  invoice, receipt, or other statement of  the  price,  if  any,  that  is
  furnished  by  a  prepaid wireless communications seller to a purchaser,
  and must be identified as the "public safety communications surcharge".
    7. Each wireless communications service supplier and prepaid  wireless
  communications  seller  is entitled to retain, as an administrative fee,
  an amount equal to three percent of its collections  of  the  surcharges


 imposed  under the authority of this section, provided that the supplier
  or seller files any required return and remits the surcharge due to  the
  commissioner on or before its due date.
    8.  Applicable  provisions.  (a)  Except as otherwise provided in this
  section, any surcharge imposed under the authority of this section shall
  be administered and collected by the commissioner in a  like  manner  as
  the  taxes  imposed  by  articles  twenty-eight  and twenty-nine of this
  chapter. All the provisions of article twenty-eight and  twenty-nine  of
  this   chapter,   including  the  provisions  relating  to  definitions,
  exemptions, returns, personal liability for the tax, collection  of  tax
  from  the  customer, payment of tax, and the administration of the taxes
  imposed by such article, shall apply to the surcharges imposed under the
  authority of this section  so  far  as  those  provisions  can  be  made
  applicable  to  the  surcharges  imposed  under  the  authority  of this
  section, with such modifications as may be necessary in order  to  adapt
  the  language  of  those  provisions to the surcharges imposed under the
  authority of this section. Those provisions shall apply  with  the  same
  force  and  effect  as  if the language of those provisions had been set
  forth in full in this section, except to the extent that  any  of  those
  provisions is either inconsistent with a provision of this section or is
  not  relevant  to  the  surcharge  imposed  under  the authority of this
  section. For purposes of this section, any reference in this chapter  to
  a  tax  or the taxes imposed by articles twenty-eight and twenty-nine of
  this chapter shall be deemed also to refer  to  the  surcharges  imposed
  under  the  authority  of  this  section  unless  a different meaning is
  clearly required.
    (b)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  paragraph   (a)   of   this
  subdivision:
    (1)  the  exemptions provided for in section eleven hundred sixteen of
  this chapter, other than the exemptions in paragraphs one, two and three
  of subdivision (a) of that section, shall not apply  to  the  surcharges
  imposed under the authority of this section;
    (2)  the  credit provided in subdivision (f) of section eleven hundred
  thirty-seven of this chapter shall not apply to this section.
    9. All surcharge  monies  remitted  to  the  commissioner  under  this
  section  shall  be  expended  only upon authorization of the legislative
  body of a city or county that imposes the  surcharges  pursuant  to  the
  authority  of  subdivision  two of this section, and only for payment of
  system costs, eligible  wireless  911  service  costs,  or  other  costs
  associated  with the administration, design, installation, construction,
  operation, or maintenance of public safety communications networks or  a
  system  to  provide  enhanced  wireless 911 service serving such city or
  county, including, but not limited to, hardware, software,  consultants,
  financing  and  other  acquisition  costs.  Such  city  or  county shall
  separately account for and keep adequate books and records of the amount
  and object or purpose of all expenditures of all such monies. If, at the
  end of any fiscal year, the total amount of all such monies exceeds  the
  amount necessary for payment of the above mentioned costs in such fiscal
  year,  such excess shall be reserved and carried over for the payment of
  those costs in the following fiscal year.




   § 187.  Credit  for  special  additional mortgage recording tax.  1. A
  taxpayer shall be allowed a credit, to be  credited  against  the  taxes
  imposed  by  this  article,  other  than  the  taxes and fees imposed by
  sections one hundred eighty-six-a and one hundred eighty-six-e  of  this
  chapter.  The  amount  of  the credit shall be the amount of the special
  additional mortgage recording tax paid by the taxpayer pursuant  to  the
  provisions  of  subdivision  one-a of section two hundred fifty-three of
  this chapter on mortgages recorded on and after January first,  nineteen
  hundred  seventy-nine. Provided, however, that the amount of such credit
  allowable against the tax imposed by section one hundred eighty-four  of
  this  chapter  shall  be  the  excess  of  the  amount  of  such special
  additional mortgage recording tax paid over the  amount  of  any  credit
  allowed  by  this section against the tax imposed by section one hundred
  eighty-three of this chapter. Provided further, however, no credit shall
  be allowed with respect to  a  mortgage  of  real  property  principally
  improved  or  to be improved by one or more structures containing in the
  aggregate not more than six residential dwelling  units,  each  dwelling
  unit having its own separate cooking facilities, where the real property
  is  located  in  one or more of the counties comprising the metropolitan
  commuter transportation district and where the mortgage is  recorded  on
  or  after  May  first,  nineteen hundred eighty-seven. Provided further,
  however, no credit shall be allowed with respect to a mortgage  of  real
  property  principally  improved  or  to  be  improved  by  one  or  more
  structures containing in the aggregate not  more  than  six  residential
  dwelling  units,  each  dwelling  unit  having  its own separate cooking
  facilities, where the real property is located in the county of Erie and
  where the mortgage is recorded on or after May first,  nineteen  hundred
  eighty-seven.
    2.  In  no event shall the credit herein provided for be allowed in an
  amount which will reduce the tax payable to  less  than  the  applicable
  minimum  tax fixed by section one hundred eighty-three or former section
  one hundred eighty-six. If, however,  the  amount  of  credit  allowable
  under  this section for any taxable year reduces the tax to such amount,
  any amount of credit not deductible in such taxable year may be  carried
  over  to  the  following  year  or  years  and  may be deducted from the
  taxpayer's tax for such year or years.




   §  187-a.  Credit  for  employment  of persons with disabilities.   1.
  Allowance of credit. A  taxpayer  shall  be  allowed  a  credit,  to  be
  computed  as  hereinafter  provided,  against  the taxes imposed by this
  article,  other  than  the  taxes  imposed  by  sections   one   hundred
  eighty-six-a,  one  hundred  eighty-six-e and one hundred eighty-nine of
  this article, for employing  within  the  state  a  qualified  employee.
  Provided,  however, the amount of credit allowed by this section against
  the tax imposed by section one hundred eighty-four of this article shall
  be the excess of the credit computed under this section over the  amount
  of credit allowed by this section against the tax imposed by section one
  hundred eighty-three of this article.
    2. Qualified employee. A qualified employee is an individual:
    (a) who is certified by the education department, or in the case of an
  individual  who  is  blind  or visually handicapped, by the state agency
  responsible for provision of vocational rehabilitation services  to  the
  blind  and visually handicapped: (i) as a person with a disability which
  constitutes or results in a substantial handicap to employment and  (ii)
  as  having  completed  or  as receiving services under an individualized
  written rehabilitation plan approved  by  the  education  department  or
  other  state  agency responsible for providing vocational rehabilitation
  services to such individual; and
    (b) who has worked on a  full-time  basis  for  the  employer  who  is
  claiming the credit for at least one hundred eighty days or four hundred
  hours.
    3.  Amount  of  credit. Except as provided in subdivision four of this
  section, the amount of credit under this section  shall  be  thirty-five
  percent  of the first six thousand dollars in qualified first-year wages
  earned by each qualified employee. "Qualified  first-year  wages"  means
  wages  paid  or  incurred  by  the  taxpayer  during the taxable year to
  qualified employees which are attributable, with  respect  to  any  such
  employee, to services rendered during the one-year period beginning with
  the day the employee begins work for the taxpayer.
    4.  Credit  where  federal  work opportunity tax credit applies.  With
  respect to any qualified employee whose qualified first-year wages under
  subdivision three of this section also constitute  qualified  first-year
  wages  for  purposes  of  the work opportunity tax credit for vocational
  rehabilitation referrals under section fifty-one of the internal revenue
  code, the amount of credit  under  this  section  shall  be  thirty-five
  percent of the first six thousand dollars in qualified second-year wages
  earned  by each such employee. "Qualified second-year wages" means wages
  paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable  year  to  qualified
  employees  which are attributable, with respect to any such employee, to
  services rendered during the one-year period beginning  one  year  after
  the employee begins work for the taxpayer.
    5.  Carryover.  In  no  event  shall  the credit under this section be
  allowed in an amount which will reduce the tax payable to less than  the
  applicable  minimum  tax  fixed  by  section one hundred eighty-three or
  former section one hundred eighty-six of this article. If, however,  the
  amount  of  credit  allowable  under  this  section for any taxable year
  reduces the tax to such amount, any amount of credit not  deductible  in
  such taxable year may be carried over to the following year or years and
  may be deducted from the taxpayer's tax for such year or years.
    6.   Coordination  with  federal  work  opportunity  tax  credit.  The
  provisions of sections fifty-one and fifty-two of the  internal  revenue
  code,  as  such  sections  applied  on  October  first, nineteen hundred
  ninety-six, that apply to the work opportunity tax credit for vocational
  rehabilitation referrals shall apply to the credit under this section to
  the  extent  that  such  sections  are  consistent  with  the   specific


 provisions of this section, provided that in the event of a conflict the
  provisions of this section shall control.




   §  187-b.  Alternative  fuels and electric vehicle recharging property
  credit. 1. General. A taxpayer shall be allowed a credit, to be credited
  against the taxes imposed under sections one  hundred  eighty-three  and
  one  hundred eighty-four of this article. Such credit, to be computed as
  hereinafter provided, shall be  allowed  for  alternative  fuel  vehicle
  refueling  and  electric  vehicle  recharging property placed in service
  during the taxable year. Provided, however,  that  the  amount  of  such
  credit  allowable  against  the  tax  imposed  by  section  one  hundred
  eighty-four of this article shall be the excess of the credit allowed by
  this section over the amount of such credit allowable  against  the  tax
  imposed by section one hundred eighty-three of this article.
    2.  (a)  Alternative  fuel  vehicle  refueling  property  and electric
  vehicle  recharging  property.  The  credit  under  this   section   for
  alternative  fuel  vehicle  refueling  and  electric  vehicle recharging
  property shall equal for each installation of  property  the  lesser  of
  five  thousand  dollars  or the product of fifty percent and the cost of
  any such property less any costs paid from the proceeds of grants.
    (b) To qualify for the credit, the property must:
    (i) be located in this state;
    (ii)  constitute  alternative  fuel  vehicle  refueling  property   or
  electric vehicle recharging property; and
    (iii)  not  be  paid  for  from  the proceeds of grants awarded before
  January first, two thousand fifteen, including grants from the New  York
  state  energy  research  and development authority or the New York power
  authority.
    3. Definitions. (a)  The  term  "alternative  fuel  vehicle  refueling
  property"  means  all  of  the  equipment needed to dispense any fuel at
  least eighty-five percent of the volume of which consists of one or more
  of  the  following:  natural  gas,  liquified  natural  gas,   liquified
  petroleum, or hydrogen.
    (b)  The  term  "electric  vehicle  recharging property" means all the
  equipment needed to convey electric power  from  the  electric  grid  or
  another power source to an onboard vehicle energy storage system.
    4.  Carryovers.  In  no  event  shall the credit under this section be
  allowed in an amount which will reduce the tax payable to less than  the
  applicable minimum tax fixed by section one hundred eighty-three of this
  article.  If, however, the amount of credit allowable under this section
  for any taxable year reduces the tax  to  such  amount,  any  amount  of
  credit  not  deductible  in such taxable year may be carried over to the
  following year or years and may be deducted from the taxpayer's tax  for
  such year or years.
    5.  Credit  recapture.  If, at any time before the end of its recovery
  period,  alternative  fuel  vehicle  refueling   or   electric   vehicle
  recharging  property  ceases to be qualified, a recapture amount must be
  added back in the year in which such cessation occurs.
    (i) Cessation of qualification.  Alternative  fuel  vehicle  refueling
  property  or electric vehicle recharging property ceases to be qualified
  if:
    (I) the property no  longer  qualifies  as  alternative  fuel  vehicle
  refueling property or electric vehicle recharging property; or
    (II)  fifty  percent  or  more of the use of the property in a taxable
  year is other than a trade or business in this state; or
    (III) the taxpayer receiving the credit under this  section  sells  or
  disposes  of  the  property  and  knows  or  has reason to know that the
  property will be used in a manner described in this subparagraph.
    (ii) Recapture amount. The recapture amount is  equal  to  the  credit
  allowable  under this section multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of
  which is the total recovery period for the property minus the number  of


 recovery  years prior to, but not including, the recapture year, and the
  denominator of which is the total recovery period.
    6.  Termination. The credit allowed by subdivision two of this section
  shall not apply in taxable years beginning after December  thirty-first,
  two thousand twenty-five.




   §  187-c.  Biofuel  production  credit.  A taxpayer shall be allowed a
  credit to be computed  as  provided  in  section  twenty-eight  of  this
  chapter,  as  added  by  part  X of chapter sixty-two of the laws of two
  thousand six,  against  the  tax  imposed  by  this  article.  Provided,
  however,  that the amount of such credit allowed against the tax imposed
  by section one hundred eighty-four of this article shall be  the  excess
  of  the  amount  of such credit over the amount of any credit allowed by
  this section against the tax imposed by section one hundred eighty-three
  of this article. In no event shall the  credit  under  this  section  be
  allowed  in an amount which will reduce the tax payable to less than the
  applicable minimum tax fixed by section one hundred eighty-three of this
  article. If, however, the  amount  of  the  credit  allowed  under  this
  section  for any taxable year reduces the tax to such amount, the excess
  shall be treated as an overpayment of tax to be credited or refunded  in
  accordance with the provisions of section six hundred eighty-six of this
  chapter.  Provided, however, the provisions of subsection (c) of section
  one thousand eighty-eight of this chapter notwithstanding,  no  interest
  shall  be  paid thereon. The tax credit allowed pursuant to this section
  shall apply  to  taxable  years  beginning  before  January  first,  two
  thousand twenty.




   §  187-d.  Green  building  credit. 1. Allowance of credit. A taxpayer
  shall be allowed a  credit,  to  be  computed  as  provided  in  section
  nineteen  of  this  chapter,  against  the taxes imposed by sections one
  hundred eighty-three, one hundred eighty-four  and  former  section  one
  hundred  eighty-six  of this article. Provided, however, that the amount
  of such credit allowable against the tax imposed by section one  hundred
  eighty-four  of  this  article shall be the excess of the amount of such
  credit over the amount of any credit allowed by this section against the
  tax imposed by section one hundred eighty-three of this article.
    2. Carryovers. In no event shall the  credit  under  this  section  be
  allowed  in an amount which will reduce the tax payable to less than the
  applicable minimum tax fixed by  section  one  hundred  eighty-three  or
  former  section one hundred eighty-six of this article. If, however, the
  amount of credit allowable under  this  section  for  any  taxable  year
  reduces  the  tax to such amount, any amount of credit not deductible in
  such taxable year may be carried over to the following year or years and
  may be deducted from the taxpayer's tax for such year or years.




   §  187-e.  Credit  for  transportation  improvement  contributions. 1.
  Allowance of credit. A  taxpayer  shall  be  allowed  a  credit,  to  be
  computed  as  provided  in  section  twenty of this chapter, against the
  taxes  imposed  by  sections  one  hundred  eighty-three,  one   hundred
  eighty-four  and  former section one hundred eighty-six of this article.
  Provided, however, that the amount of such credit allowable against  the
  tax  imposed by section one hundred eighty-four of this article shall be
  the excess of the amount of such credit over the amount  of  any  credit
  allowed  by  this section against the tax imposed by section one hundred
  eighty-three of this article.
    2. Application of credit. In no event  shall  the  credit  under  this
  section  be  allowed  in  an amount which will reduce the tax payable to
  less than the applicable  minimum  tax  fixed  by  section  one  hundred
  eighty-three  or  former section one hundred eighty-six of this article.
  If, however, the amount of credit allowable under this section  for  any
  taxable  year  reduces  the tax to such amount, any amount of credit not
  thus deductible in such taxable year shall be treated as an  overpayment
  of  tax  to be credited or refunded in accordance with the provisions of
  section ten hundred eighty-six of this chapter. Provided,  however,  the
  provisions of subsection (c) of section ten hundred eighty-eight of this
  chapter notwithstanding, no interest shall be paid thereon.
    3. Credit recapture. For provisions requiring recapture of credit, see
  subdivision (c) of section twenty of this chapter.




   §  187-f. Order of credits. Credits allowable under this article which
  cannot be carried over and which are not refundable  shall  be  deducted
  first.  Credits  allowable under this article which can be carried over,
  and carryovers of such credits, shall be deducted next, and  among  such
  credits,  those whose carryover is of limited duration shall be deducted
  before those whose carryover is of unlimited duration. Credits allowable
  under this article which are refundable shall be deducted last.




   §  187-g. Brownfield redevelopment tax credit. 1. Allowance of credit.
  A taxpayer shall be allowed a credit, to  be  computed  as  provided  in
  section  twenty-one  of  this  chapter,  against  the  taxes  imposed by
  sections one hundred eighty-three and one hundred  eighty-four  of  this
  article.  Provided,  however,  that  the amount of such credit allowable
  against the tax imposed by  section  one  hundred  eighty-four  of  this
  article shall be the excess of the amount of such credit over the amount
  of any credit allowed by this section against the tax imposed by section
  one hundred eighty-three of this article.
    2.  Application  of  credit.  In  no event shall the credit under this
  section be allowed in an amount which will reduce  the  tax  payable  to
  less  than  the  applicable  minimum  tax  fixed  by section one hundred
  eighty-three  of  this  article.  If,  however,  the  amount  of  credit
  allowable  under  this  section  for any taxable year reduces the tax to
  such amount, any amount of credit not deductible in  such  taxable  year
  shall  be  treated as an overpayment of tax to be refunded in accordance
  with the provisions of section ten hundred eighty-six of  this  chapter.
  Provided,  however,  the  provisions  of  subsection  (c) of section ten
  hundred eighty-eight of this chapter notwithstanding, no interest  shall
  be paid thereon.




   §  187-h.  Remediated  brownfield  credit  for real property taxes for
  qualified sites. 1. Allowance of credit. A taxpayer shall be  allowed  a
  credit,  to  be  computed  as  provided  in  subdivision  (b) of section
  twenty-two of this chapter, against the taxes imposed  by  sections  one
  hundred  eighty-three  and  one  hundred  eighty-four  of  this article.
  Provided, however, that the amount of such credit  allowed  against  the
  tax  imposed by section one hundred eighty-four of this article shall be
  the excess of the amount of such credit over the amount  of  any  credit
  allowed  by  this section against the tax imposed by section one hundred
  eighty-three of this article.
    2. Application of credit. In no event  shall  the  credit  under  this
  section  be  allowed  in  an amount which will reduce the tax payable to
  less than the applicable  minimum  tax  fixed  by  section  one  hundred
  eighty-three  of this article. If, however, the amount of credit allowed
  under this section for any taxable year reduces the tax to such  amount,
  any  amount  of credit not thus deductible in such taxable year shall be
  treated as  an  overpayment  of  tax  to  be  credited  or  refunded  in
  accordance with the provisions of section ten hundred eighty-six of this
  chapter.  Provided, however, the provisions of subsection (c) of section
  ten hundred eighty-eight of this chapter  notwithstanding,  no  interest
  shall be paid thereon.




   §  187-i.  Environmental remediation insurance credit. 1. Allowance of
  credit. A taxpayer shall be allowed a credit, to be computed as provided
  in section twenty-three of this chapter, against the  taxes  imposed  by
  sections  one  hundred  eighty-three and one hundred eighty-four of this
  article. Provided, however, that the amount  of  such  credit  allowable
  against  the  tax  imposed  by  section  one hundred eighty-four of this
  article shall be the excess of the amount of such credit over the amount
  of any credit allowed by this section against the tax imposed by section
  one hundred eighty-three of this article.
    2. Application of credit. In no event  shall  the  credit  under  this
  section  be  allowed  in  an amount which will reduce the tax payable to
  less than the applicable  minimum  tax  fixed  by  section  one  hundred
  eighty-three  of  this  article.  If,  however,  the  amount  of  credit
  allowable under this section for any taxable year  reduces  the  tax  to
  such  amount,  any  amount of credit not deductible in such taxable year
  shall be treated as an overpayment of tax to be refunded  in  accordance
  with  the provisions of section one thousand eighty-six of this chapter.
  Provided, however, the provisions  of  subsection  (c)  of  section  one
  thousand eighty-eight of this chapter notwithstanding, no interest shall
  be paid thereon.




   * §  187-n.  Security  training  tax credit. 1. Allowance of credit. A
  taxpayer shall be allowed a  credit,  to  be  computed  as  provided  in
  section  twenty-six  of  this  chapter,  against the tax imposed by this
  article.
    2. Application of credit. In no event  shall  the  credit  under  this
  section  be  allowed  in  an amount which will reduce the tax payable to
  less than the applicable  minimum  tax  fixed  by  section  one  hundred
  eighty-three  of  this  article.  If,  however,  the  amount  of  credit
  allowable under this section for any taxable year  reduces  the  tax  to
  such  amount,  any  amount of credit not deductible in such taxable year
  shall be treated as an overpayment of tax to be refunded  in  accordance
  with  the provisions of section one thousand eighty-six of this chapter.
  Provided, however, the provisions  of  subsection  (c)  of  section  one
  thousand eighty-eight of this chapter notwithstanding, no interest shall
  be paid thereon.
    * NB There are 2 § 187-n's




   * §  187-n.  Fuel  cell  electric  generating  equipment  expenditures
  credit.  (1) Allowance of credit. For  taxable  years  beginning  before
  January  first,  two  thousand  nine,  a  taxpayer whose business is not
  substantially  engaged  in  the  commercial  generation,   distribution,
  transmission, or servicing of energy or energy products shall be allowed
  a  credit against the taxes imposed by sections one hundred eighty-three
  and one hundred eighty-four of this article, equal to its qualified fuel
  cell electric generating equipment expenditures. Provided, however, that
  the amount of such credit allowable against the tax imposed  by  section
  one  hundred  eighty-four  of  this  article  shall be the excess of the
  amount of such credit over the amount of  any  credit  allowed  by  this
  section  against  the tax imposed by section one hundred eighty-three of
  this article. This credit shall not exceed  one  thousand  five  hundred
  dollars per generating unit with respect to any taxable year. The credit
  provided for herein shall be allowed with respect to the taxable year in
  which the fuel cell electric generating equipment is placed in service.
    (2)  Qualified  fuel  cell electric generating equipment expenditures.
  (a) Qualified fuel cell electric generating equipment  expenditures  are
  the  costs,  incurred  on  or  after  July  first,  two  thousand  five,
  associated with the purchase of  on-site  electricity  generation  units
  utilizing  proton  exchange  membrane  fuel  cells,  providing  a  rated
  baseload capacity of no less than one kilowatt  of  electricity  and  no
  more  than  one  hundred  kilowatts of electricity, which are located in
  this state at the time  the  qualified  fuel  cell  electric  generating
  equipment is placed in service.
    (b)  Qualified  fuel  cell  electric generating equipment expenditures
  shall also include costs, incurred on or after July first, two  thousand
  five,  for  materials,  labor  for  on-site  preparation,  assembly  and
  original installation, engineering services, designs and plans  directly
  related to construction or installation and utility compliance costs.
    (c)  Such  qualified  expenditures shall not include interest or other
  finance charges.
    (d) The amount of any federal, state or local grant  received  by  the
  taxpayer,  which  was  used for the purchase and/or installation of such
  equipment and which was not included in the federal gross income of  the
  taxpayer,  shall  not  be  included  in  the  amount  of  such qualified
  expenditures.
    (3) Application of credit. In no event shall  the  credit  under  this
  section  be  allowed  in  an amount which will reduce the tax payable to
  less than the applicable  minimum  tax  fixed  by  section  one  hundred
  eighty-three  of  this  article.  If,  however,  the  amount  of  credit
  allowable under this section for any taxable year  reduces  the  tax  to
  such  amount,  any  amount of credit not deductible in such taxable year
  may be carried over to the following year or years and may  be  deducted
  from the taxpayer's tax for such year or years.
    * NB There are 2 § 187-n's




   * §  187-n.  Fuel  cell  electric  generating  equipment  expenditures
  credit.  (1) Allowance of credit. For  taxable  years  beginning  before
  January  first,  two  thousand  nine,  a  taxpayer whose business is not
  substantially  engaged  in  the  commercial  generation,   distribution,
  transmission, or servicing of energy or energy products shall be allowed
  a  credit against the taxes imposed by sections one hundred eighty-three
  and one hundred eighty-four of this article, equal to its qualified fuel
  cell electric generating equipment expenditures. Provided, however, that
  the amount of such credit allowable against the tax imposed  by  section
  one  hundred  eighty-four  of  this  article  shall be the excess of the
  amount of such credit over the amount of  any  credit  allowed  by  this
  section  against  the tax imposed by section one hundred eighty-three of
  this article. This credit shall not exceed  one  thousand  five  hundred
  dollars per generating unit with respect to any taxable year. The credit
  provided for herein shall be allowed with respect to the taxable year in
  which the fuel cell electric generating equipment is placed in service.
    (2)  Qualified  fuel  cell electric generating equipment expenditures.
  (a) Qualified fuel cell electric generating equipment  expenditures  are
  the  costs,  incurred  on  or  after  July  first,  two  thousand  five,
  associated with the purchase of  on-site  electricity  generation  units
  utilizing  proton  exchange  membrane  fuel  cells,  providing  a  rated
  baseload capacity of no less than one kilowatt  of  electricity  and  no
  more  than  one  hundred  kilowatts of electricity, which are located in
  this state at the time  the  qualified  fuel  cell  electric  generating
  equipment is placed in service.
    (b)  Qualified  fuel  cell  electric generating equipment expenditures
  shall also include costs, incurred on or after July first, two  thousand
  five,  for  materials,  labor  for  on-site  preparation,  assembly  and
  original installation, engineering services, designs and plans  directly
  related to construction or installation and utility compliance costs.
    (c)  Such  qualified  expenditures shall not include interest or other
  finance charges.
    (d) The amount of any federal, state or local grant  received  by  the
  taxpayer,  which  was  used for the purchase and/or installation of such
  equipment and which was not included in the federal gross income of  the
  taxpayer,  shall  not  be  included  in  the  amount  of  such qualified
  expenditures.
    (3) Application of credit. In no event shall  the  credit  under  this
  section  be  allowed  in  an amount which will reduce the tax payable to
  less than the applicable  minimum  tax  fixed  by  section  one  hundred
  eighty-three  of  this  article.  If,  however,  the  amount  of  credit
  allowable under this section for any taxable year  reduces  the  tax  to
  such  amount,  any  amount of credit not deductible in such taxable year
  may be carried over to the following year or years and may  be  deducted
  from the taxpayer's tax for such year or years.
    * NB There are 2 § 187-n's




   §  187-o. Temporary deferral nonrefundable payout credit. 1. Allowance
  of credit. A taxpayer shall be allowed  a  credit,  to  be  computed  as
  provided  in  subdivision  one  of  section thirty-four of this chapter,
  against either the taxes imposed by sections  one  hundred  eighty-three
  and  one  hundred eighty-four, or the tax imposed by section one hundred
  eighty-six-a of this article. However, the amount of such credit against
  the tax imposed by section one hundred eighty-four of this article shall
  be the excess of the amount of that credit over the amount of any credit
  allowed by this section against the tax imposed by section  one  hundred
  eighty-three of this article.
    2.  Application  of  credit.  In  no event shall the credit under this
  section be allowed in an amount which will reduce the tax to  less  than
  the  applicable minimum tax fixed by section one hundred eighty-three of
  this article. If, however, the  amount  of  credit  allowed  under  this
  section  for any taxable year reduces the tax to such amount, any amount
  of credit not deductible in such taxable year may be carried over to the
  following year or years and may be deducted from the taxpayer's tax  for
  such year or years.






	   §  187-p. Temporary deferral refundable payout credit. 1. Allowance of
  credit. A taxpayer shall be allowed a credit, to be computed as provided
  in subdivision two of section thirty-four of this chapter,  against  the
  taxes  imposed  by  sections  one  hundred  eighty-three and one hundred
  eighty-four of this article, or the tax imposed by section  one  hundred
  eighty-six-a of this article. However, the amount of such credit against
  the tax imposed by section one hundred eighty-four of this article shall
  be the excess of the amount of that credit over the amount of any credit
  allowed  by  this section against the tax imposed by section one hundred
  eighty-three of this article.
    2. Application of credit. In no event  shall  the  credit  under  this
  section  be  allowed in an amount which will reduce the tax to less than
  the applicable minimum tax fixed by section one hundred eighty-three  of
  this  article.  If,  however,  the  amount  of credit allowed under this
  section for any taxable year reduces the tax to such amount, any  amount
  of  credit  not  deductible  in such taxable year shall be treated as an
  overpayment of tax to be refunded in accordance with the  provisions  of
  section  one thousand eighty-six of this chapter, provided however, that
  no interest shall be paid thereon.




   §  187-p. Temporary deferral refundable payout credit. 1. Allowance of
  credit. A taxpayer shall be allowed a credit, to be computed as provided
  in subdivision two of section thirty-four of this chapter,  against  the
  taxes  imposed  by  sections  one  hundred  eighty-three and one hundred
  eighty-four of this article, or the tax imposed by section  one  hundred
  eighty-six-a of this article. However, the amount of such credit against
  the tax imposed by section one hundred eighty-four of this article shall
  be the excess of the amount of that credit over the amount of any credit
  allowed  by  this section against the tax imposed by section one hundred
  eighty-three of this article.
    2. Application of credit. In no event  shall  the  credit  under  this
  section  be  allowed in an amount which will reduce the tax to less than
  the applicable minimum tax fixed by section one hundred eighty-three  of
  this  article.  If,  however,  the  amount  of credit allowed under this
  section for any taxable year reduces the tax to such amount, any  amount
  of  credit  not  deductible  in such taxable year shall be treated as an
  overpayment of tax to be refunded in accordance with the  provisions  of
  section  one thousand eighty-six of this chapter, provided however, that
  no interest shall be paid thereon.




   §  187-q. Utility COVID-19 debt relief credit. 1. Allowance of credit.
  A taxpayer  doing  business  in  this  state  that  is  subject  to  the
  supervision  of  the public service commission shall be allowed a credit
  against the taxes imposed by this article, to be computed as hereinafter
  provided, for the amount  of  debt  that  the  taxpayer  has  waived  in
  accordance  with procedures established by the public service commission
  that was owed to the taxpayer by customers who received utility  arrears
  assistance  pursuant  to  the  chapter  of  the  laws  of  two  thousand
  twenty-one that enacted this section. Provided,  however,  that  if  the
  taxpayer  is subject to tax under both sections one hundred eighty-three
  and one hundred eighty-four of this article the amount  of  such  credit
  allowable   against   the  tax  imposed  by  such  section  one  hundred
  eighty-four shall be the excess of the amount of such  credit  over  the
  amount  of any credit allowed by this section against the tax imposed by
  section one hundred eighty-three of this article.
    2. Application of credit. In no event  shall  the  credit  under  this
  section be allowed in an amount that will reduce the tax payable to less
  than   the   applicable   minimum  tax  fixed  by  section  one  hundred
  eighty-three  of  this  article.  If,  however,  the  amount  of  credit
  allowable  under  this  section  for any taxable year reduces the tax to
  such amount, any amount of credit not deductible in  such  taxable  year
  shall  be  treated as an overpayment of tax to be refunded in accordance
  with the provisions of section one thousand eighty-six of this  chapter.
  Provided,  however,  the  provisions  of  subsection  (c) of section one
  thousand eighty-eight of this chapter notwithstanding, no interest shall
  be paid thereon.
    3. Certification. No amount of waived customer debt may be  the  basis
  for  the  credit  herein  unless  such amount is certified by the public
  service  commission  as  provided  herein.  After  consulting  with  the
  commissioner,  the  public service commission shall establish procedures
  for determining the amount of waived customer debt that may be used as a
  basis for the tax credit allowed by this section. Such procedures  shall
  include  provisions  describing the application process, application due
  dates,  the  documentation  that  will  be  provided  by  taxpayers   to
  substantiate  the  amount  of  customer  debt  that  was  waived by such
  taxpayers, the process by which  the  public  service  commission  shall
  certify  to  a  taxpayer  and  to  the commissioner the amount of waived
  customer debt that qualifies for the credit, and such  other  provisions
  as deemed necessary and appropriate.
    4.  Timing  of  credit.  The  credit  allowed by this section shall be
  claimed in the taxable year  in  which  the  public  service  commission
  certifies  the  amount  of  customer  debt  waived  by the taxpayer that
  qualifies for the credit allowed by this section.
    5. Credit recapture. If the certification made by the  public  service
  commission  under  subdivision  three  of this section is revoked by the
  public service commission,  the  amount  of  credit  described  in  this
  section  and  claimed  by the taxpayer prior to that revocation shall be
  added back to the tax in the  taxable  year  in  which  such  revocation
  becomes final.
    6. Information sharing. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter,
  employees  and  officers  of  the  public  service  commission  and  the
  department shall be allowed and  are  directed  to  share  and  exchange
  information  regarding the credits allowed, or claimed, pursuant to this
  section, and the taxpayers who are  applying  for  credits  or  who  are
  claiming  credits,  including  information  contained in or derived from
  credit claim forms submitted to the department, and the  information  of
  the  taxpayer  used by the department of public service to determine the
  amount of waived customer debt.




   §  188.  Tax  surcharge.  1.  In  addition  to the taxes imposed under
  sections one hundred eighty-three, one hundred eighty-four, one  hundred
  eighty-six and one hundred eighty-six-a of this article, there is hereby
  imposed,  for  years  ending  on December thirty-first, nineteen hundred
  ninety,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-one,  nineteen  hundred   ninety-two,
  nineteen  hundred  ninety-three,  nineteen hundred ninety-four, nineteen
  hundred ninety-five and nineteen hundred ninety-six, and, in addition to
  the tax imposed under section one hundred eighty-six-e of this  article,
  there  is  hereby  imposed,  for  years ending on December thirty-first,
  nineteen hundred ninety-five and  nineteen  hundred  ninety-six,  a  tax
  surcharge  at the rate of fifteen percent in the case of years ending on
  December  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety,   nineteen   hundred
  ninety-one,   nineteen   hundred   ninety-two   and   nineteen   hundred
  ninety-three, and until such rate is superseded;  at  the  rate  of  ten
  percent  in  the case of years ending on December thirty-first, nineteen
  hundred ninety-four, and until such rate is superseded; at the  rate  of
  five  percent  in  the  case  of  years ending on December thirty-first,
  nineteen hundred ninety-five, and until such rate is superseded; and  at
  the  rate  of  zero  percent  in  the  case  of years ending on December
  thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-six,  of  the  tax  imposed  under
  sections  one hundred eighty-three, one hundred eighty-four, one hundred
  eighty-six, one hundred eighty-six-a and  one  hundred  eighty-six-e  of
  this  article,  after  deduction  of  any  credits against tax otherwise
  allowable under this article. However, the tax surcharge imposed by this
  section shall not be imposed upon any taxpayer for more than eighty-four
  months (or twenty-four months, in the case  of  the  tax  imposed  under
  section  one  hundred eighty-six-e).   The credits against tax otherwise
  allowable under this article  shall  not  be  allowed  against  the  tax
  surcharge  imposed  by  this section. Provided that, with respect to the
  year ending on December thirty-first, nineteen hundred  ninety-one,  the
  foregoing  tax surcharge imposed under this section with respect to such
  section one hundred eighty-six-a of this article shall be computed based
  upon the tax liability under such section for such  period  undiminished
  by  the  application  of  any utility credit under article thirteen-A of
  this chapter. Provided, further, that in addition to the  aforesaid  tax
  surcharge  imposed with respect to such section one hundred eighty-six-a
  of this article for the year ending  on  December  thirty-one,  nineteen
  hundred ninety-one, for such year there is also hereby imposed an amount
  in  addition to such surcharge; such additional amount shall be equal to
  fifteen percent of the total amount of the utility credit under  article
  thirteen-A of this chapter which was applied against tax liability under
  such  section  one hundred eighty-six-a of this article for the tax year
  ending December thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety.
    1-a. Insofar as subdivision one of this section establishes a rate  of
  fifteen  percent  in  the case of years ending on December thirty-first,
  nineteen hundred ninety-three and until such rate is superseded, a  rate
  of  ten  percent  in  the case of years ending on December thirty-first,
  nineteen hundred ninety-four and until such rate is superseded,  a  rate
  of  five  percent  in the case of years ending on December thirty-first,
  nineteen hundred ninety-five and until such rate is  superseded,  and  a
  rate   of  zero  percent  in  the  case  of  years  ending  on  December
  thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-six, the transition from such rate
  of fifteen percent to such rate of ten percent, from such  rate  of  ten
  percent to such rate of five percent, and from such rate of five percent
  to such rate of zero percent, shall be deemed to occur, respectively, on
  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month of each of such years ending on
  December thirty-first, nineteen hundred  ninety-four,  nineteen  hundred
  ninety-five  and  nineteen  hundred ninety-six, with the result that for


 purposes of implementation of such changes in rates, and notwithstanding
  such subdivision one, there is hereby imposed with respect to all  years
  ending on December thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-four, including
  years of fewer than twelve months, a tax surcharge at the rate of twelve
  and  one-half percent; there is hereby imposed with respect to all years
  ending on December thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-five, including
  years of fewer than twelve months, a tax surcharge at the rate of  seven
  and  one-half  percent;  and there is hereby imposed with respect to all
  years ending on  December  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-six,
  including years of fewer than twelve months, a tax surcharge at the rate
  of two and one-half percent.
    2.  The  provisions  concerning  reports  under  sections  one hundred
  eighty-six-a, one hundred eighty-six-e and  one  hundred  ninety-two  of
  this article shall be applicable to this section, except that the report
  covering the tax surcharge computed on the tax imposed under section one
  hundred  eighty-three  of  this  article shall be filed on or before the
  date one year after the date on which the report of such tax is required
  to be filed.  An extension pursuant to section one hundred  ninety-three
  shall  be  allowed, for taxable years to which the tax surcharge imposed
  by this section applies, only if a taxpayer files with the  commissioner
  an  application  for  extension  in  such  form as said commissioner may
  prescribe, and pays on or before the date of such filing in addition  to
  any  other amounts required under this article, either ninety percent of
  the tax surcharge required  to  be  paid  under  this  section  for  the
  applicable  period  or  not  less  than  the  tax surcharge shown on the
  taxpayer's report for the preceding period,  if  such  preceding  period
  consisted  of twelve months, or in the case of the tax surcharge for the
  year ending December  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety,  fifteen
  percent  of  the  tax  after  the  deduction  of  credits,  shown on the
  taxpayer's report for the year ending  December  thirty-first,  nineteen
  hundred  eighty-nine  if  such  year consisted of twelve months. The tax
  surcharge imposed by this section shall be payable to  the  commissioner
  in full at the time the report is required to be filed.
    3. Except as otherwise provided in this section, all of the provisions
  of  this  article,  except  for sections one hundred eighty-three-a, one
  hundred   eighty-four-a,   one   hundred   eighty-six-b,   one   hundred
  eighty-six-c  and  two  hundred  five,  shall apply to the tax surcharge
  imposed by this section with such modifications as may be  necessary  to
  adapt  such  language to the tax surcharge imposed by this section. Such
  provisions shall apply with the  same  force  and  effect  as  if  those
  provisions  had  been  set  forth  in full in this section except to the
  extent that any provision is either inconsistent  with  a  provision  of
  this  section  or  not  relevant  to  the  tax surcharge imposed by this
  section, and to that end a reference in this article to the tax  imposed
  by  section  one  hundred  eighty-three,  one  hundred  eighty-four, one
  hundred eighty-six, one hundred eighty-six-a or one hundred eighty-six-e
  of this article shall be read  as  a  reference  to  the  tax  surcharge
  imposed  by  this  section,  and  to  the  sum  of such tax and such tax
  surcharge in the case of sections one  hundred  ninety-seven-a  and  one
  hundred  ninety-seven-b  of  this  article  and  such  other  provisions
  requiring such reading in order  to  effectuate  the  purposes  of  this
  provision, unless a different meaning is clearly required.
    4.  The amount of tax surcharge imposed pursuant to this section shall
  not be included in any calculation of a tax surcharge  imposed  pursuant
  to  section  one  hundred eighty-three-a, one hundred eighty-four-a, one
  hundred eighty-six-b or one hundred eighty-six-c of this article.




   §  189-b.  Tax  surcharge.  1.  In  addition  to the tax imposed under
  section one hundred eighty-nine of this article, there is hereby imposed
  a tax surcharge at the rate  of  fifteen  percent,  for  taxable  months
  beginning  on  or  after  August  first, nineteen hundred ninety-one and
  ending  on   or   before   December   thirty-first,   nineteen   hundred
  ninety-three;  at  the rate of ten percent, for taxable months beginning
  on or after January first, nineteen hundred ninety-four and ending on or
  before May thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-five; at  the  rate  of
  seven  and  one-half  percent,  for taxable months beginning on or after
  June first, nineteen hundred ninety-five and ending  on  or  before  May
  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred  ninety-six; and at the rate of two and
  one-half percent, for taxable months beginning on or after  June  first,
  nineteen  hundred  ninety-six  and ending on or before May thirty-first,
  nineteen hundred ninety-seven, of the  tax  imposed  under  section  one
  hundred eighty-nine of this article.
    2. The provisions concerning reports, payment and collection of tax in
  subdivision  three  of  section  one hundred eighty-nine of this article
  shall be applicable to this section.   All of  the  provisions  of  this
  article  presently applicable to section one hundred eighty-nine of this
  article are applicable to the tax surcharge imposed by this section.
    3. The amount of tax surcharge imposed pursuant to this section  shall
  not  be  included in any calculation of a tax surcharge imposed pursuant
  to section one hundred eighty-nine-a of this article.




   §  190. Long-term care insurance credit.  1. General. A taxpayer shall
  be allowed a credit against the tax imposed by  this  article  equal  to
  twenty percent of the premium paid during the taxable year for long-term
  care  insurance.  In  order  to  qualify for such credit, the taxpayer's
  premium payment must be for the purchase of or for  continuing  coverage
  under  a  long-term care insurance policy that qualifies for such credit
  pursuant to section one thousand one hundred seventeen of the  insurance
  law.
    2.  Computation.  The  credit  allowed  by this section shall first be
  deducted from the taxes imposed by section one hundred  eighty-three  or
  former section one hundred eighty-six of this article. The amount of any
  such  credit  remaining shall next be deducted from the taxes imposed by
  section one hundred eighty-four of this article.
    3. Carryover. In no event shall the amount  of  credit  allowed  under
  this  section  reduce the tax payable to less than the minimum tax fixed
  by section one  hundred  eighty-three  or  former  section  one  hundred
  eighty-six  of this article. If, however, the amount of credit allowable
  under this section for any taxable year reduces the tax to such  amount,
  any  amount of credit not deductible in such taxable year may be carried
  over to the following year  or  years  and  may  be  deducted  from  the
  taxpayer's tax for such year or years.




   §  191. Receivers, etc., conducting corporate business.  Any receiver,
  liquidator, referee, trustee, assignee, or other fiduciary or officer or
  agent  appointed  by  any  court,  who  conducts  the  business  of  any
  corporation,   limited   liability   company,  joint  stock  company  or
  association shall be subject to the tax imposed by this article  in  the
  same  manner and to the same extent as if the business were conducted by
  the agents or officers of such corporation, limited  liability  company,
  joint  stock  company or association.   A dissolved corporation, limited
  liability company, joint stock company or association which continues to
  conduct business shall also be  subject  to  the  tax  imposed  by  this
  article.




   § 192. Reports of corporations. Corporations liable to pay a tax under
  this article shall report as follows:
    1.  Corporations  paying franchise tax. Every corporation, association
  or joint-stock company liable to pay a tax  under  section  one  hundred
  eighty-three of this chapter shall, on or before March fifteenth in each
  year,  for  taxable  years  beginning before January first, two thousand
  seventeen, and on or before April fifteenth in each  year,  for  taxable
  years  beginning on or after January first, two thousand seventeen, make
  a written report to the commissioner of its condition at  the  close  of
  its  business on the preceding December thirty-first, stating the amount
  of its authorized capital stock, the amount of stock paid in,  the  date
  and  rate  per centum of each dividend paid by it during the year ending
  with such day, the entire amount of the capital of such corporation, and
  the capital employed by it in this state during such year.
    2. Transportation and transmission corporations. Every  transportation
  or  transmission  corporation, joint-stock company or association liable
  to pay an additional franchise tax under section one hundred eighty-four
  of this chapter, shall also, on or before March fifteenth of each  year,
  make  a  written  report  to the commissioner of the amount of its gross
  earnings subject to the tax imposed by said section for the  year  ended
  on  the  preceding  December  thirty-first,  for taxable years beginning
  before January first, two thousand sixteen, except that the  year  ended
  on  December thirty-first, nineteen hundred seventy-six shall be deemed,
  for the purposes of this subdivision, to have commenced on  July  first,
  nineteen  hundred  seventy-six,  and  shall  also,  on  or  before April
  fifteenth of each year, make a written report to the commissioner of the
  amount of its gross earnings subject to the tax imposed by said  section
  for  the  year ended on the preceding December thirty-first, for taxable
  years beginning on or after January first,  two  thousand  sixteen.  Any
  such  corporation, joint-stock company or association which ceases to be
  subject to the tax imposed by section one hundred  eighty-four  of  this
  chapter by reason of a liquidation, dissolution, merger or consolidation
  with  any  other  corporation, or any other cause, shall, on the date of
  such cessation or at such other time as the  commissioner  may  require,
  make  a  written  report  to the commissioner of the amount of its gross
  earnings subject to the tax imposed by section one  hundred  eighty-four
  of  this  chapter  for  any  period  for which no report was theretofore
  filed. Any corporation, joint-stock company or association subject to  a
  tax  upon  dividends  under said section one hundred eighty-four of this
  chapter shall also include in its report under this subdivision required
  to be filed a statement of the authorized capital of  the  company,  the
  amount  of  capital  stock  issued, and the amount of dividends of every
  nature  paid  during  the  year  ended   on   the   preceding   December
  thirty-first.  As to tax payers subject to such tax upon dividends under
  said section one hundred eighty-four of this chapter, the year ended  on
  December thirty-first, nineteen hundred seventy-six shall be deemed, for
  the  purposes  of  this  subdivision,  to  have commenced on July first,
  nineteen hundred seventy-six.
    4. Insurance corporations.  (a)  Except  as  hereinafter  provided  in
  paragraph  (b),  every  insurance  corporation liable to pay a tax under
  section one hundred eighty-seven of this chapter  shall,  on  or  before
  March  first,  June  first,  September  first and December first in each
  year,  make  a  written  report  to  the  tax  commission  and  to   the
  superintendent of financial services covering the quarter year ending on
  the  last  day  of the third month preceding that in which the report is
  required to be filed, in such form and containing  such  information  as
  the  tax  commission may deem necessary for the determination of the tax
  due for each such quarter year. There shall also be filed with  the  tax


 commission  and  with  the  superintendent  of financial services, on or
  before March fifteenth of each year, a statement  which  will  reconcile
  the  net  taxable premiums shown in the quarterly reports, made pursuant
  to  this  section, for the preceding calendar year, with the total gross
  and net  premiums  shown  in  the  annual  statement  of  the  insurance
  corporation  filed  with  said  superintendent of financial services for
  such year pursuant to section three hundred seven of the insurance law.
    (b) Every insurance corporation liable to pay a tax under subdivisions
  six and eight of section one hundred eighty-seven of this chapter shall,
  on or before the fifteenth day of March, make and file a written  report
  with  the  tax  commission  and  with  the  superintendent  of financial
  services, covering  the  preceding  calendar  year,  in  such  form  and
  containing such information as the tax commission may deem necessary for
  the  determination  of  the  tax  imposed by said subdivisions, and such
  calendar year shall be deemed the taxable year  within  the  meaning  of
  this  section and of said subdivisions, provided, however that insurance
  corporations liable to pay tax under subdivision eight  of  section  one
  hundred  eighty-seven  shall  be  required  to make the reports required
  herein only on the fifteenth day of March in the years nineteen  hundred
  sixty-five through and including nineteen hundred seventy-six.
    5.  Notwithstanding  the provisions of section two hundred two of this
  article,  the  commissioner  shall  provide  the  statements  and  other
  required information requested on tax reports under section four hundred
  eight  of  the  business  corporation  law to the secretary of state for
  filing. Such provision may also include a copy or image of that  portion
  of  the  report  solely  pertinent  to  such  information  to the extent
  feasible.   The   commissioner   may   also   provide   information   on
  noncompliance.




   §  193.   Extension of time for filing report.  The tax commission may
  for good cause shown extend the time within  which  any  corporation  is
  required to report by this article.




   §  194.    Further  requirements as to reports of corporations.  Every
  report  required  by  this  article  shall  have   annexed   thereto   a
  certification  by  the  president,  vice-president, treasurer, assistant
  treasurer, or chief accounting officer  or  any  other  officer  of  the
  corporation,  association  or  joint-stock company duly authorized so to
  act, or of the person or one of the  persons,  or  the  members  of  the
  partnership making the same, to the effect that the statements contained
  therein  are  true. In the case of an association, within the meaning of
  paragraph three of subsection (a) of section seventy-seven  hundred  one
  of  the internal revenue code (including a limited liability company), a
  publicly traded partnership treated as a corporation for purposes of the
  internal revenue code pursuant to  section  seventy-seven  hundred  four
  thereof  and  any  business  conducted  by a trustee or trustees wherein
  interest or ownership is evidenced  by  certificates  or  other  written
  instruments,  such  certification  shall  be  made  by  any  person duly
  authorized so to act on behalf  of  such  association,  publicly  traded
  partnership,  limited  liability  company  or business. The fact that an
  individual's name is signed on a  certification  attached  to  a  report
  shall  be  prima  facie  evidence  that such individual is authorized to
  certify the report on behalf of the taxpayer. Such reports shall contain
  any other data, information or matter which the commissioner may require
  to be included therein, and it may prescribe  the  form  in  which  such
  reports  shall  be made.  When so prescribed such forms shall be used in
  making the report. The commissioner may require at any time a further or
  supplemental report under this article, which shall contain  information
  and  data  upon  such  matters as the commissioner may specify.  Reports
  shall be preserved for five years, and thereafter until the commissioner
  orders them to be destroyed.




   §  197.  Payment  of tax and penalties. 1. To the extent the taxes and
  fees imposed by this article shall not have been previously paid,
    (a) such taxes and fees, or the balance thereof, shall be  payable  to
  the tax commission in full at the time the taxpayer's report is required
  to be filed, and
    (b)  such  taxes  and  fees,  or  the  balance thereof, imposed on any
  taxpayer which ceased to exercise its franchise or to be subject to  any
  of the taxes or fees imposed by this article shall be payable to the tax
  commission  at the time the report is required to be filed, provided any
  such tax or fee of a domestic corporation which continues to possess its
  franchise shall be  subject  to  adjustment  as  the  circumstances  may
  require;  all  other taxes and fees of any such taxpayer, which pursuant
  to the foregoing provisions of this section would otherwise  be  payable
  subsequent  to  the  time  such  report  is  required to be filed, shall
  nevertheless be payable at such time.
    2. Where an application for consent to  dissolution,  as  provided  by
  section one thousand four of the business corporation law, is filed with
  the  commissioner  of  taxation and finance, such consent shall be given
  only if the commissioner of taxation and  finance  ascertains  that  all
  fees  and  taxes  imposed  under this chapter or any related statute, as
  defined in  section  eighteen  hundred  of  this  chapter,  as  well  as
  penalties  and  interest  charges  related  thereto, accrued against the
  corporation have been paid, and where such application  for  consent  to
  dissolution is filed with such commissioner prior to the commencement of
  any  tax  year or period, by a corporation subject to tax under articles
  nine or nine-a of this chapter, such corporation shall not be liable for
  any tax imposed by said articles  for  such  following  year  or  period
  (except  as may be otherwise provided in section one hundred ninety-one,
  subdivision nine of section one hundred eighty-two, subdivision nine  of
  section  one  hundred  eighty-two-a,  subdivision  nine  of  section one
  hundred eighty-two-b and subdivision three of section two  hundred  nine
  of  this chapter), provided that the certificate of dissolution for such
  corporation is duly filed in the office of the secretary of state within
  ninety days after the commencement of such tax year or period  and  such
  corporation does not conduct business in such tax year or period.
    3.  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  this  article, the tax
  commission may grant a reasonable extension of time for payment  of  any
  tax  or  fee  imposed  by this article under such conditions as it deems
  just and proper.




   §  197-a.  Declaration of estimated tax.  1. Every taxpayer subject to
  the taxes imposed under sections one  hundred  eighty-two,  one  hundred
  eighty-two-a,  former  section  one  hundred  eighty-two-b,  one hundred
  eighty-four, one hundred eighty-six-a or  one  hundred  eighty-six-e  of
  this  article  shall  make  a  declaration  of its estimated tax for the
  current taxable year, containing such information  as  the  commissioner
  may  prescribe by regulations or instructions, if such estimated tax can
  reasonably be expected to exceed one thousand dollars. If a taxpayer  is
  subject   to  the  tax  surcharge  imposed  under  section  one  hundred
  eighty-four-a or one hundred  eighty-six-c  of  this  article  and  such
  taxpayer's  estimated  tax  under section one hundred eighty-four or one
  hundred eighty-six-a of this article, respectively,  can  reasonably  be
  expected to exceed one thousand dollars, such taxpayer shall also make a
  declaration of its estimated tax surcharge for the current taxable year.
    2.  The  terms  "estimated tax" and "estimated tax surcharge" mean the
  amounts which the taxpayer estimates to be the taxes or tax  surcharges,
  respectively,  imposed  by  the  sections  enumerated in subdivision one
  hereof for the current taxable year, less the sum of any  credits  which
  it  estimates  to  be  allowable  against  such taxes or tax surcharges,
  respectively.
    3. A declaration of estimated tax and a declaration of  estimated  tax
  surcharge  shall  be  filed  on  or before June fifteenth of the current
  taxable year in the case of a taxpayer which reports on the basis  of  a
  calendar  year,  except  that  if the requirements of subdivision one of
  this section are first met:
    (a) after May thirty-first and before September first of such  current
  taxable  year,  the  declaration  shall  be filed on or before September
  fifteenth, or
    (b) after August  thirty-first  and  before  December  first  of  such
  current  taxable  year,  the  declaration  shall  be  filed on or before
  December fifteenth.
    4.  A  taxpayer  may  amend  a  declaration  of  estimated  tax  or  a
  declaration  of  estimated tax surcharge under regulations prescribed by
  the commissioner of taxation and finance.
    5. If, on or before February fifteenth of the succeeding year  in  the
  case  of  a  taxpayer  whose taxable year is a calendar year, a taxpayer
  files its return for the year for which the declaration is required, and
  pays therewith the balance, if any, of the full amount of the tax or tax
  surcharge shown to be due on the return:
    (a)  such  return  shall  be  considered  as  its  declaration  if  no
  declaration  was  required to be filed during the taxable year for which
  the tax or tax surcharge was imposed, but is otherwise  required  to  be
  filed  on  or  before  December  fifteenth  pursuant to paragraph (b) of
  subdivision three of this section, and
    (b) such return shall be considered  as  the  amendment  permitted  by
  subdivision  four  of  this  section  to  be filed on or before December
  fifteenth if the tax or tax surcharge shown on  the  return  is  greater
  than  the  estimated tax or estimated tax surcharge, as the case may be,
  shown on a declaration previously made.
    6. If the taxable period for which a tax or tax surcharge  is  imposed
  under  any of the sections enumerated in subdivision one hereof is other
  than twelve months, every taxpayer required to  make  a  declaration  of
  estimated  tax  or  a  declaration  of  estimated tax surcharge for such
  taxable period shall make such declaration in accordance with  rules  of
  the commissioner.
    7.  This section shall apply to taxable periods of twelve months other
  than a calendar year by the substitution of the months  of  such  fiscal
  year for the corresponding months specified in this section.


   8. The tax commission may grant a reasonable extension of time, not to
  exceed three months, for the filing of any declaration required pursuant
  to this section, on such terms and conditions as it may require.








   § 197-b. Payments of estimated tax. 1. (a) For taxable years beginning
  on  or  after  January  first,  nineteen  hundred  seventy-seven,  every
  taxpayer subject to tax  under  section  one  hundred  eighty-four,  one
  hundred  eighty-six-a  or one hundred eighty-six-e of this article, must
  pay in each year an amount equal to (i) twenty-five percent of  the  tax
  imposed  under  each  of  such sections for the second preceding taxable
  year if the second preceding year's tax exceeded  one  thousand  dollars
  but  was  equal  to  or  less than one hundred thousand dollars, or (ii)
  forty percent of the tax imposed under any of  these  sections  for  the
  second  preceding  taxable  year  if  the  second  preceding  year's tax
  exceeded one hundred thousand dollars. If the  second  preceding  year's
  tax  under  section one hundred eighty-four, one hundred eighty-six-a or
  one hundred eighty-six-e of this article exceeded one  thousand  dollars
  and  the taxpayer is subject to the tax surcharge imposed by section one
  hundred eighty-four-a or  one  hundred  eighty-six-c  of  this  article,
  respectively,  the  taxpayer  must  also pay in each such year an amount
  equal to (i) twenty-five percent of the tax surcharge imposed under such
  section for the second preceding taxable year if  the  second  preceding
  year's  tax  exceeded one thousand dollars but was equal to or less than
  one hundred thousand dollars, or (ii) forty percent of the tax surcharge
  imposed under that section for the second preceding taxable year if  the
  second  preceding  year's tax exceeded one hundred thousand dollars. The
  amount or amounts must be paid with the return or report required to  be
  filed with respect to the tax or tax surcharge for the preceding taxable
  year  or  with  an  application for extension of the time for filing the
  return or report, for taxable years beginning before January first,  two
  thousand  sixteen.  The amount or amounts that must be paid with respect
  to the tax or tax surcharge for the second preceding year must  be  paid
  on or before the fifteenth day of the third month following the close of
  the taxable year, for taxable years beginning on or after January first,
  two thousand sixteen.
    (b)  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  this  article  to the
  contrary, any taxpayer required under this subdivision to pay an  amount
  equal  to  twenty-five percent of its tax for the taxable year ending on
  December thirty-first, nineteen hundred seventy-six shall  compute  such
  amount  as if its tax for such taxable year were determined on the basis
  of its gross earnings, dividends paid, gross income or  gross  operating
  income,  as  the  case  may  be,  for either the preceding twelve months
  ending on such date or for the period from the date of its incorporation
  under the laws of this state or the date it  commenced  carrying  on  or
  doing  business  in  New  York  to  and including December thirty-first,
  nineteen  hundred  seventy-six,  if  such  date  of   incorporation   or
  commencement  of the carrying on or doing business was within the twelve
  months immediately preceding  December  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred
  seventy-six.
    2.  The estimated tax or estimated tax surcharge for each taxable year
  with respect to which a declaration of estimated tax or a declaration of
  estimated tax surcharge, respectively, is required  to  be  filed  under
  this  article  shall be paid, in the case of a taxpayer which reports on
  the basis of a calendar year, as follows:
    (a) If the declaration is filed  on  or  before  June  fifteenth,  the
  estimated  tax  or estimated tax surcharge shown thereon, after applying
  thereto the amount, if any, paid during the same taxable  year  pursuant
  to  subdivision  one  of  this  section,  shall  be  paid in three equal
  installments. One of such installments shall be paid at the time of  the
  filing  of the declaration, one shall be paid on the following September
  fifteenth, and one on the following December fifteenth.


   (b) If the declaration is filed after June  fifteenth  and  not  after
  September  fifteenth  of  such  taxable  year, and is not required to be
  filed on or before June fifteenth of such year,  the  estimated  tax  or
  estimated  tax  surcharge  shown  on  such  declaration,  after applying
  thereto  the  amount, if any, paid during the same taxable year pursuant
  to subdivision  one  of  this  section,  shall  be  paid  in  two  equal
  installments.  One of such installments shall be paid at the time of the
  filing of the declaration  and  one  shall  be  paid  on  the  following
  December fifteenth.
    (c)  If  the  declaration  is  filed after September fifteenth of such
  taxable year, and is not required to be filed  on  or  before  September
  fifteenth  of  such  year,  the estimated tax or estimated tax surcharge
  shown on such declaration, after applying thereto the  amount,  if  any,
  paid in respect of such year pursuant to subdivision one of this section
  shall be paid in full at the time of the filing of the declaration.
    (d) If the declaration is filed after the time prescribed therefor, or
  after  the  expiration of any extension of time therefor, paragraphs (b)
  and (c) of this subdivision shall not apply and there shall be  paid  at
  the  time  of such filing all installments of estimated tax or estimated
  tax surcharge  payable  at  or  before  such  time,  and  the  remaining
  installments  shall be paid at the times at which, and in the amounts in
  which, they would have been payable if the declaration  had  been  filed
  when due.
    3.  If  any  amendment  of  a  declaration  is  filed,  the  remaining
  installments, if any, shall be ratably increased or  decreased  (as  the
  case may be) to reflect any increase or decrease in the estimated tax or
  estimated  tax  surcharge  by  reason  of  such  amendment,  and  if any
  amendment is made after September fifteenth of  the  taxable  year,  any
  increase  in  the  estimated  tax  or  estimated tax surcharge by reason
  thereof shall be paid at the time of making such amendment.
    4. Any amount paid pursuant to subdivision one shall be applied  as  a
  first  installment against the estimated tax or estimated tax surcharge,
  respectively, of  the  taxpayer  for  the  taxable  year  shown  on  the
  declaration  required  to  be  filed  pursuant  to  section  one hundred
  ninety-seven-a of this chapter, or if no declaration is  filed  pursuant
  to  such  section,  any  such  amount  shall  be considered a payment on
  account of the tax or tax  surcharge  shown  on  the  return  or  report
  required to be filed by the taxpayer for such taxable year.
    5. Notwithstanding the provisions of section one thousand eighty-eight
  of  this  chapter  or  section  sixteen  of the state finance law, if an
  amount paid pursuant to subdivision one of this section exceeds the  tax
  or  tax  surcharge, respectively, shown on the return or report required
  to be filed by the taxpayer for  the  taxable  year  during  which  such
  amount  was  paid,  interest  shall be allowed and paid on the amount by
  which the amount so paid pursuant to subdivision one exceeds such tax or
  tax surcharge, at the  overpayment  rate  set  by  the  commissioner  of
  taxation and finance pursuant to subdivision (e) of section one thousand
  ninety-six  or, if no rate is set, at the rate of six percent per annum,
  from the date of  payment  of  the  amount  so  paid  pursuant  to  such
  subdivision  one  to  the fifteenth day of the third month following the
  close of the taxable year, provided, however, that no interest shall  be
  allowed  or  paid  under  this subdivision if the amount thereof is less
  than one dollar.
    6. As used in this section, "the second preceding  year's  tax"  means
  the  tax  imposed  upon the taxpayer by section one hundred eighty-four,
  one hundred eighty-six-a or one hundred eighty-six-e of this article for
  the second preceding taxable year.


   7. This section shall apply to a taxable period of  less  than  twelve
  months in accordance with regulations of the tax commission.
    8.  The  commissioner  of  taxation and finance may grant a reasonable
  extension of time, not to exceed six months,  for  the  payment  of  any
  installment  of  estimated  tax  or  estimated  tax  surcharge  required
  pursuant to this section,  on  such  terms  and  conditions  as  he  may
  require,  including  the  furnishing  of a bond or other security by the
  taxpayer in an amount not exceeding  twice  the  amount  for  which  any
  extension  of  time  for  payment  is  granted,  provided, however, that
  interest at the underpayment rate set by the  commissioner  pursuant  to
  subdivision  (e)  of  section  one thousand ninety-six or, if no rate is
  set, at the rate of  six  percent  per  annum  for  the  period  of  the
  extension,  shall  be  charged and collected on the amount for which any
  extension of time for payment is granted under this subdivision.
    9. A taxpayer may elect to pay any installment  of  estimated  tax  or
  estimated tax surcharge prior to the date prescribed in this section for
  payment thereof.
    10.  The  provisions of this section shall apply to taxable periods of
  twelve months other than a calendar year  by  the  substitution  of  the
  months  of  such  fiscal  year for the corresponding months specified in
  such provisions.
    11. Any amount paid pursuant to paragraph four of  subsection  (c)  of
  section  six hundred fifty-eight of this chapter on behalf of a taxpayer
  subject to tax under this article shall be applied against the estimated
  tax of the taxpayer for  the  taxable  year  shown  on  the  declaration
  required  to  be filed pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven-a of
  this article, or if no declaration is filed pursuant  to  such  section,
  any  such  amount  shall  be  considered a payment on account of the tax
  shown on the report required to  be  filed  by  the  taxpayer  for  such
  taxable year.




   §   197-c.   Applicability   of   section  one  hundred  eighty-two-a.
  Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, with respect
  to the tax imposed by section one hundred eighty-two-a of this  article,
  a  declaration  of estimated tax of a taxpayer with a taxable year which
  is the calendar year nineteen hundred eighty-one, shall be filed  on  or
  before September fifteen of such year and the estimated tax with respect
  to  which such declaration is required to be filed, shall be paid in two
  equal installments as  follows:  on  September  fifteenth  and  December
  fifteenth  of such year. The provisions of this section shall apply to a
  taxpayer subject  to  the  tax  imposed  by  such  section  one  hundred
  eighty-two-a  with  a  taxabl  period  of  twelve  months,  other than a
  calendar year, which period commences in nineteen hundred eighty-one  by
  the substitution of the months of such fiscal year for the corresponding
  months  specified  in  this provision for a taxpayer with a taxable year
  which is the calendar year nineteen hundred eighty-one. If  the  taxable
  period   for   which  the  tax  imposed  by  such  section  one  hundred
  eighty-two-a is other than twelve months,  every  taxpayer  required  to
  make  a  declaration  of  estimated  tax  and  payments of estimated tax
  pursuant to the provisions of this section shall make  such  declaration
  and such payments in accordance with regulations of the tax commission.




   §  197-d. The provisions of article twenty-seven of this chapter which
  pertain to  declarations  and  payments  of  estimated  taxes  shall  be
  applicable  to declarations and payments of estimated tax required under
  this article as if this article had been  specifically  incorporated  in
  and referred to in such provisions.




   § 202. Secrecy required of officials; penalty for violation. 1. Except
  in  accordance  with  proper  judicial order or as otherwise provided by
  law, it shall be unlawful for  any  tax  commissioner,  any  officer  or
  employee  of  the department of taxation and finance, or any person who,
  pursuant to this section, is permitted to inspect any report, or to whom
  any information contained in any report  is  furnished,  or  any  person
  engaged or retained by such department on an independent contract basis,
  or any person who in any manner may acquire knowledge of the contents of
  a report filed pursuant to this article, to divulge or make known in any
  manner the amount of income or any particulars set forth or disclosed in
  any  report under this article. The officers charged with the custody of
  such reports shall not be required to produce any of them or evidence of
  anything contained in them in any action or  proceeding  in  any  court,
  except  on  behalf  of  the  state  or  the commissioner of taxation and
  finance in an action or proceeding under the provisions of this  chapter
  or  in  any other action or proceeding involving the collection of a tax
  due under this chapter  to  which  the  state  or  the  commissioner  of
  taxation and finance is a party or a claimant, or on behalf of any party
  to  any  action  or proceeding under the provisions of this article when
  the reports or facts shown thereby are directly involved in such  action
  or  proceeding,  in  any  of  which  events  the  court  may require the
  production of, and may admit in evidence, so much of said reports or  of
  the  facts  shown  thereby, as are pertinent to the action or proceeding
  and no more. The commissioner of taxation and finance may, nevertheless,
  publish a copy or a summary of any determination  or  decision  rendered
  after   the   formal  hearing  provided  for  in  section  one  thousand
  eighty-nine of this  chapter.  Nothing  herein  shall  be  construed  to
  prohibit   the   delivery  to  a  corporation  or  its  duly  authorized
  representative of a copy of any report filed by it, nor to prohibit  the
  publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification
  of  particular  reports  and  the  items  thereof, or the publication of
  delinquent lists showing the names of taxpayers who have failed  to  pay
  their  taxes  at  the  time  and  in  the manner provided by section one
  hundred ninety-seven together with any relevant information which in the
  opinion of the commissioner of taxation and finance may  assist  in  the
  collection   of   such  delinquent  taxes;  or  the  inspection  by  the
  attorney-general or other legal representatives  of  the  state  of  the
  report  of  any  corporation  which  shall  bring action to set aside or
  review the tax based thereon, or against whom an  action  or  proceeding
  under  this chapter has been recommended by the commissioner of taxation
  and finance or the attorney-general  or  has  been  instituted;  or  the
  inspection  of the reports of any corporation by the comptroller or duly
  designated officer or employee of the  state  department  of  audit  and
  control,  for  purposes of the audit of a refund of any tax paid by such
  corporation under this article; or the disclosing  to  a  state  agency,
  pursuant  to  section  one hundred seventy-one-f of this chapter, of the
  name  and  taxpayer  identification  number  of   any   taxpayer   whose
  overpayment  is  certified  to  the comptroller to be credited against a
  past-due legally enforceable debt owed to  such  state  agency  and  the
  amount  of  the  overpayment  and  interest  thereon  certified  to  the
  comptroller to be credited against a past-due legally enforceable  debt;
  or  the  disclosing  to  the  commissioner of finance of the city of New
  York, pursuant to section one hundred seventy-one-l of this chapter,  of
  the  name  and  taxpayer  identification  number  of  any taxpayer whose
  overpayment is certified to the comptroller to  be  credited  against  a
  city  of  New York tax warrant judgment debt. Provided, further, nothing
  herein shall be construed to prohibit the disclosure  of  the  names  of
  corporations  subject to tax under section one hundred eighty-two or one


 hundred eighty-two-a of this article, or to  any  two  or  all  of  such
  taxes,  for  purposes  of  assisting corporations subject to such tax or
  taxes in determining whether a gross receipt or  a  gross  receipt  from
  sales  of  petroleum  is an excludible gross receipt or excludible gross
  receipt from sales of petroleum because it is derived from  a  sale  for
  resale.
    2. (a) Any officer or employee of the state who willfully violates the
  provisions  of  subdivision  one of this section shall be dismissed from
  office and be incapable of holding any public office in this state for a
  period of five years thereafter.
    (b) Cross-reference: For criminal penalties, see article  thirty-seven
  of this chapter.
    3.  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section, the tax commission
  may permit the secretary of the treasury of the  United  States  or  his
  delegates,  or  the  proper  officer of any other state charged with tax
  administration, or the authorized representative of either such officer,
  to inspect the reports filed under this article, or may furnish to  such
  officer  or his authorized representative an abstract of any such report
  or supply information concerning an item contained in any  such  report,
  or  disclosed  by  an investigation of tax liability under this article,
  but such permission shall be granted or such  information  furnished  to
  such officer or his representative only if the laws of the United States
  or  of such other state, as the case may be, grant substantially similar
  privileges to the commission or officer of this state charged  with  the
  administration  of  the tax imposed by this article and such information
  is  to  be  used  for  tax  purposes  only;  and  provided  further  the
  commissioner of taxation and finance may furnish to the secretary of the
  treasury  of the United States or his delegates such reports filed under
  this article and other tax information, as he may consider  proper,  for
  use  in  court  actions  or proceedings under the internal revenue code,
  whether civil or criminal, where a written  request  therefor  has  been
  made to the commissioner of taxation and finance by the secretary of the
  treasury  or  his delegates provided the laws of the United States grant
  substantially similar powers to the secretary of  the  treasury  or  his
  delegates.  Where  the  commissioner  of  taxation  and  finance  has so
  authorized use of reports or other tax information in  such  actions  or
  proceedings,  officers  and  employees of the department of taxation and
  finance may testify in such actions or proceedings in  respect  to  such
  reports or other tax information.
    4.  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section, the tax commission
  may furnish any municipality with  such  information  contained  in  the
  franchise tax reports filed under this article as it may consider proper
  for  use  in any certiorari or condemnation proceedings, and may furnish
  any authorized officer  or  employee  of  the  department  of  financial
  services  of the state of New York with any information contained in the
  franchise tax reports of corporations liable to pay a tax under  section
  one  hundred  eighty-seven of this chapter, provided such information is
  to be used for tax purposes only.
    5. Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision one of this  section,
  the  tax commission, in its discretion, may require or permit any or all
  persons liable for any fee or tax  imposed  by  this  article,  to  make
  payment  of any fee, tax, penalty or interest imposed by this article to
  banks,  banking  houses  or  trust  companies  designated  by  the   tax
  commission  and to file reports with such banks, banking houses or trust
  companies as agents of the tax commission, in lieu of  making  any  such
  payment  directly  to  the  tax  commission. However, the tax commission
  shall designate only such banks, banking houses or  trust  companies  as


 are  or  shall be designated by the comptroller as depositories pursuant
  to section two hundred six.
    6.  (a)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  subdivision one of this
  section, upon written request from the chairperson of the  committee  on
  ways  and  means  of  the  United  States  House of Representatives, the
  chairperson of the committee on finance of the United States Senate,  or
  the  chairperson of the joint committee on taxation of the United States
  Congress, the commissioner shall furnish such committee with any current
  or prior year reports specified in such request that  were  filed  under
  this  article  by  the president of the United States, vice-president of
  the United States, member of the United States Congress representing New
  York state, or any person who served in or was employed by the executive
  branch of the government of the United States on the executive staff  of
  the president, in the executive office of the president, or in an acting
  or  confirmed  capacity  in  a  position  subject to confirmation by the
  United States senate;  or,  in  New  York  state:  a  statewide  elected
  official,  as  defined  in  paragraph  (a) of subdivision one of section
  seventy-three-a of the public officers law; a state officer or employee,
  as defined in subparagraph (i) of paragraph (c) of  subdivision  one  of
  such  section seventy-three-a; a political party chairperson, as defined
  in paragraph (h) of subdivision one of such section  seventy-three-a;  a
  local  elected  official,  as  defined  in  subdivisions  one and two of
  section eight hundred  ten  of  the  general  municipal  law;  a  person
  appointed,  pursuant to law, to serve due to vacancy or otherwise in the
  position of a local elected official, as defined in subdivisions one and
  two of section eight hundred ten of the general municipal law; a  member
  of  the  state  legislature;  or a judge or justice of the unified court
  system; or filed  by  a  partnership,  firm,  association,  corporation,
  joint-stock  company,  trust  or  similar  entity directly or indirectly
  controlled by any  individual  listed  in  this  paragraph,  whether  by
  contract,  through  ownership  or control of a majority interest in such
  entity, or otherwise, or filed  by  a  partnership,  firm,  association,
  corporation,  joint-stock  company, trust or similar entity of which any
  individual listed in this paragraph holds ten percent  or  more  of  the
  voting  securities  of  such  entity;  provided  however  that, prior to
  furnishing any report, the commissioner  shall  redact  any  copy  of  a
  federal return (or portion thereof) attached to, or any information on a
  federal  return  that  is  reflected  on,  such  report,  and any social
  security numbers, account numbers and residential address information.
    (b) No reports shall be furnished pursuant to this subdivision  unless
  the  chairperson  of  the requesting committee certifies in writing that
  such reports have been requested related to, and in  furtherance  of,  a
  legitimate  task of the Congress, that the requesting committee has made
  a written request to the United States secretary  of  the  treasury  for
  related  federal  reports  or  report information, pursuant to 26 U.S.C.
  Section 6103(f), and that if such requested  reports  are  inspected  by
  and/or  submitted  to  another  committee, to the United States House of
  Representatives, or to the United States Senate,  then  such  inspection
  and/or  submission  shall  occur in a manner consistent with the federal
  law as informed by requirements and procedures established in 26  U.S.C.
  Section 6103(f).




   §  203.    Collection of taxes.   1.   An action may be brought by the
  attorney-general, at the instance of the tax commission, in the name  of
  the  state,  to compel the filing of reports or to recover the amount of
  any account audited and stated by the tax commission under this  article
  or  to recover the amount of any taxes, fees, penalties and interest due
  pursuant to this article.  If any such account or any tax  shall  remain
  unpaid  or such report be not filed, and the tax-commission is satisfied
  that the failure to pay or file the report is  intentional,  it  may  so
  report  to  the attorney-general, who shall immediately bring an action,
  in the name of the people of  the  state,  for  the  forfeiture  of  the
  franchise  of  any  such  delinquent corporation, joint-stock company or
  association failing to make such payments, or file such reports, and  if
  it  is  found  that  such  failure  was  intentional,  judgment shall be
  rendered in such action for the forfeiture of its franchise and for  its
  dissolution,  and thereafter such franchise shall be annulled and if the
  delinquent is a foreign corporation its authority to do business in this
  state shall be revoked.
    2.   Every foreign corporation  (other  than  a  moneyed  corporation)
  subject to the provisions of this article, except a corporation having a
  certificate of authority under section two hundred twelve of the general
  corporation  law or having authority to do business by virtue of section
  thirteen hundred five of the business corporation law, shall file in the
  department of state a certificate of designation in its corporate  name,
  signed  and  acknowledged  by  its  president or a vice-president or its
  secretary or  treasurer,  under  its  corporate  seal,  designating  the
  secretary of state as its agent upon whom process in any action provided
  for  by  this article may be served within this state, and setting forth
  an address to which the secretary of state shall mail a copy of any such
  process against the corporation which may be served upon him.   In  case
  any  such  corporation  shall  have  failed  to file such certificate of
  designation, it shall be deemed to  have  designated  the  secretary  of
  state  as its agent upon whom such process against it may be served; and
  until a certificate of designation shall have been filed the corporation
  shall be deemed to have directed the secretary of state to  mail  copies
  of  process  served upon him to the corporation at its last known office
  address within or without the state.  When a certificate of  designation
  has  been  filed  by  such corporation the secretary of state shall mail
  copies of process thereafter served upon him to the address set forth in
  such certificate.  Any such corporation, from time to time,  may  change
  the  address  to which the secretary of state is directed to mail copies
  of process, by filing a certificate to that effect executed, signed  and
  acknowledged  in  like  manner as a certificate of designation as herein
  provided.  Service of process upon any  such  corporation  or  upon  any
  corporation  having a certificate of authority under section two hundred
  twelve of the general corporation law or having authority to do business
  by virtue of section thirteen hundred five of the  business  corporation
  law,  in  any action commenced at any time pursuant to the provisions of
  this article, may be made by either (1)  personally  delivering  to  and
  leaving with the secretary of state, a deputy secretary of state or with
  any  person authorized by the secretary of state to receive such service
  duplicate copies thereof at the office of the department of state in the
  city of Albany, in which event the secretary of  state  shall  forthwith
  send by registered mail, return receipt requested, one of such copies to
  the  corporation  at  the  address designated by it or at its last known
  office address within or without the state, or (2) personally delivering
  to and leaving with the secretary of state, a deputy secretary of  state
  or  with any person authorized by the secretary of state to receive such
  service, a copy thereof at the office of the department of state in  the


 city  of  Albany  and  by delivering a copy thereof to, and leaving such
  copy  with,  the   president,   vice-president,   secretary,   assistant
  secretary,   treasurer,   assistant   treasurer,   or  cashier  of  such
  corporation,  or  the  officer  performing corresponding functions under
  another name, or a director  or  managing  agent  of  such  corporation,
  personally  without  the state.   Proof of such personal service without
  the state shall be filed with the clerk of the court in which the action
  is pending within thirty days after such service, and such service shall
  be complete ten days after proof thereof is filed.




   §  203-a.  Dissolution of delinquent business corporations.  1.  On or
  before the last day of  March,  June,  September  or  December  in  each
  calendar  year,  the  tax  commission  may  certify  and transmit to the
  department of state a list containing the names of any or all such stock
  corporations and corporations formed for profit, other than corporations
  formed by or under special acts and other than  banking,  insurance  and
  railroad  corporations,  as  have  not filed reports required under this
  article during the period of two consecutive years  next  preceding  the
  date  of such certification or as have been delinquent in the payment of
  taxes for any two years duly assessed pursuant to this article.
    2.  If the secretary of state, upon comparing the names  so  certified
  with  his  records,  shall discover error, he may return the list to the
  tax commission for correction.
    3.  The secretary of state shall make a proclamation  under  his  hand
  and  seal  of office, as to the corporations whose names are included in
  such list as finally corrected, declaring  such  corporations  dissolved
  and their charters forfeited pursuant to the provisions of this section.
  He  shall file the original proclamation in his office and shall publish
  a copy thereof  in  the  state  bulletin  no  later  than  three  months
  following receipt of the list by him.
    4.  Upon the publication of such proclamation in the manner aforesaid,
  each corporation named therein shall be deemed dissolved without further
  legal proceedings.
    5.    The  secretary  of state shall mail a copy of the state bulletin
  containing such proclamation to the clerk of each county in  the  state.
  The  county clerk shall file the copy without charge but need not record
  it.
    6.  The names of all corporations so dissolved shall be reserved for a
  period of three months immediately  following  the  publication  of  the
  proclamation,  and  during  such  period  no corporation shall be formed
  under a name the same as any name so reserved or so nearly resembling it
  as to be calculated to  deceive,  nor  shall  any  foreign  corporation,
  within  such  period, be authorized to do business in this state under a
  name the same as any name so reserved or so nearly resembling it  as  to
  be calculated to deceive.
    7.  Any corporation so dissolved may file in the department of state a
  certificate of consent of the commissioner of taxation and finance. Such
  certificate of consent shall  be  given  only  if  the  commissioner  of
  taxation  and  finance  ascertains that all fees and taxes imposed under
  this chapter or any related statute,  as  defined  in  section  eighteen
  hundred  of  this  chapter,  as  well  as penalties and interest charges
  related thereto, accrued against the corporation  have  been  paid.  The
  filing of such certificate of consent shall have the effect of annulling
  all  of  the  proceedings  theretofore taken for the dissolution of such
  corporation under the provisions of this section and it shall  thereupon
  have  such corporate powers, rights, duties and obligations as it had on
  the date of the publication of the proclamation, with the same force and
  effect as if such proclamation had not been made or published.  The  fee
  of  the  secretary  of  state for filing such certificate shall be fifty
  dollars and if it is filed later than three months  after  the  date  of
  publication  of  the proclamation the secretary of state shall collect a
  further sum equal to one-fortieth of one percentum of  all  shares  with
  par  value  and two and one-half cents for every share without par value
  which such corporation was authorized  to  have  at  the  time  of  such
  publication.  No  such  certificate  shall  be  filed if the name of the
  corporation is the same as, or so nearly resembles as to  be  calculated
  to  deceive,  that  of  a  domestic  corporation formed later than three
  months after the publication of the proclamation of dissolution or of  a


 foreign  corporation  which has obtained authority to do business in the
  state later than three months after such proclamation  unless  there  is
  simultaneously  filed in the department of state a certificate of change
  of  name.  Such  certificate of change of name shall be executed in like
  manner as if such corporation had not been  dissolved.  Any  corporation
  dissolved pursuant to this section and desiring to annul the dissolution
  proceedings  later  than  three  months from the date of proclamation of
  dissolution, may, if such name is still available, pay to the  secretary
  of  state  the  fees  hereinbefore in this subdivision mentioned, or may
  submit  with  such  payment  a  written   application   requesting   the
  reservation  of  another  available name, and thereupon the secretary of
  state shall reserve such name for a period of thirty days from the  date
  of such payment to permit the completion of such annulment. No moneys so
  paid shall in any event be returned by the secretary of state.
    8.    If,  after the publication of such proclamation, it shall appear
  that the name of any corporation was erroneously included  therein,  the
  state tax commission shall so certify to the secretary of state, and the
  secretary  of  state  shall make appropriate entry on the records of the
  department of state, which entry shall have the effect of annulling  all
  of  the  proceedings  theretofore  taken  for  the  dissolution  of such
  corporation under the provisions of this section, and it shall have such
  corporate powers, rights, duties and obligations as it had on  the  date
  of  the  publication of the proclamation, with the same force and effect
  as if such proclamation had not been made or published.
    9.  Whenever a corporation shall have complied with subdivision  seven
  of  this  section,  or  whenever the proceeding specified in subdivision
  eight of this section shall have been  taken,  the  secretary  of  state
  shall  publish  a  notice  thereof in the state advertising bulletin and
  shall send a copy of such bulletin to the county clerk of the county  in
  which,  according  to  his  records,  the  office  of the corporation is
  located.  Such county clerk shall file such copy  and  make  appropriate
  entry on his records without charge.
    10.   The provisions of section twenty-nine of the general corporation
  law shall apply to any corporation  heretofore  or  hereafter  dissolved
  under  this  section  except  for  those  corporations  governed  by the
  business corporation law as to which section one thousand nine  of  such
  law shall apply.


   §   203-b.   Annulment   of   authority  to  do  business  by  foreign
  corporations.  1. On or before the last day of March, June, September or
  December in each calendar year,  the  tax  commission  may  certify  and
  transmit  to  the department of state a list containing the names of any
  or all such foreign corporations,  except  banking  corporations,  fire,
  marine,  casualty  and  life insurance companies, co-operative fraternal
  insurance companies and building and loan associations, which have  been
  authorized  to do business in this state pursuant to article thirteen or
  article fifteen-a of the business corporation law  and  have  not  filed
  reports  required  under  this  article  during  the period of time next
  preceding  the  date  of  such  certification  applicable  to   business
  corporations  as  set  forth  in  section  two  hundred  three-a of this
  chapter, have been delinquent in the  payment  of  taxes  duly  assessed
  pursuant   to  this  article  for  the  period  applicable  to  business
  corporations as set forth in such section, or have  been  delinquent  in
  the  payment of maintenance fees imposed under this article for a period
  exceeding ninety days.
    2. If the secretary of state, upon comparing the  names  so  certified
  with  his  records,  shall discover error, he may return the list to the
  tax commission for correction.
    3. The secretary of state shall make a proclamation under his hand and
  seal of office, as to the corporations whose names are included in  such
  list  as finally corrected, declaring the authority of such corporations
  to do business in this state annulled pursuant to the provisions of this
  section. He shall file the original proclamation in his office and shall
  publish a copy thereof in the state bulletin no later than three  months
  following receipt of the list by him.
    4.  Upon the publication of such proclamation in the manner aforesaid,
  each corporation named therein shall be deemed to have had its authority
  annulled without further legal proceedings.
    5. The secretary of state shall mail a  copy  of  the  state  bulletin
  containing  such  proclamation to the clerk of each county in the state.
  The county clerk shall file the copy without charge but need not  record
  it.
    6. The names of all corporations whose authority was so annulled shall
  be  reserved  for  a  period  of  three months immediately following the
  publication of the proclamation, and during such period  no  corporation
  shall  be  formed  under  a  name the same as any name so reserved or so
  nearly resembling it as to be  calculated  to  deceive,  nor  shall  any
  foreign corporation, within such period, be authorized to do business in
  this  state  under  a name the same as any name so reserved or so nearly
  resembling it as to be calculated to deceive.
    7. Any corporation whose authority was so annulled  may  file  in  the
  department  of  state  a  certificate  of consent of the commissioner of
  taxation and finance. Such certificate of consent shall be given only if
  the commissioner of taxation and finance ascertains that  all  fees  and
  taxes  imposed  under this chapter or any related statute, as defined in
  section eighteen hundred of this  chapter,  as  well  as  penalties  and
  interest  charges  related thereto, accrued against the corporation have
  been paid. The filing of such certificate  of  consent  shall  have  the
  effect  of  annulling  all  of the proceedings theretofore taken for the
  annulment of authority of such corporation under the provisions of  this
  section  and  it  shall  thereupon  have  such corporate powers, rights,
  duties and obligations as it had on the date of the publication  of  the
  proclamation, with the same force and effect as if such proclamation had
  not been made or published. The fee of the secretary of state for filing
  such  certificate  shall  be fifty dollars. No such certificate shall be
  filed if the name of the corporation  is  the  same  as,  or  so  nearly


 resembles as to be calculated to deceive, that of a domestic corporation
  formed later than three months after the publication of the proclamation
  of annulment or of a foreign corporation which has obtained authority to
  do business in the state later than three months after such proclamation
  unless  there  is  simultaneously  filed  in  the  department of state a
  certificate of amendment of its application for authority under  section
  thirteen  hundred  nine of the business corporation law showing a change
  of name in compliance with  such  section.  Such  certificate  shall  be
  executed  in  a  like manner as if the authority of such corporation had
  not been annulled. Any corporation whose authority was annulled pursuant
  to this section and desiring to annul the annulment of  authority  later
  than  three  months  from the date of proclamation thereof, may, if such
  name is still available pay to the secretary of  state  the  fee  (other
  than the maintenance fee) hereinbefore in this subdivision mentioned, or
  may  submit  with  such  payment  a  written  application requesting the
  reservation of another available name, and thereupon  the  secretary  of
  state  shall reserve such name for a period of thirty days from the date
  of such payment to permit the completion of such annulment of  annulment
  of  authority.  No  moneys so paid shall in any event be returned by the
  secretary of state.
    8. If, after the publication of such  proclamation,  it  shall  appear
  that  the  name of any corporation was erroneously included therein, the
  state tax commission shall so certify to the secretary of state, and the
  secretary of state shall make appropriate entry on the  records  of  the
  department  of state, which entry shall have the effect of annulling all
  of the proceedings theretofore taken for the annulment of  authority  of
  such corporation under the provisions of this section, and it shall have
  such  corporate  powers, rights, duties and obligations as it had on the
  date of the publication of the proclamation, with  the  same  force  and
  effect as if such proclamation had not been made or published.
    9.  Whenever  a corporation shall have complied with subdivision seven
  of this section, or whenever the  proceeding  specified  in  subdivision
  eight  of  this  section  shall  have been taken, the secretary of state
  shall publish a notice thereof in the  state  advertising  bulletin  and
  shall  send a copy of such bulletin to the county clerk of the county in
  which, according to his  records,  the  office  of  the  corporation  is
  located.  Such  county  clerk  shall file such copy and make appropriate
  entry on his records without charge.




   §  204. Reports to be made by the secretary of state. 1.  Report.  The
  secretary of state shall transmit to the commissioner a  report  of  the
  stock  corporations or corporations formed for profit whose certificates
  of incorporation are filed, or of  the  foreign  stock  corporations  or
  corporations  formed  for  profit to whom a certificate of authority has
  been issued to do business in this state.
    2. Contents of report.   Such report  shall  state  the  name  of  the
  corporation, its place of business, the amount of its capital stock, its
  purposes  or objects, its duration, the names and places of residence of
  its directors, and, if a foreign  corporation,  its  place  of  business
  within  the  state and the name and address of its designee. In the case
  of a domestic business corporation, such report  shall  also  state  the
  accounting  period  which  the  corporation  intends to establish as its
  first calendar or  fiscal  year  for  reporting  the  franchise  tax  on
  business  corporations imposed by article nine-A of this chapter, and in
  the case of a  foreign business corporation, the accounting period which
  it uses or will use to compute its federal income tax.
    3. Notice.  The secretary of state shall also cause to be  transmitted
  to the commissioner notice of all dissolutions, mergers, consolidations,
  take-overs,  increases  and decreases of capital stock, changes of names
  and re-organization  of  domestic  stock  corporations  or  corporations
  formed  for profit, and dissolutions, withdrawals and revocations of and
  changes of designees of foreign corporations, filed or recorded  in  his
  or her office.
    4.  Additional reports. The secretary of state shall make like reports
  to the commissioner whenever required by him or her relating to any such
  corporations whose certificates have been filed or to  whom  certificate
  of  authority  has  been  issued  prior  to  the time this article takes
  effect, and during any period of time specified by the  commissioner  in
  his or her request for such report.
    5.  Definitions.  For purposes of this section, the term "corporation"
  shall be deemed to include a limited liability  company  and  a  limited
  liability   partnership   registered   under   article  eight-B  of  the
  partnership law, and the term "certificates of incorporation"  shall  be
  deemed  to  include  articles  of  organization  of  a limited liability
  company  and,  with  respect  to  a  limited  liability  partnership,  a
  registration  described  in section 121-1500 of the partnership law or a
  notice described in section 121-1502 of such law.




   §  205. Deposit of moneys collected from taxes imposed by sections one
  hundred eighty-three and one hundred eighty-four of this chapter. 1. (a)
  From moneys  collected  from  taxes  imposed  by  sections  one  hundred
  eighty-three  and  one  hundred  eighty-four  of this chapter during the
  period from April  first,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-one  through  March
  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-two:  (i) the first one hundred
  million dollars shall be deposited pursuant to the provisions of section
  one hundred seventy-one-a of this chapter; (ii)  the  next  seventy-five
  million  dollars  shall  be  deposited  in  the  mass  transit operating
  assistance fund to the credit of the metropolitan mass transit operating
  assistance account created pursuant to  section  eighty-eight-a  of  the
  state  finance  law;  and  (iii) of any amounts in excess of one hundred
  seventy-five million dollars collected during such period, sixty percent
  shall be disbursed pursuant to the provisions  of  clause  (i)  of  this
  paragraph and forty percent pursuant to clause (ii) of this paragraph.
    (b)  From  moneys collected from taxes imposed by such sections during
  the period from the first day of April to the  thirtieth  day  of  June,
  nineteen  hundred  eighty-two an amount, which when added to the amounts
  deposited to the credit  of  the  metropolitan  mass  transit  operating
  assistance  account pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subdivision, shall
  total eighty-four million dollars  which  shall  be  deposited  in  such
  account; and the balance of moneys collected during such period shall be
  deposited   pursuant   to   the   provisions   of  section  one  hundred
  seventy-one-a of this chapter.
    * 2. Of moneys collected from taxes imposed by  sections  one  hundred
  eighty-three  and  one hundred eighty-four of this article subsequent to
  June thirtieth, nineteen hundred  eighty-two,  sixty  percent  shall  be
  deposited   pursuant   to   the   provisions   of  section  one  hundred
  seventy-one-a of this chapter, provided that after April first, nineteen
  hundred ninety-six, fifty-two percent of such  moneys  collected  on  or
  after  such  date  shall  be so deposited; provided, further, that after
  January first, nineteen hundred ninety-seven, fifty and one-half percent
  of such moneys collected on or after such date shall  be  so  deposited;
  provided,   further,   that   after   January  first,  nineteen  hundred
  ninety-eight, forty-six percent of such moneys  collected  on  or  after
  such  date  shall be so deposited; provided, further, that after January
  first, two thousand, thirty-six percent of such moneys collected  on  or
  after  such  date  shall  be so deposited; provided, further, that after
  January first, two thousand one but before  April  first,  two  thousand
  four,  twenty  percent  of  such  moneys collected on or after such date
  shall be so deposited; and the balance  of  such  collections  shall  be
  deposited  in  the  mass transportation operating assistance fund to the
  credit of the  metropolitan  mass  transportation  operating  assistance
  account;  provided,  however,  for  taxable years commencing on or after
  January first, nineteen hundred eighty-five  and  ending  on  or  before
  December  thirty-first,  nineteen hundred eighty-nine, all of the moneys
  collected from the tax imposed by section  one  hundred  eighty-four  of
  this  chapter  on  corporations,  joint-stock  companies or associations
  formed for or  principally  engaged  in  the  conduct  of  telephone  or
  telegraph  business  shall  be  deposited  in  the  mass  transportation
  operating assistance  fund  to  the  credit  of  the  metropolitan  mass
  transportation operating assistance account; and provided, further, that
  the  actual  amount  of  moneys  from  the taxes imposed by sections one
  hundred eighty-three and one hundred eighty-four of this  article  which
  shall be deposited in such mass transportation operating assistance fund
  to   the  credit  of  the  metropolitan  mass  transportation  operating
  assistance account, pursuant to  this  subdivision,  during  the  twelve
  month  period  from  April  first,  nineteen hundred eighty-five, to and


 including March thirty-first, nineteen hundred eighty-six, shall not  be
  less  than  sixty  million  dollars;  provided,  further,  that  for the
  twenty-four month period from April first, nineteen hundred ninety-four,
  to and including March thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-six, of the
  moneys  so  collected,  sixty  percent shall be deposited in the general
  fund pursuant to the provisions of section one hundred seventy-one-a  of
  this  chapter, thirty-four and four-tenths percent shall be deposited in
  the revenue accumulation fund and five and six-tenths percent  shall  be
  deposited  in  such mass transportation operating assistance fund to the
  credit of such metropolitan  mass  transportation  operating  assistance
  account.
    * NB Effective until April 1, 2024
    * 2.  Of  moneys  collected from taxes imposed by sections one hundred
  eighty-three and one hundred eighty-four of this chapter  subsequent  to
  June  thirtieth,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-two,  sixty percent shall be
  deposited  pursuant  to  the   provisions   of   section   one   hundred
  seventy-one-a of this chapter, provided that after April first, nineteen
  hundred  ninety-six,  fifty-two  percent  of such moneys collected on or
  after such date shall be so deposited;  provided,  further,  that  after
  January first, nineteen hundred ninety-seven, fifty and one-half percent
  of  such  moneys  collected on or after such date shall be so deposited;
  provided,  further,  that  after   January   first,   nineteen   hundred
  ninety-eight,  forty-six  percent  of  such moneys collected on or after
  such date shall be so deposited; provided, further, that  after  January
  first,  two  thousand, thirty-six percent of such moneys collected on or
  after such date shall be so deposited;  provided,  further,  that  after
  January first, two thousand one, twenty percent of such moneys collected
  on  or  after  such  date shall be so deposited; and the balance of such
  collections shall be deposited  in  the  mass  transportation  operating
  assistance  fund  to  the credit of the metropolitan mass transportation
  operating assistance  account;  provided,  however,  for  taxable  years
  commencing  on  or after January first, nineteen hundred eighty-five and
  ending on or before December thirty-first, nineteen hundred eighty-nine,
  all of the moneys collected from the tax imposed by section one  hundred
  eighty-four  of  this  chapter on corporations, joint-stock companies or
  associations formed  for  or  principally  engaged  in  the  conduct  of
  telephone   or  telegraph  business  shall  be  deposited  in  the  mass
  transportation  operating  assistance  fund  to  the   credit   of   the
  metropolitan  mass  transportation  operating  assistance  account;  and
  provided, further, that the actual  amount  of  moneys  from  the  taxes
  imposed by sections one hundred eighty-three and one hundred eighty-four
  of  this  chapter  which  shall be deposited in such mass transportation
  operating assistance  fund  to  the  credit  of  the  metropolitan  mass
  transportation   operating   assistance   account,   pursuant   to  this
  subdivision, during the twelve month period from April  first,  nineteen
  hundred  eighty-five,  to  and  including  March  thirty-first, nineteen
  hundred eighty-six, shall  not  be  less  than  sixty  million  dollars;
  provided,  further,  that  for  the  twenty-four month period from April
  first,  nineteen   hundred   ninety-four,   to   and   including   March
  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred ninety-six, of the moneys so collected,
  sixty percent shall be deposited in the general  fund  pursuant  to  the
  provisions  of  section  one  hundred  seventy-one-a  of  this  chapter,
  thirty-four and four-tenths percent shall be deposited  in  the  revenue
  accumulation  fund and five and six-tenths percent shall be deposited in
  such mass transportation operating assistance fund to the credit of such
  metropolitan mass transportation operating assistance account.
    * NB Effective April 1, 2024


   3. The moneys collected from the taxes imposed by sections one hundred
  eighty-three and one hundred eighty-four of this article  on  and  after
  April  first, two thousand thirteen, after reserving amounts for refunds
  or reimbursements, shall be distributed as follows:  twenty  percent  of
  such  moneys  shall  be deposited to the credit of the dedicated highway
  and bridge trust fund established by section eighty-nine-b of the  state
  finance law, fifty-four percent of such moneys shall be deposited in the
  mass  transportation  operating  assistance  fund  to  the credit of the
  metropolitan mass transportation operating  assistance  account  created
  pursuant  to  section  eighty-eight-a  of  the  state  finance  law  and
  twenty-six percent of  such  moneys  shall  be  deposited  in  the  mass
  transportation  operating  assistance  fund  to the credit of the public
  transportation systems operating assistance account created pursuant  to
  section eighty-eight-a of the state finance law.




   §  206.  Deposit  and  disposition  of revenue. The taxes, percentage,
  interest and other charges imposed by this article  shall  be  collected
  and  deposited  and receipts therefor issued by the commissioner and all
  revenues so collected or received shall be  deposited  and  disposed  of
  pursuant  to the provisions of section one hundred seventy-one-a of this
  chapter.




   §  207.  Limitation of time.  The provisions of the civil practice law
  and rules relative to the limitation of time of enforcing a civil remedy
  shall not apply to any proceeding or action  taken  to  levy,  appraise,
  assess,  determine  or  enforce  the  collection  of  any tax or penalty
  prescribed by this article, and  this  section  shall  be  construed  as
  having  been  in  effect as of the date of the original enactment of the
  corporation tax law, provided, however, that as to real  estate  in  the
  hands  of persons who are owners thereof who would be purchasers in good
  faith but for such tax or penalty and as to the lien on real  estate  of
  mortgages held by persons who would be holders thereof in good faith but
  for  such tax or penalty, all such taxes and penalties shall cease to be
  a lien on such real estate as against such purchasers or  holders  after
  the  expiration  of  ten  years  from the date such taxes became due and
  payable.  The limitations herein provided for shall  not  apply  to  any
  transfer  from  a  corporation to a person or corporation with intent to
  avoid payment of any taxes, or where with like intent  the  transfer  is
  made  to  a  grantee  corporation, or any subsequent grantee corporation
  controlled by such grantor or which has any community of  interest  with
  it,  either  through stock ownership or otherwise.  Nothing herein shall
  affect any action or proceeding now  actually  pending  to  enforce  the
  collection of such tax or penalty from such real estate.


   §  207-a.  Exemption  of corporations owned by a municipality.  On and
  after the second day of June, nineteen hundred forty, the provisions  of
  this article shall not apply to any corporation all of the capital stock
  of which is owned by a municipal corporation of this state.




   §  207-b.  Practice and procedure for taxable years ending on or after
  December thirty-first, nineteen hundred sixty-four.-- For taxable  years
  or  periods  ending  on or after December thirty-first, nineteen hundred
  sixty-four--
    (1)  the provisions of article twenty-seven shall apply  with  respect
  to the administration of and procedure with respect to the taxes imposed
  under this article;
    (2)    any  provisions  of this article which are inconsistent with or
  contrary to the provisions of article twenty-seven shall not apply.




   § 208. Definitions. As used in this article:
    1.  The  term  "corporation"  includes  (a)  an association within the
  meaning of paragraph three of subsection (a)  of  section  seventy-seven
  hundred  one of the internal revenue code (including a limited liability
  company), (b) a joint-stock  company  or  association,  (c)  a  publicly
  traded partnership treated as a corporation for purposes of the internal
  revenue  code pursuant to section seventy-seven hundred four thereof and
  (d) any business conducted by a trustee or trustees wherein interest  or
  ownership  is  evidenced  by  certificate  or  other written instrument.
  "DISC"  and  "former  DISC"  mean  any  corporation  which   meets   the
  requirements of subsection (a) of section nine hundred ninety-two of the
  internal revenue code.
    1-A.  The  term  "New  York  S corporation" means, with respect to any
  taxable year, a corporation subject to tax under this article for  which
  an  election  is  in  effect  pursuant  to subsection (a) of section six
  hundred sixty of this chapter for such year,  any  such  year  shall  be
  denominated  a "New York S year", and such election shall be denominated
  a "New York S election". The term "New York C corporation"  means,  with
  respect  to  any  taxable  year, a corporation subject to tax under this
  article which is not a New York S corporation, and any such  year  shall
  be  denominated  a  "New York C year". The term "termination year" means
  any taxable year of a corporation during which the New York  S  election
  terminates  on  a day other than the first day of such year. The portion
  of the  taxable  year  ending  before  the  first  day  for  which  such
  termination  is  effective  shall be denominated the "S short year", and
  the  portion  of  such  year  beginning  on  such  first  day  shall  be
  denominated  the  "C short year". The term "New York S termination year"
  means any termination year which is not also an S termination  year  for
  federal purposes.
    1-B.  The  term  "QSSS"  means  a  corporation  which  is  a qualified
  subchapter S subsidiary as defined  in  subparagraph  (B)  of  paragraph
  three  of  subsection  (b)  of section thirteen hundred sixty-one of the
  internal revenue code. The term "exempt QSSS" means a QSSS  exempt  from
  tax  under this article as provided in paragraph (k) of subdivision nine
  of this section, or a QSSS described in subclause (i) of clause  (B)  of
  subparagraph  two  of paragraph (k) of subdivision nine of this section,
  wherein the parent corporation of the QSSS is subject to tax under  this
  article,  and the assets, liabilities, income and deductions of the QSSS
  are treated as the assets, liabilities, income  and  deductions  of  the
  parent  corporation.  Where  a  QSSS  is  an  exempt  QSSS, then for all
  purposes under this article:
    (a) the assets, liabilities, income,  deductions,  property,  payroll,
  receipts, capital, credits, and all other tax attributes and elements of
  economic  activity of the QSSS shall be deemed to be those of the parent
  corporation,
    (b) the  stocks,  bonds  and  other  securities  issued  by,  and  any
  indebtedness  from, the QSSS shall not be investment or business capital
  of the parent corporation,
    (c)  transactions  between  the  parent  corporation  and  the   QSSS,
  including the payment of interest and dividends, shall not be taken into
  account, and
    (d)  general  executive  officers  of  the  QSSS shall be deemed to be
  general executive officers of the parent corporation.
    2. The term "taxpayer" means any corporation subject to tax under this
  article.
    3. The term "subsidiary" means  a  corporation  of  which  over  fifty
  percent  of  the number of shares of stock entitling the holders thereof


 to vote for the election of  directors  or  trustees  is  owned  by  the
  taxpayer.
    4. The term "stock" means an interest in a corporation that is treated
  as equity for federal income tax purposes.
    5.  (a) The term "investment capital" means investments in stocks that
  (i) satisfy the definition of a capital asset under section 1221 of  the
  internal  revenue code at all times the taxpayer owned such stock during
  the taxable year, (ii) are held by the taxpayer for investment for  more
  than one year, (iii) the dispositions of which are, or would be, treated
  by  the  taxpayer  as generating long-term capital gains or losses under
  the internal revenue code, (iv) for stocks acquired on or after  January
  first,  two  thousand fifteen, at any time after the close of the day in
  which they are acquired, have never been held for sale to  customers  in
  the  regular  course of business, and (v) before the close of the day on
  which the stock was acquired, are clearly identified in  the  taxpayer's
  records  as  stock  held  for  investment in the same manner as required
  under section 1236(a)(1) of the internal revenue code for the stock of a
  dealer in securities to be eligible for capital gain treatment  (whether
  or  not the taxpayer is a dealer of securities subject to section 1236),
  provided, however, that for stock acquired prior to October  first,  two
  thousand fifteen that was not subject to section 1236(a) of the internal
  revenue  code,  such identification in the taxpayer's records must occur
  before October first, two thousand fifteen. Stock in a corporation  that
  is  conducting  a  unitary  business  with  the  taxpayer,  stock  in  a
  corporation that is included in a  combined  report  with  the  taxpayer
  pursuant  to  the  commonly owned group election in subdivision three of
  section two hundred ten-C of this  article,  and  stock  issued  by  the
  taxpayer  shall  not constitute investment capital. For purposes of this
  subdivision, if the taxpayer owns or controls, directly  or  indirectly,
  less  than  twenty  percent  of  the  voting  power  of  the  stock of a
  corporation, that corporation  will  be  presumed  to  be  conducting  a
  business that is not unitary with the business of the taxpayer.
    (b)  There  shall  be deducted from investment capital any liabilities
  which are directly or indirectly attributable to investment capital.  If
  the  amount  of  those  liabilities  exceeds  the  amount  of investment
  capital, the amount of investment capital will be zero.
    (c) Investment capital shall not  include  any  such  investments  the
  income  from  which  is  excluded from entire net income pursuant to the
  provisions of paragraph (c-1) of subdivision nine of this  section,  and
  that  investment capital shall be computed without regard to liabilities
  directly or indirectly attributable to such investments, but only if air
  carriers organized in the United States and  operating  in  the  foreign
  country  or  countries  in  which  the  taxpayer  has  its major base of
  operations and in which it is organized, resident or  headquartered  (if
  not in the same country as its major base of operations) are not subject
  to  any  tax  based  on  or  measured by capital imposed by such foreign
  country or countries or any political subdivision thereof, or if  taxed,
  are  provided an exemption, equivalent to that provided for herein, from
  any tax based on or measured by capital imposed by such foreign  country
  or  countries and from any such tax imposed by any political subdivision
  thereof.
    (d) If a taxpayer acquires stock that is a capital asset under section
  1221 of the internal revenue code during the taxable year and owns  that
  stock  on  the last day of the taxable year, it will be presumed, solely
  for purposes of determining whether that stock should be  classified  as
  investment  capital  after  it  is acquired, that the taxpayer held that
  stock for more than one year. However, if the taxpayer does not in  fact
  own that stock at the time it actually files its original report for the


 taxable year in which it acquired the stock, then the presumption in the
  preceding  sentence shall not apply and the actual period of time during
  which the taxpayer owned the stock shall be used  to  determine  whether
  the  stock  should  be  classified  as  investment  capital  after it is
  acquired. If the  taxpayer  relies  on  the  presumption  in  the  first
  sentence  of this paragraph but does not own the stock for more than one
  year, the taxpayer must increase  its  total  business  capital  in  the
  immediately succeeding taxable year by the amount included in investment
  capital  for  that  stock,  net  of any liabilities attributable to that
  stock computed as provided in paragraph (b) of this subdivision and must
  increase its business income in the immediately succeeding taxable  year
  by the amount of income and net gains (but not less than zero) from that
  stock  included  in  investment  income,  less  any  interest deductions
  directly or indirectly  attributable  to  that  stock,  as  provided  in
  subdivision six of this section.
    (e)  When  income  or  gain  from  a debt obligation or other security
  cannot be apportioned  to  the  state  using  the  apportionment  factor
  determined  under  section two hundred ten-A of this article as a result
  of United States constitutional principles, the debt obligation or other
  security will be included in investment capital.
    6. (a) (i)  The  term  "investment  income"  means  income,  including
  capital  gains  in excess of capital losses, from investment capital, to
  the extent included  in  computing  entire  net  income,  less,  in  the
  discretion  of  the  commissioner,  any interest deductions allowable in
  computing  entire  net  income  which   are   directly   or   indirectly
  attributable  to  investment  capital  or  investment  income, provided,
  however, that in no case  shall  investment  income  exceed  entire  net
  income.  (ii)  If  the  amount  of  interest deductions subtracted under
  subparagraph (i) of this paragraph exceeds investment income, the excess
  of such amount over investment income must be added back to  entire  net
  income.  (iii)  If  the  taxpayer's investment income determined without
  regard to the interest deductions subtracted under subparagraph  (i)  of
  this  paragraph  comprises  more  than  eight  percent of the taxpayer's
  entire net income, investment income determined without regard  to  such
  interest deductions cannot exceed eight percent of the taxpayer's entire
  net income.
    (b)  In lieu of subtracting from investment income the amount of those
  interest deductions, the taxpayer  may  make  a  revocable  election  to
  reduce  its  total  investment  income,  determined  after  applying the
  limitation in subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (a) of  this  subdivision,
  by forty percent. If the taxpayer makes this election, the taxpayer must
  also  make  the  elections  provided  for  in  paragraphs (b) and (c) of
  subdivision six-a of this section. If the taxpayer subsequently  revokes
  this  election,  the  taxpayer must revoke the elections provided for in
  paragraphs (b) and (c) of subdivision six-a of this section. A  taxpayer
  that  does  not  make this election because it has no investment capital
  will not be precluded from making those other elections.
    (c)  Investment  income  shall  not  include  any  amount  treated  as
  dividends  pursuant  to  section  seventy-eight  of the internal revenue
  code.
    6-a. (a) The term "other exempt income" means the sum  of  exempt  CFC
  income and exempt unitary corporation dividends.
    (b)  "Exempt  CFC  income" means (i) except to the extent described in
  subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, the income required to be  included
  in  the  taxpayer's  federal  gross income pursuant to subsection (a) of
  section 951 of the internal revenue code, received  from  a  corporation
  that  is  conducting  a  unitary  business  with the taxpayer but is not
  included in a combined  report  with  the  taxpayer,  (ii)  such  income


 required  to be included in the taxpayer's federal gross income pursuant
  to subsection (a) of such section 951 of the internal  revenue  code  by
  reason of subsection (a) of section 965 of the internal revenue code, as
  adjusted  by subsection (b) of section 965 of the internal revenue code,
  and without regard to subsection (c) of such section,  received  from  a
  corporation that is not included in a combined report with the taxpayer,
  and  (iii)  ninety-five percent of the income required to be included in
  the taxpayer's federal  gross  income  pursuant  to  subsection  (a)  of
  section  951A  of  the  internal  revenue  code,  without  regard to the
  deduction under section 250 of the internal revenue code, received  from
  a  corporation  that  is  not  included  in  a  combined report with the
  taxpayer, less, (iv) in the discretion of the commissioner, any interest
  deductions directly or indirectly attributable to that income.  In  lieu
  of  subtracting  from its exempt CFC income the amount of those interest
  deductions, the taxpayer may make a revocable  election  to  reduce  its
  total  exempt  CFC  income  by forty percent. If the taxpayer makes this
  election, the taxpayer must also make  the  elections  provided  for  in
  paragraph  (b)  of  subdivision six of this section and paragraph (c) of
  this subdivision. If the taxpayer subsequently  revokes  this  election,
  the  taxpayer must revoke the elections provided for in paragraph (b) of
  subdivision six of this section and paragraph (c) of this subdivision. A
  taxpayer which does not make this election because it has no exempt  CFC
  income  will  not  be  precluded  from making those other elections. The
  income described in subparagraphs (ii) and (iii) of this paragraph shall
  not constitute investment income. The income described  in  subparagraph
  (iii)  of this paragraph shall not constitute exempt unitary corporation
  dividends.
    (c) "Exempt unitary corporation dividends" means those dividends  from
  a  corporation  that  is conducting a unitary business with the taxpayer
  but is not included in a combined report with the taxpayer, less, in the
  discretion of the commissioner,  any  interest  deductions  directly  or
  indirectly  attributable  to  such  income.  Other  than dividend income
  received from corporations  that  are  taxable  under  a  franchise  tax
  imposed by article nine or article thirty-three of this chapter or would
  be  taxable  under  a  franchise  tax imposed by article nine or article
  thirty-three of this chapter if subject to tax, in lieu  of  subtracting
  from  this  dividend  income those interest deductions, the taxpayer may
  make a revocable election to reduce the total amount  of  this  dividend
  income  by  forty  percent.  If  the  taxpayer  makes this election, the
  taxpayer must also make the elections provided for in paragraph  (b)  of
  subdivision  six  of this section and paragraph (b) of this subdivision.
  If the taxpayer subsequently revokes this election,  the  taxpayer  must
  also  revoke  the elections provided for in paragraph (b) of subdivision
  six of this section and paragraph (b) of this  subdivision.  A  taxpayer
  which does not make this election because it has not received any exempt
  unitary  corporation dividends or is precluded from making this election
  for dividends received from corporations taxable under a  franchise  tax
  imposed by article nine or article thirty-three of this chapter or would
  be  taxable  under  a  franchise  tax imposed by article nine or article
  thirty-three of this chapter if subject to tax  will  not  be  precluded
  from making those other elections.
    (d)  If  the  taxpayer  attributes interest deductions to other exempt
  income and the amount subtracted exceeds other exempt income, the excess
  of the interest deductions over other exempt income must be  added  back
  to entire net income. In no case shall other exempt income exceed entire
  net income.


   (e)  Other  exempt  income  shall  not  include  any amount treated as
  dividends pursuant to section  seventy-eight  of  the  internal  revenue
  code.
    7.  (a)  The  term  "business  capital"  means  all assets, other than
  investment capital and stock issued by the  taxpayer,  less  liabilities
  not  deducted  from  investment  capital. Business capital shall include
  only those assets the income, loss or  expense  of  which  are  properly
  reflected   (or   would  have  been  properly  reflected  if  not  fully
  depreciated or expensed or depreciated or expensed to a nominal  amount)
  in the computation of entire net income for the taxable year.
    (b)  Provided, however, "business capital" shall not include assets to
  the extent employed for  the  purpose  of  generating  income  which  is
  excluded  from entire net income pursuant to the provisions of paragraph
  (c-1) of subdivision nine of this section and shall be computed  without
  regard  to  liabilities  directly  or  indirectly  attributable  to such
  assets, but only if air carriers organized  in  the  United  States  and
  operating  in the foreign country or countries in which the taxpayer has
  its major base of operations and in which it is organized,  resident  or
  headquartered  (if  not  in  the  same  country  as  its  major  base of
  operations) are not subject to any tax based on or measured  by  capital
  imposed   by   such  foreign  country  or  countries  or  any  political
  subdivision thereof, or if taxed, are provided an exemption,  equivalent
  to  that  provided  for  herein,  from  any  tax based on or measured by
  capital imposed by such foreign country or countries and from  any  such
  tax imposed by any political subdivision thereof.
    8. The term "business income" means entire net income minus investment
  income  and other exempt income. In no event shall the sum of investment
  income and other exempt income exceed entire net income. If the taxpayer
  makes the election provided for in subparagraph one of paragraph (a)  of
  subdivision  five of section two hundred ten-A of this article, then all
  income from qualified financial instruments  shall  constitute  business
  income.
    8-A.  Provided, however, that with respect to a DISC or a former DISC,
  the following provisions shall apply:
    (a) investments in the stocks, bonds or other securities of a DISC  or
  any  indebtedness from a DISC shall not be treated as investment capital
  under subdivision five of this section,
    (b) any amounts deemed distributed from a DISC or a former DISC  which
  are  taxable  as  dividends  pursuant  to subsection (b) of section nine
  hundred ninety-five of the internal revenue  code  of  nineteen  hundred
  fifty-four  shall be treated as business income, except any such amounts
  from a former DISC attributable to amounts includible  in  a  taxpayer's
  entire  net  income  for  a prior taxable year under subparagraph (B) of
  paragraph (i) of subdivision nine of this section shall be excluded from
  entire net income,
    (c) any gain  recognized  for  federal  income  tax  purposes  on  the
  disposition  of  stock  in  a  DISC,  and  any  gain  recognized  on the
  disposition of stock in a former DISC, includible in gross income  as  a
  dividend  pursuant to subsection (c) of section nine hundred ninety-five
  of the internal revenue code of nineteen hundred  fifty-four,  shall  be
  treated as business income, and
    (d)  except  as  provided in paragraph (i) of subdivision nine of this
  section, any actual distribution from a DISC or a former DISC  shall  be
  treated  as  business  income  except  an  actual distribution which for
  federal income tax purposes is treated as made out  of  "other  earnings
  and  profits"  under  section  nine  hundred  ninety-six of the internal
  revenue code of nineteen hundred fifty-four, in which case  such  actual
  distribution shall be treated as investment income under this article.


   9.  The  term  "entire  net  income"  means  total net income from all
  sources, which shall be  presumably  the  same  as  the  entire  taxable
  income, which, except as hereinafter provided in this subdivision,
    (i)  the  taxpayer is required to report to the United States treasury
  department, or
    (ii) the taxpayer would have been required to  report  to  the  United
  States  treasury  department  if  it  had  not  made  an  election under
  subchapter s of chapter one of the internal revenue code, or
    (iii) the taxpayer, in the case of a corporation which is exempt  from
  federal  income  tax  (other  than the tax on unrelated business taxable
  income imposed under section 511 of the internal revenue code) but which
  is subject to tax under this article, would have been required to report
  to the United States treasury department but for such exemption, or
    (iv) in the case of an alien corporation that under any  provision  of
  the  internal revenue code is not treated as a "domestic corporation" as
  defined in section seven thousand seven hundred  one  of  such  code  is
  effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business within the
  United  States  as  determined under section 882 of the Internal Revenue
  Code.
    (a) Entire net income shall not include:
    (3) bona fide gifts,
    (4) income and deductions with respect to amounts received from school
  districts and from corporations and associations, organized and operated
  exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes,  no  part
  of  the  net  earnings  of  which  inures  to the benefit of any private
  shareholder or individual, for the operation of school buses,
    (5) (i) any refund or credit of a  tax  imposed  under  this  article,
  article  twenty-three, or former article thirty-two of this chapter, for
  which tax no exclusion or  deduction  was  allowed  in  determining  the
  taxpayer's  entire  net income under this article, article twenty-three,
  or former article thirty-two of this chapter for any prior year, or (ii)
  any refund or credit  of  a  tax  imposed  under  sections  one  hundred
  eighty-three, one hundred eighty-three-a, one hundred eighty-four or one
  hundred eighty-four-a of this chapter;
    (6)  any amount treated as dividends pursuant to section seventy-eight
  of the internal revenue code to the extent that such dividends  are  not
  deducted under section two hundred fifty of such code;
    (7)  that  portion  of  wages  and  salaries  paid or incurred for the
  taxable year for which a  deduction  is  not  allowed  pursuant  to  the
  provisions of section two hundred eighty-C of the internal revenue code.
    (9)  for taxable years beginning after December thirty-first, nineteen
  hundred eighty-one, except with respect to property which is a qualified
  mass commuting vehicle described in subparagraph (D) of paragraph  eight
  of  subsection  (f)  of  section one hundred sixty-eight of the internal
  revenue  code  (relating  to  qualified  mass  commuting  vehicles)  and
  property  of  a  taxpayer principally engaged in the conduct of aviation
  (other than air freight forwarders acting as principal and like indirect
  air carriers) which is placed in service before taxable years  beginning
  in  nineteen  hundred  eighty-nine,  any amount which is included in the
  taxpayer's federal taxable income solely as a result of an election made
  pursuant to the provisions of such paragraph eight as it was  in  effect
  for  agreements  entered  into  prior to January first, nineteen hundred
  eighty-four;
    (10) for taxable years beginning after December thirty-first, nineteen
  hundred eighty-one, except with respect to property which is a qualified
  mass commuting vehicle described in subparagraph (D) of paragraph  eight
  of  subsection  (f)  of  section one hundred sixty-eight of the internal
  revenue  code  (relating  to  qualified  mass  commuting  vehicles)  and


 property  of  a  taxpayer principally engaged in the conduct of aviation
  (other than air freight forwarders acting as principal and like indirect
  air carriers) which is placed in service before taxable years  beginning
  in  nineteen  hundred  eighty-nine,  any amount which the taxpayer could
  have excluded from federal taxable income had it not made  the  election
  provided  for in such paragraph eight as it was in effect for agreements
  entered into prior to January first, nineteen hundred eighty-four;
    (11)  the  amount  deductible  pursuant  to  paragraph  (j)  of   this
  subdivision; and
    (12)  upon  the disposition of property to which paragraph (j) of this
  subdivision applies, the amount, if any, by which the aggregate  of  the
  amounts   described  in  subparagraph  ten  of  paragraph  (b)  of  this
  subdivision attributable to such property exceeds the aggregate  of  the
  amounts  described  in paragraph (j) of this subdivision attributable to
  such property; and
    (14)  The  amount  deductible  pursuant  to  paragraph  (l)  of   this
  subdivision.
    (16) In the case of a taxpayer subject to the modification provided by
  subparagraph  sixteen  of  paragraph (b) of this subdivision, the amount
  required to be recaptured pursuant to subsection (d) of section  179  of
  the  internal  revenue  code  with  respect  to property upon which such
  modification was based.
    (17) for taxable years  beginning  after  December  thirty-first,  two
  thousand  two, the amount deductible pursuant to paragraph (n-1) of this
  subdivision.
    (18) the amount of income or gain included in federal  taxable  income
  of  a taxpayer that is a partner in a qualified entity or is a qualified
  entity that is  located  both  within  and  without  a  New  York  state
  innovation  hot  spot,  to  the  extent  that  the  income  or  gain  is
  attributable to the operations of a qualified entity at or  as  part  of
  the   New  York  state  innovation  hot  spot  as  provided  in  section
  thirty-eight of this chapter.
    (19) the amount computed pursuant to paragraph (r), (s) or (t) of this
  subdivision, but only the amount determined  pursuant  to  one  of  such
  paragraphs.
    (20)  Any  amount  excepted, for purposes of subsection (a) of section
  one hundred eighteen  of  the  internal  revenue  code,  from  the  term
  "contribution  to  the  capital  of  the  taxpayer"  by paragraph two of
  subsection (b) of section one hundred eighteen of the  internal  revenue
  code.
    (21)  The amount of any gain added back to determine entire net income
  in a previous taxable year  pursuant  to  subparagraph  twenty-seven  of
  paragraph  (b)  of  subdivision nine of this section that is included in
  federal gross income for the taxable year.
    (22) Grants received pursuant to the COVID-19 pandemic small  business
  recovery  grant  program,  established  in section 16-ff of the New York
  state urban development corporation act, to  the  extent  includable  in
  federal taxable income.
    (23)  The  amount  of  any  federal  deduction  disallowed pursuant to
  section 280E of the internal revenue code related to the production  and
  distribution  of  adult-use  cannabis  products,  as  defined by article
  twenty-C of this chapter, not used  as  the  basis  for  any  other  tax
  deduction,  exemption,  or credit and not otherwise required to be added
  back by paragraph (b)  of  this  subdivision  in  computing  entire  net
  income.
    (b)  Entire  net  income  shall  be  determined without the exclusion,
  deduction or credit of:


   (1) in the case of an alien corporation that under  any  provision  of
  the  internal revenue code is not treated as a "domestic corporation" as
  defined in section seven thousand seven hundred one of  such  code,  (i)
  any  part of any income from dividends or interest on any kind of stock,
  securities  or  indebtedness,  but  only  if  such  income is treated as
  effectively connected with the conduct of a trade  or  business  in  the
  United States pursuant to section 864 of the internal revenue code, (ii)
  any   income  exempt  from  federal  taxable  income  under  any  treaty
  obligation of the United States,  but  only  if  such  income  would  be
  treated  as  effectively connected in absence of such exemption provided
  that such treaty obligation does  not  preclude  the  taxation  of  such
  income  by  a  state,  or  (iii)  any  income  which would be treated as
  effectively connected if such income were not excluded from gross income
  pursuant to subsection (a) of section 103 of the internal revenue code;
    (2) any part of any income from dividends or interest on any  kind  of
  stock, securities or indebtedness,
    (3)  taxes  on or measured by profits or income paid or accrued to the
  United States or any of its possessions, territories  or  commonwealths,
  including  taxes  in  lieu  of  any  of  the  foregoing  taxes otherwise
  generally imposed by any possession, territory or  commonwealth  of  the
  United States,
    (3-a)  taxes  on  or  measured  by profits or income, or which include
  profits or income as a measure, paid or accrued to any  other  state  of
  the  United  States,  or  any  political  subdivision thereof, or to the
  District of Columbia, including taxes expressly in lieu of  any  of  the
  foregoing  taxes  otherwise  generally imposed by any other state of the
  United States, or any political subdivision thereof, or the District  of
  Columbia;
    (4)  taxes  imposed  under  this  article and article thirty-two as in
  effect on December thirty-first, two thousand fourteen and sections  one
  hundred   eighty-three,   one   hundred   eighty-three-a,   one  hundred
  eighty-four and one hundred eighty-four-a of this chapter,
    (4-a)(A) in those instances where a credit for the special  additional
  mortgage  recording  tax  credit  is  allowed  under subdivision nine of
  section two hundred ten-B of this article,  the  amount  allowed  as  an
  exclusion or deduction for the special additional mortgage recording tax
  imposed  by subdivision one-a of section two hundred fifty-three of this
  chapter in determining the entire taxable income which the  taxpayer  is
  required  to  report  to  the United States treasury department, and (B)
  unless the credit allowed pursuant to subdivision nine  of  section  two
  hundred  ten-B  of  this  article is reflected in the computation of the
  gain or loss so as to result in an increase in such gain or decrease  of
  such  loss,  for  federal  income  tax  purposes, from the sale or other
  disposition of the property with respect to which the special additional
  mortgage recording tax imposed pursuant to subdivision one-a of  section
  two  hundred  fifty-three  of  this  chapter was paid, the amount of the
  special additional mortgage recording tax imposed by  subdivision  one-a
  of  section  two  hundred fifty-three of this chapter which was paid and
  which is reflected in the computation of the basis of the property so as
  to result in a decrease in such  gain  or  increase  in  such  loss  for
  federal  income  tax  purposes from the sale or other disposition of the
  property with respect to which such tax was paid.
    (6) any amount allowed as a  deduction  for  the  taxable  year  under
  section  172  of  the  internal  revenue  code,  including carryovers of
  deductions from prior taxable years.
    (8) for taxable years beginning after December thirty-first,  nineteen
  hundred eighty-one, except with respect to property which is a qualified
  mass  commuting vehicle described in subparagraph (D) of paragraph eight


 of subsection (f) of section one hundred  sixty-eight  of  the  internal
  revenue  code  (relating  to  qualified  mass  commuting  vehicles)  and
  property of a taxpayer principally engaged in the  conduct  of  aviation
  (other than air freight forwarders acting as principal and like indirect
  air  carriers) which is placed in service before taxable years beginning
  in nineteen hundred eighty-nine, any amount which the  taxpayer  claimed
  as  a  deduction  in  computing  its  federal taxable income solely as a
  result of an election made pursuant to the provisions of such  paragraph
  eight  as  it was in effect for agreements entered into prior to January
  first, nineteen hundred eighty-four;
    (9) for taxable years beginning after December thirty-first,  nineteen
  hundred eighty-one, except with respect to property which is a qualified
  mass  commuting vehicle described in subparagraph (D) of paragraph eight
  of subsection (f) of section one hundred  sixty-eight  of  the  internal
  revenue  code  (relating  to  qualified  mass  commuting  vehicles)  and
  property of a taxpayer principally engaged in the  conduct  of  aviation
  (other than air freight forwarders acting as principal and like indirect
  air  carriers) which is placed in service before taxable years beginning
  in nineteen hundred eighty-nine, any amount  which  the  taxpayer  would
  have  been required to include in the computation of its federal taxable
  income had it not made the election permitted pursuant to such paragraph
  eight as it was in effect for agreements entered into prior  to  January
  first, nineteen hundred eighty-four;
    (10)  in  the  case  of  property  placed  in service in taxable years
  beginning  before  nineteen  hundred  ninety-four,  for  taxable   years
  beginning  after  December  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred eighty-one,
  except with respect to property subject to the provisions of section two
  hundred eighty-F of the internal revenue code, property subject  to  the
  provisions  of  section  one hundred sixty-eight of the internal revenue
  code which is placed in service in this state in taxable years beginning
  after December thirty-first, nineteen hundred eighty-four  and  property
  of a taxpayer principally engaged in the conduct of aviation (other than
  air  freight  forwarders  acting  as  principal  and  like  indirect air
  carriers) which is placed in service before taxable years  beginning  in
  nineteen  hundred  eighty-nine,  the  amount  allowable  as  a deduction
  determined under section one hundred sixty-eight of the internal revenue
  code;
    (11) upon the disposition of property to which paragraph (j)  of  this
  subdivision  applies,  the amount, if any, by which the aggregate of the
  amounts described in such paragraph (j) attributable  to  such  property
  exceeds  the  aggregate  of the amounts described in subparagraph ten of
  this paragraph attributable to such property.
    (15) Real property taxes paid on qualified agricultural  property  and
  deducted  in  determining  federal  taxable income, to the extent of the
  amount of the agricultural property tax credit allowed under subdivision
  eleven of section two hundred ten-B of this article.
    (16) In the case of a taxpayer which is  not  an  eligible  farmer  as
  defined  in  paragraph  (b) of subdivision eleven of section two hundred
  ten-B of this article, the amount of any deduction claimed  pursuant  to
  section 179 of the internal revenue code with respect to a sport utility
  vehicle which is not a passenger automobile as defined in paragraph 5 of
  subsection (d) of section 280F of the internal revenue code.
    (17)  for  taxable  years  beginning  after December thirty-first, two
  thousand two, in the case of qualified property described  in  paragraph
  two  of  subsection k of section 168 of the internal revenue code, other
  than qualified resurgence zone property described in  paragraph  (q)  of
  this  subdivision,  and  other  than  qualified  New  York  Liberty Zone
  property described in paragraph two of subsection b of section 1400L  of


 the  internal revenue code (without regard to clause (i) of subparagraph
  (C) of such paragraph), which was placed in service  on  or  after  June
  first,  two  thousand  three,  the amount allowable as a deduction under
  section 167 of the internal revenue code.
    (18) Premiums paid for environmental remediation insurance, as defined
  in  section  twenty-three  of  this chapter, and deducted in determining
  federal taxable income, to the extent of the amount of the environmental
  remediation insurance credit allowed under such section twenty-three and
  subdivision nineteen of section two hundred ten-B of this article.
    (19) The amount of any  deduction  allowed  pursuant  to  section  one
  hundred ninety-nine of the internal revenue code.
    (20)  The  amount  of  any  federal  deduction for taxes imposed under
  article twenty-three of this chapter.
    (20-a) The amount of any federal  deduction  for  the  excise  tax  on
  telecommunication  services  to  the  extent  such taxes are used as the
  basis of  the  calculation  of  the  tax-free  NY  area  excise  tax  on
  telecommunication  services  credit allowed under subdivision forty-four
  of section two hundred ten-B of this article.
    (21) The amount of any federal deduction for real  property  taxes  to
  the  extent  such  taxes are used as the basis of the calculation of the
  real property tax credit for  manufacturers  allowed  under  subdivision
  forty-three of section two hundred ten-B of this article.
    (22)  the amount of any deduction for charitable contributions allowed
  under section one hundred seventy of the internal revenue  code  to  the
  extent  such  contributions  are used as the basis of the calculation of
  the farm donations to food pantries credit under  subdivision  fifty-two
  of section two hundred ten-B of this article.
    (23)   The  amount  of  any  federal  deduction  allowed  pursuant  to
  subsection (c) of section 965 of the internal revenue code.
    (24) The amount of any federal deduction allowed pursuant  to  section
  250(a)(1)(A) of the internal revenue code.
    (25)  The  amount of any federal deduction allowed pursuant to section
  250(a)(1)(B)(i) of the internal revenue code.
    (26) For taxable years beginning in  two  thousand  nineteen  and  two
  thousand  twenty,  the  amount  of  the increase in the federal interest
  deduction allowed pursuant to section 163(j)(10)(A)(i) of  the  internal
  revenue code.
    (27) The amount of any gain excluded from federal gross income for the
  taxable  year  by subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of
  section 1400Z-2 of the internal revenue code.
    (c-1)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article,  in  the
  case  of a taxpayer which is a foreign air carrier holding a foreign air
  carrier permit issued by the United States department of  transportation
  pursuant  to  section  four  hundred  two of the federal aviation act of
  nineteen hundred fifty-eight, as amended, and which is  qualified  under
  subparagraph two of this paragraph, entire net income shall not include,
  and  shall  be  computed  without  the deduction of, amounts directly or
  indirectly  attributable  to,  (i)   any   income   derived   from   the
  international  operation  of aircraft as described in and subject to the
  provisions of section eight hundred eighty-three of the internal revenue
  code, (ii) income without the United States which is  derived  from  the
  operation  of aircraft, and (iii) income without the United States which
  is of a type described in  subdivision  (a)  of  section  eight  hundred
  eighty-one  of  the internal revenue code except that it is derived from
  sources without the United  States.  Entire  net  income  shall  include
  income  described in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of this subparagraph in
  the case of taxpayers not described in the previous sentence.


   (2) A taxpayer is qualified under this subparagraph  if  air  carriers
  organized  in  the United States and operating in the foreign country or
  countries in which the taxpayer has its major base of operations and  in
  which  it  is  organized,  resident or headquartered (if not in the same
  country  as  its major base of operations) are not subject to any income
  tax or other tax based on or measured by income or receipts  imposed  by
  such  foreign country or countries or any political subdivision thereof,
  or if so subject to such tax, are provided an exemption  from  such  tax
  equivalent to that provided for herein.
    (c-2)  Adjustments by qualified public utilities. (1) In the case of a
  taxpayer which is a qualified public utility, entire net income shall be
  computed with the adjustments set forth in this paragraph.
    (2) Definitions. (A) Qualified public  utility.  The  term  "qualified
  public  utility"  means  a taxpayer which: (i) on December thirty-first,
  nineteen hundred ninety-nine, was subject to the ratemaking  supervision
  of  the state department of public service, and (ii) for the year ending
  on December thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine, was  subject  to
  tax under former section one hundred eighty-six of this chapter.
    (B) Transition property. The term "transition property" means property
  placed  in  service  by the taxpayer before January first, two thousand,
  for which a depreciation deduction is allowed under section one  hundred
  sixty-seven of the internal revenue code.
    (3)  Federal  depreciation  disallowed.  With  respect  to  transition
  property, the deduction for federal income tax purposes for depreciation
  shall not be allowed.
    (4) New York depreciation. With  respect  to  transition  property,  a
  deduction  shall  be  allowed  for the depreciation expense shown on the
  books and records of the taxpayer for the taxable year and determined in
  accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
    (5) Regulatory assets.  A  deduction  shall  be  allowed  for  amounts
  recognized  as  expense on the books and records of the taxpayer for the
  taxable year, which amounts  were  recognized  as  expense  for  federal
  income  tax  purposes  in  a  taxable  year ending on or before December
  thirty-first, nineteen hundred  ninety-nine,  where:  (A)  such  amounts
  represent  expenditures  which,  when  made,  were charged to a deferred
  debit account or similar asset account on the books and records  of  the
  taxpayer,  and  where  (B)  the  recognition of expense on the books and
  records of the taxpayer is matched by revenue stemming from a  procedure
  or  adjustment allowing the recovery of such expenditures, and where (C)
  such revenue is recognized  for  federal  income  tax  purposes  in  the
  taxable year.
    (6)  Basis for gain or loss. (A) Recognition transactions. (i) General
  rule - book basis. Except as provided in subclause (ii) of this  clause,
  where  transition  property  is  sold  or  otherwise  disposed of in the
  taxable year in a transaction of the type requiring recognition of  gain
  or  loss  for federal income tax purposes, the basis for determining the
  amount of such gain or loss under this article shall be the cost of  the
  property less the accumulated depreciation on the property determined on
  the  books  and  records  of  the  taxpayer in accordance with generally
  accepted accounting principles.
    (ii) Qualified gain - New York basis.  Where  a  sale  or  disposition
  described in subclause (i) of this clause results in recognition of gain
  for  federal  income tax purposes, and where either (I) such recognition
  occurs in a taxable year ending after nineteen hundred  ninety-nine  and
  before  two  thousand ten, or (II) such recognition is with respect to a
  nuclear electric generating facility,  the  basis  for  determining  the
  amount of such gain under this article shall be the cost of the property


 less  the  aggregate  of  the  New  York  depreciation deductions on the
  property determined under subparagraph four of this paragraph.
    (iii)  No  conversion  of  gain  to  loss. In the event that the basis
  determined under subclause (ii) of this clause results in  determination
  of  a  loss  on the sale or disposition of the property, no gain or loss
  shall be recognized under this article with  respect  to  such  sale  or
  disposition.
    (B)  Nonrecognition  transactions.  (i)  Carryover  basis.  (I)  where
  transition  property  is  disposed  of  ("original  disposition")  in  a
  transaction  of a type requiring deferral of recognition of gain or loss
  for federal income tax purposes, and where (II) there  is  a  subsequent
  recognition  of  gain or loss for federal income tax purposes ("clause B
  gain or loss"), the amount of which is determined by reference, in whole
  or in part, to  the  basis  of  such  transition  property  ("underlying
  transition  property"),  then  (III) the amount of such clause B gain or
  loss under this article shall be adjusted as provided in subclause  (ii)
  or (iii) of this clause.
    (ii)  General  rule  -  book  basis  adjustment. Except as provided in
  subclause (iii) of this clause, the amount of clause  B  gain  shall  be
  reduced,  or  the  amount  of  clause B loss increased, by the amount by
  which the book basis of the underlying transition property on  the  date
  of  original  disposition  (determined using the provisions of subclause
  (i) of clause (A) of this subparagraph) exceeds the federal  income  tax
  basis of such property on such date.
    (iii)  Qualified gain - New York basis adjustment. Where clause B gain
  either (I) occurs in  a  taxable  year  ending  after  nineteen  hundred
  ninety-nine  and  before  two thousand ten, or (II) is with respect to a
  nuclear electric generating facility, the amount of such gain under this
  article shall be reduced, but not below zero, by the amount by which the
  New York basis of the underlying transition  property  on  the  date  of
  original  disposition (determined using the provisions of subclause (ii)
  of clause (A) of this subparagraph) exceeds the federal income tax basis
  of such property on such date.
    (iv) Application to replacement  property  and  transferee  taxpayers.
  This  clause  shall apply whether the clause B gain or loss: (I) is with
  respect to either transition property or depreciable property the  basis
  of  which  is determined by reference to transition property, or (II) is
  recognized by either a qualified public utility or by a  taxpayer  which
  is  a  transferee of transition property (whether or not such transferee
  is a qualified public utility, notwithstanding subparagraph one of  this
  paragraph).
    (c-3)  Depreciation  adjustments  by  qualified  power  producers  and
  pipeline companies. (1) In the case of a qualified taxpayer, entire  net
  income  shall be computed with the depreciation adjustments set forth in
  this paragraph.
    (2) Definitions. (A) Qualified taxpayer. The term "qualified taxpayer"
  means a qualified power producer or a qualified pipeline.
    (B) Qualified power producer.  The  term  "qualified  power  producer"
  means  a  taxpayer which: (i) on December thirty-first, nineteen hundred
  ninety-nine, was not subject to the ratemaking supervision of the  state
  department  of  public service, and (ii) for the year ending on December
  thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-nine, was  subject  to  tax  under
  former  section one hundred eighty-six of this chapter on account of its
  being principally engaged in the business of supplying electricity.
    (C) Qualified pipeline. The term "qualified pipeline" means a taxpayer
  which: (i) on December thirty-first, nineteen hundred  ninety-nine,  was
  subject  to  the  ratemaking  supervision  of  either the federal energy
  regulatory commission or the state department  of  public  service,  and


 (ii)  for  the  year  ending  on December thirty-first, nineteen hundred
  ninety-nine, was subject to tax under sections one hundred  eighty-three
  and  one  hundred  eighty-four  of  this chapter on account of its being
  principally engaged in the business of pipeline transmission.
    (D) Transition property. The term "transition property" means property
  placed  in  service  by  a  qualified taxpayer before January first, two
  thousand, for which a depreciation deduction is  allowed  under  section
  one hundred sixty-seven of the internal revenue code.
    (3)  Federal  depreciation  disallowed.  With  respect  to  transition
  property, the deduction for federal income tax purposes for depreciation
  shall not be allowed.
    (4) New York depreciation. With  respect  to  transition  property,  a
  deduction  shall  be  allowed  for  the depreciation expense computed as
  provided in this subparagraph. (A) All transition property shown on  the
  books  and  records of the taxpayer on January first, two thousand shall
  be treated as a single asset placed in service on  such  date.  The  New
  York  basis for purposes of computing the depreciation deduction on such
  single asset shall be the net book value  of  such  transition  property
  determined  on  the  first day of the federal taxable year ending in two
  thousand (or on the date any such property  is  placed  in  service,  if
  later) adjusted as provided in clause (B) of this subparagraph.
    (B)  If  transition property is sold or otherwise disposed of, the New
  York basis of the single asset shall be reduced on the date of such sale
  or disposition by the amount of the adjusted federal tax basis  of  such
  property on such date.
    (C)  The  New York depreciation deduction allowed for any taxable year
  with  respect  to  such  single  asset  shall  be  computed  using   the
  straight-line method, a twenty-year life, and a salvage value of zero.
    (D) For purposes of this subparagraph, the term "net book value" means
  cost  reduced by accumulated depreciation shown on the books and records
  of the taxpayer and  determined,  in  the  case  of  a  qualified  power
  producer,  in  accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
  and in the  case  of  a  qualified  pipeline,  in  accordance  with  the
  taxpayer's  regulatory  reports filed with the federal energy regulatory
  commission or state department of public service.
    (d) The commissioner may, whenever  necessary  in  order  properly  to
  reflect  the  entire  net  income of any taxpayer, determine the year or
  period in which any item of  income  or  deduction  shall  be  included,
  without regard to the method of accounting employed by the taxpayer.
    (e)  The  entire net income of any bridge commission created by act of
  congress to construct a bridge across an  international  boundary  means
  its  gross  income  less  the  expense  of maintaining and operating its
  properties, the annual interest upon its bonds  and  other  obligations,
  and the annual charge for the retirement of such bonds or obligations at
  maturity.
    (h) If the period covered by a report under this article is other than
  the  period  covered  by  the  report  to  the  United  States  treasury
  department,
    (1) except as provided in subparagraph two hereof, entire  net  income
  shall  be  determined by multiplying the taxable income reported to such
  department (as adjusted pursuant to the provisions of this  article)  by
  the  number  of  calendar  months  or major parts thereof covered by the
  report under this article and dividing by the number of calendar  months
  or  major  parts thereof covered by the report to such department. If it
  shall appear that such method of determining entire net income does  not
  properly  reflect the taxpayer's income during the period covered by the
  report under this article, the commissioner shall be authorized  in  its
  discretion  to  determine  such entire net income solely on the basis of


 the taxpayer's income during the period covered by its report under this
  article.
    (2)  In the case of a New York S termination year, an equal portion of
  entire net income shall be assigned  to  each  day  of  such  year.  The
  portion  of  such entire net income thereby assigned to the S short year
  and the C short year shall be included in the respective reports for the
  S short year and the C short year under  this  article.  However,  where
  paragraph  three of subsection (s) of section six hundred twelve of this
  chapter applies, the portion of such entire net income assigned to the S
  short year and the C short year shall be  determined  under  normal  tax
  accounting rules.
    (i)  With respect to a DISC which during any taxable year or reporting
  year (1) received more than five percent of its  gross  sales  from  the
  sale  of  inventory  or  other  property  which  it  purchased  from its
  stockholders, (2) received more than five percent of its  gross  rentals
  from  the  rental  of  property  which  it  purchased or rented from its
  stockholders or (3)  received  more  than  five  percent  of  its  total
  receipts  other  than  sales  and  rentals  from  its  stockholders, the
  following provisions shall apply.
    (A) For any taxable year in which sub-paragraph (B) of this  paragraph
  is  in  effect  and  not rendered invalid, a DISC meeting the above test
  shall be exempt from all taxes imposed by this article.
    (B) Supplemental to the provisions of subdivision five of section  two
  hundred  eleven  of this article, any taxpayer required to compute a tax
  under this article, which during the taxable year being reported  was  a
  stockholder  in  any DISC meeting the test prescribed in this paragraph,
  shall for any taxable year ending after December thirty-first,  nineteen
  hundred  seventy-one  adjust each item of its receipts, expenses, assets
  and liabilities, as otherwise computed under  this  article,  by  adding
  thereto  its  attributable share of each such DISC's receipts, expenses,
  assets and liabilities as reportable by each such  DISC  to  the  United
  States Treasury Department for its annual reporting period ending during
  the  current  taxable year of such taxpayer; provided, however, (1) that
  all transactions between the  taxpayer  and  each  such  DISC  shall  be
  eliminated  from  the taxpayer's adjusted receipts, expenses, assets and
  liabilities; (2) that the taxpayer's  entire  net  income  as  otherwise
  computed  under this section, shall be reduced by subtracting the amount
  of the deemed distribution of current income, if  any,  from  each  such
  DISC  already  included  in  the  entire  net income of such taxpayer by
  virtue of having been included in its entire  taxable  income  for  that
  taxable  year  as reported to the United States Treasury Department; and
  (3) that in the event this paragraph should  be  rendered  invalid,  all
  DISC's  and  their stockholders taxable hereunder shall be taxed instead
  under the remaining portions of this article.
    (j) in the case  of  property  placed  in  service  in  taxable  years
  beginning   before  nineteen  hundred  ninety-four,  for  taxable  years
  beginning after  December  thirty-first,  nineteen  hundred  eighty-one,
  except with respect to property subject to the provisions of section two
  hundred  eighty-F  of  the internal revenue code and property subject to
  the provisions of  section  one  hundred  sixty-eight  of  the  internal
  revenue  code  which is placed in service in this state in taxable years
  beginning after December thirty-first, nineteen hundred eighty-four, and
  provided a deduction has  not  been  excluded  from  entire  net  income
  pursuant  to  subparagraph eight of paragraph (b) of this subdivision, a
  taxpayer shall be allowed with respect to property which is  subject  to
  the  provisions  of  section  one  hundred  sixty-eight  of the internal
  revenue code the depreciation  deduction  allowable  under  section  one
  hundred  sixty-seven  of the internal revenue code as such section would


 have applied to property placed in  service  on  December  thirty-first,
  nineteen hundred eighty. This paragraph shall not apply to property of a
  taxpayer  principally engaged in the conduct of aviation (other than air
  freight  forwarders  acting as principal and like indirect air carriers)
  which is placed in service before taxable years  beginning  in  nineteen
  hundred eighty-nine.
    (k)  QSSS.  (1)  New  York  S corporation. In the case of a New York S
  corporation which is the parent of a qualified subchapter  S  subsidiary
  (QSSS) with respect to a taxable year:
    (A) where the QSSS is not an excluded corporation,
    (i)  in  determining the entire net income of such parent corporation,
  all assets, liabilities, income and deductions  of  the  QSSS  shall  be
  treated  as  assets,  liabilities,  income  and deductions of the parent
  corporation, and
    (ii) the QSSS shall be exempt from all taxes imposed by this  article,
  and
    (B)  where  the QSSS is an excluded corporation, the entire net income
  of the parent corporation shall be determined as  if  the  federal  QSSS
  election had not been made.
    (2)  New  York  C corporation. In the case of a New York C corporation
  which is the parent of a QSSS with respect to a taxable year:
    (A) where the QSSS is a taxpayer,
    (i) in determining the entire net income of such  parent  corporation,
  all  assets,  liabilities,  income  and  deductions of the QSSS shall be
  treated as assets, liabilities, income  and  deductions  of  the  parent
  corporation, and
    (ii)  the QSSS shall be exempt from all taxes imposed by this article,
  and
    (B) where the QSSS is not a taxpayer,
    (i) if the QSSS is not an excluded corporation, the parent corporation
  may make a QSSS inclusion election to include all  assets,  liabilities,
  income  and  deductions  of  the QSSS as assets, liabilities, income and
  deductions of the parent corporation, and
    (ii) in the absence of such election, or where the QSSS is an excluded
  corporation, the entire net income of the parent  corporation  shall  be
  determined as if the federal QSSS election had not been made.
    (3)  Non-New  York  S  corporation  not  excluded. In the case of an S
  corporation which is not a taxpayer and not an excluded corporation, and
  which is the parent of a QSSS which is a taxpayer, the  shareholders  of
  the parent corporation shall be entitled to make the New York S election
  under subsection (a) of section six hundred sixty of this chapter.
    (A)  For  any  taxable  year for which such election is in effect, the
  parent corporation shall be subject to tax under this article as  a  New
  York S corporation, and the provisions of clause (A) of subparagraph one
  of this paragraph shall apply.
    (B) For any taxable year for which such election is not in effect, the
  QSSS shall be a New York C corporation, and the entire net income of the
  QSSS  shall  be  determined as if the federal QSSS election had not been
  made. For purposes of such determination, the taxable year of the parent
  corporation shall constitute the taxable year of  the  QSSS,  excluding,
  however,  any  portion  of  such  year  during  which  the QSSS is not a
  taxpayer.
    (4) S corporation excluded. In the case of an S corporation  which  is
  an  excluded  corporation  and  which is the parent of a QSSS which is a
  taxpayer, the QSSS shall be a New York C corporation and the  provisions
  of clause (B) of subparagraph three of this paragraph shall apply.
    (5)  Excluded  corporation.  The  term  "excluded corporation" means a
  corporation subject to  tax  under  sections  one  hundred  eighty-three


 through  one  hundred  eighty-six, inclusive, or article thirty-three of
  this chapter, or a foreign corporation not taxable by this state  which,
  if  it  were taxable, would be subject to tax under any of such sections
  or article.
    (6)  Taxpayer.  For  purposes  of  this paragraph, the term "taxpayer"
  means a parent corporation or QSSS subject to tax  under  this  article,
  determined without regard to the provisions of this paragraph.
    (7)  QSSS  inclusion  election.  The  election  under subclause (i) of
  clause (B) of subparagraph two of this paragraph shall be effective  for
  the  taxable year for which made and for all succeeding taxable years of
  the corporation until  such  election  is  terminated.  An  election  or
  termination  shall  be  made  on  such  form  and  in such manner as the
  commissioner may prescribe by regulation or instruction.
    (l) Emerging technology investment deferral. In the case of  any  sale
  of  a  qualified  emerging  technologies  investment  held for more than
  thirty-six months and with respect to  which  the  taxpayer  elects  the
  application  of  this paragraph, gain from such sale shall be recognized
  only to the extent that the amount realized on  such  sale  exceeds  the
  cost  of any qualified emerging technologies investment purchased by the
  taxpayer during the three hundred sixty-five-day period beginning on the
  date of such sale, reduced by any portion of such cost previously  taken
  into  account  under  this paragraph. For purposes of this paragraph the
  following shall apply:
    (1) A qualified investment is stock of a corporation or  an  interest,
  other  than as a creditor, in a partnership or limited liability company
  that was acquired by the taxpayer as provided in Internal Revenue Code §
  1202(c)(1)(B), except that the reference to the  term  "stock"  in  such
  section  shall be read as "investment," or by the taxpayer from a person
  who had acquired such stock or interest in such a manner.
    (2)  A  qualified  emerging  technology  investment  is  a   qualified
  investment,  that  was  held  by  the  taxpayer  for at least thirty-six
  months, in a company defined in paragraph  (c)  of  subdivision  one  of
  section  thirty-one  hundred  two-e  of the public authorities law or an
  investment in a partnership or limited liability company that  is  taxed
  as  a  partnership  to  the  extent  that  such  partnership  or limited
  liability company invests in qualified emerging technology companies.
    (3) For purposes of determining whether  the  nonrecognition  of  gain
  under  this  subsection  applies  to  a  qualified emerging technologies
  investment  that  is  sold,  the  taxpayer's  holding  period  for  such
  investment  and  the  qualified emerging technologies investment that is
  purchased shall be determined without regard to Internal Revenue Code  §
  1223.
    (m)  Amounts deferred. The amount deferred under paragraph (l) of this
  subdivision shall be added to entire net income when the reinvestment in
  the New York qualified emerging technology  company  which  qualified  a
  taxpayer for such deferral is sold.
    (n-1)  For  taxable  years  beginning after December thirty-first, two
  thousand two, in the case of qualified property described  in  paragraph
  two  of  subsection k of section 168 of the internal revenue code, other
  than qualified resurgence zone property described in  paragraph  (q)  of
  this  subdivision,  and  other  than  qualified  New  York  Liberty Zone
  property described in paragraph two of subsection b of section 1400L  of
  the  internal revenue code (without regard to clause (i) of subparagraph
  (C) of such paragraph), which was placed in service  on  or  after  June
  first,  two  thousand three, a taxpayer shall be allowed with respect to
  such property the depreciation deduction allowable under section 167  of
  the  internal  revenue  code  as such section would have applied to such


 property had it been acquired by the taxpayer on  September  tenth,  two
  thousand one.
    (o)  Related  members  expense  add back. (1) Definitions. (A) Related
  member.  "Related  member"  means  a  related  person  as   defined   in
  subparagraph  (c)  of  paragraph three of subsection (b) of section four
  hundred sixty-five of the internal  revenue  code,  except  that  "fifty
  percent" shall be substituted for "ten percent".
    (B)  Effective  rate  of tax. "Effective rate of tax" means, as to any
  state or U.S. possession, the maximum statutory rate of tax  imposed  by
  the  state or possession on or measured by a related member's net income
  multiplied by the apportionment percentage, if any,  applicable  to  the
  related member under the laws of said jurisdiction. For purposes of this
  definition, the effective rate of tax as to any state or U.S. possession
  is  zero  where  the  related  member's net income tax liability in said
  jurisdiction is reported on a combined or consolidated return  including
  both the taxpayer and the related member where the reported transactions
  between  the  taxpayer  and the related member are eliminated or offset.
  Also, for purposes of this definition, when computing the effective rate
  of tax for a jurisdiction in which a  related  member's  net  income  is
  eliminated or offset by a credit or similar adjustment that is dependent
  upon  the  related  member  either  maintaining  or  managing intangible
  property or collecting interest income in that jurisdiction, the maximum
  statutory rate of tax imposed by said jurisdiction shall be decreased to
  reflect the statutory rate of tax that applies to the related member  as
  effectively reduced by such credit or similar adjustment.
    (C) Royalty payments. Royalty payments are payments directly connected
  to  the  acquisition,  use,  maintenance or management, ownership, sale,
  exchange, or any other disposition of licenses, trademarks,  copyrights,
  trade  names,  trade  dress,  service  marks, mask works, trade secrets,
  patents and any other similar types of intangible assets  as  determined
  by   the   commissioner,  and  include  amounts  allowable  as  interest
  deductions under section one hundred sixty-three of the internal revenue
  code to the extent such amounts are directly or indirectly for,  related
  to   or   in  connection  with  the  acquisition,  use,  maintenance  or
  management, ownership, sale, exchange or disposition of such  intangible
  assets.
    (D)  Valid  Business  Purpose. A valid business purpose is one or more
  business purposes, other than the avoidance or  reduction  of  taxation,
  which alone or in combination constitute the primary motivation for some
  business  activity or transaction, which activity or transaction changes
  in a meaningful way, apart from tax effects, the  economic  position  of
  the taxpayer. The economic position of the taxpayer includes an increase
  in  the  market share of the taxpayer, or the entry by the taxpayer into
  new business markets.
    (2) Royalty expense add backs. (A) Except where a taxpayer is included
  in a combined report with a  related  member  pursuant  to  section  two
  hundred  ten-C  of this article, for the purpose of computing entire net
  income or other applicable taxable  basis,  a  taxpayer  must  add  back
  royalty  payments  directly  or indirectly paid, accrued, or incurred in
  connection with one or more direct or indirect transactions with one  or
  more related members during the taxable year to the extent deductible in
  calculating federal taxable income.
    (B)  Exceptions.  (i)  The adjustment required in this paragraph shall
  not apply to the portion  of  the  royalty  payment  that  the  taxpayer
  establishes,  by  clear  and  convincing evidence of the type and in the
  form  specified  by  the  commissioner,  meets  all  of  the   following
  requirements: (I) the related member was subject to tax in this state or
  another  state or possession of the United States or a foreign nation or


 some combination thereof on a tax base that included the royalty payment
  paid, accrued or incurred by  the  taxpayer;  (II)  the  related  member
  during  the  same  taxable  year directly or indirectly paid, accrued or
  incurred  such  portion  to  a  person that is not a related member; and
  (III) the transaction giving rise to the  royalty  payment  between  the
  taxpayer  and  the  related  member  was undertaken for a valid business
  purpose.
    (ii) The adjustment required in this paragraph shall not apply if  the
  taxpayer  establishes,  by clear and convincing evidence of the type and
  in the form specified by the commissioner, that: (I) the related  member
  was  subject  to  tax  on or measured by its net income in this state or
  another state or possession of the United  States  or  some  combination
  thereof;  (II)  the  tax  base for said tax included the royalty payment
  paid, accrued or incurred by  the  taxpayer;  and  (III)  the  aggregate
  effective   rate   of  tax  applied  to  the  related  member  in  those
  jurisdictions is no less than eighty percent of the  statutory  rate  of
  tax  that  applied to the taxpayer under section two hundred ten of this
  article for the taxable year.
    (iii) The adjustment required in this paragraph shall not apply if the
  taxpayer establishes, by clear and convincing evidence of the  type  and
  in the form specified by the commissioner, that: (I) the royalty payment
  was  paid,  accrued  or incurred to a related member organized under the
  laws of a country  other  than  the  United  States;  (II)  the  related
  member's  income  from  the  transaction  was subject to a comprehensive
  income tax treaty between such country and the United States; (III)  the
  related member was subject to tax in a foreign nation on a tax base that
  included  the royalty payment paid, accrued or incurred by the taxpayer;
  (IV) the related member's income from the transaction was taxed in  such
  country  at  an  effective rate of tax at least equal to that imposed by
  this state; and (V) the royalty payment was paid,  accrued  or  incurred
  pursuant  to  a  transaction  that  was  undertaken for a valid business
  purpose and using terms that reflect an arm's length relationship.
    (iv) The adjustment required in this paragraph shall not apply if  the
  taxpayer and the commissioner agree in writing to the application or use
  of alternative adjustments or computations. The commissioner may, in his
  or  her  discretion,  agree  to  the  application  or use of alternative
  adjustments or computations when he or she concludes that in the absence
  of such agreement the income of  the  taxpayer  would  not  be  properly
  reflected.
    (p)  For  taxable  years  beginning  after  December thirty-first, two
  thousand two, upon the disposition of property to which paragraph  (n-1)
  of  this  subdivision applies, the amount of any gain or loss includible
  in entire net income shall be adjusted to  reflect  the  inclusions  and
  exclusions  from entire net income pursuant to subparagraph seventeen of
  paragraph (a) and  subparagraph  seventeen  of  paragraph  (b)  of  this
  subdivision attributable to such property.
    (q)  For  purposes  of  paragraphs  (n-1) and (p) of this subdivision,
  qualified  resurgence  zone  property  shall  mean  qualified   property
  described  in  paragraph  two  of  subsection  k  of  section 168 of the
  internal revenue code substantially all of the use of which  is  in  the
  resurgence  zone,  as  defined  below, and is in the active conduct of a
  trade or business by the taxpayer in such zone, and the original use  of
  which  in the resurgence zone commences with the taxpayer after December
  thirty-first, two thousand two. The resurgence zone shall mean the  area
  of  New  York  county  bounded  on  the south by a line running from the
  intersection of the Hudson River with the Holland  Tunnel,  and  running
  thence  east to Canal Street, then running along the centerline of Canal
  Street to the intersection of  the  Bowery  and  Canal  Street,  running


 thence  in  a southeasterly direction diagonally across Manhattan Bridge
  Plaza, to the Manhattan Bridge and thence along the  centerline  of  the
  Manhattan  Bridge  to  the  point  where the centerline of the Manhattan
  Bridge  would  intersect  with  the easterly bank of the East River, and
  bounded on the north by a line running  from  the  intersection  of  the
  Hudson River with the Holland Tunnel and running thence north along West
  Avenue  to  the  intersection of Clarkson Street then running east along
  the centerline of Clarkson Street  to  the  intersection  of  Washington
  Avenue,  then running south along the centerline of Washington Avenue to
  the intersection of West Houston Street, then east along the  centerline
  of  West  Houston  Street, then at the intersection of the Avenue of the
  Americas continuing east along the centerline of East Houston Street  to
  the easterly bank of the East River.
    (r)   Subtraction   modification   for   qualified   residential  loan
  portfolios.  (1)(A) A taxpayer that is either a  thrift  institution  as
  defined in subparagraph three of this paragraph or a qualified community
  bank as defined in subparagraph two of paragraph (s) of this subdivision
  and  maintains  a  qualified  residential  loan  portfolio as defined in
  subparagraph two of this paragraph shall be allowed as  a  deduction  in
  computing  entire net income the amount, if any, by which (i) thirty-two
  percent of its entire net  income  determined  without  regard  to  this
  paragraph  exceeds (ii) the amounts deducted by the taxpayer pursuant to
  sections 166 and 585 of the  Internal  Revenue  Code  less  any  amounts
  included in federal taxable income as a result of a recovery of a loan.
    (B)(i)  If  the  taxpayer  is  in  a combined report under section two
  hundred ten-C of this article, this deduction  will  be  computed  on  a
  combined  basis. In that instance, the entire net income of the combined
  reporting group for purposes of this paragraph shall be multiplied by  a
  fraction,  the numerator of which is the average total assets of all the
  thrift institutions  and  qualified  community  banks  included  in  the
  combined report and the denominator of which is the average total assets
  of all the corporations included in the combined report.
    (ii)  Measurement of assets. For purposes of this paragraph: (I) Total
  assets are those assets that are properly reflected on a balance  sheet,
  computed  in  the same manner as is required by the banking regulator of
  the taxpayers included in the combined return. In addition, total assets
  includes leased real property  that  is  not  properly  reflected  on  a
  balance sheet.
    (II)  Assets  will only be included if the income or expenses of which
  are properly reflected (or would have been  properly  reflected  if  not
  fully  depreciated  or expensed, or depreciated or expensed to a nominal
  amount) in the computation of the combined group's entire net income for
  the taxable year. Assets  will  not  include  deferred  tax  assets  and
  intangible assets identified as "goodwill".
    (III)  Tangible  real  and personal property, such as buildings, land,
  machinery, and equipment shall be valued at cost. Leased  real  property
  that  is not properly reflected on a balance sheet will be valued at the
  annual lease payment multiplied by eight. Intangible property,  such  as
  loans  and  investments,  shall  be  valued  at  book value exclusive of
  reserves.
    (IV)  Intercorporate  stockholdings  and  bills,  notes  and  accounts
  receivable,   and   other   intercorporate   indebtedness   between  the
  corporations included in the combined report shall be eliminated.
    (V) Average assets are computed using the assets measured on the first
  day of the taxable year, and on the last day of each subsequent  quarter
  of the taxable year or month or day during the taxable year.
    (2)  Qualified  residential loan portfolio. (A) A taxpayer maintains a
  qualified residential loan portfolio if at least sixty  percent  of  the


 amount  of  the  total  assets  at  the close of the taxable year of the
  thrift institution or qualified community bank consists  of  the  assets
  described   in  items  (i)  through  (xii)  of  this  clause,  with  the
  application of the rule in item (xiii). If the taxpayer is a member of a
  combined  group,  the  determination  of  whether  there  is a qualified
  residential loan portfolio will be made by aggregating the assets of the
  thrift institutions and qualified community banks that  are  members  of
  the combined group.
    Assets:
    (i)  cash,  which  includes  cash  and cash equivalents including cash
  items in  the  process  of  collection,  deposit  with  other  financial
  institutions,  including  corporate credit unions, balances with federal
  reserve banks and federal home loan banks, federal funds sold, and  cash
  and  cash  equivalents  on  hand.  Cash  shall  not include any balances
  serving as collateral for securities lending transactions;
    (ii) obligations of the United States  or  of  a  state  or  political
  subdivision  thereof, and stock or obligations of a corporation which is
  an instrumentality or a government sponsored enterprise  of  the  United
  States or of a state or political subdivision thereof;
    (iii) loans secured by a deposit or share of a member;
    (iv)  loans  secured by an interest in real property which is (or from
  the proceeds of the loan, will become) residential real property or real
  property  used  primarily  for  church  purposes,  loans  made  for  the
  improvement of residential real property or real property used primarily
  for   church   purposes,  provided  that  for  purposes  of  this  item,
  residential  real  property  shall  include   single   or   multi-family
  dwellings,  facilities  in  residential developments dedicated to public
  use or property used on a nonprofit  basis  for  residents,  and  mobile
  homes not used on a transient basis;
    (v)  property  acquired  through  the  liquidation  of defaulted loans
  described in item (iv) of this clause;
    (vi) any regular or residual interest in a  REMIC,  as  such  term  is
  defined  in  section  860D of the internal revenue code, but only in the
  proportion which the assets of such REMIC consist of property  described
  in any of the preceding items of this clause, except that if ninety-five
  percent  or  more  of  the  assets of such REMIC are assets described in
  items (i) through (v) of this clause, the entire interest in  the  REMIC
  shall qualify;
    (vii)  any  mortgage-backed  security  which represents ownership of a
  fractional undivided interest in a trust, the assets  of  which  consist
  primarily  of  mortgage  loans,  provided  that  the real property which
  serves as security for the loans is (or from the proceeds of  the  loan,
  will  become) the type of property described in item (iv) of this clause
  and any collateralized  mortgage  obligation,  the  security  for  which
  consists  primarily of mortgage loans that maintain as security the type
  of property described in item (iv) of this clause;
    (viii) certificates of deposit in, or obligations  of,  a  corporation
  organized   under   a  state  law  which  specifically  authorizes  such
  corporation  to  insure  the  deposits  or  share  accounts  of   member
  associations;
    (ix)  loans  secured by an interest in educational, health, or welfare
  institutions  or  facilities,  including  structures  designed  or  used
  primarily  for residential purposes for students, residents, and persons
  under care, employees, or members of the staff of such  institutions  or
  facilities;
    (x)  loans  made  for the payment of expenses of college or university
  education or vocational training;


   (xi) property used by  the  taxpayer  in  support  of  business  which
  consists  principally  of  acquiring  the  savings  of  the  public  and
  investing in loans; and
    (xii)  loans  for  which  the  taxpayer  is the creditor and which are
  wholly secured by loans described in item (iv) of this clause.
    (xiii) The value of accrued interest receivable and  any  loss-sharing
  commitment  or  other  loan  guaranty  by  a governmental agency will be
  considered part of the basis in the loans to which the accrued  interest
  or loss protection applies.
    (B)  At  the  election  of  the  taxpayer, the percentage specified in
  clause (A) of this subparagraph shall be applied on  the  basis  of  the
  average assets outstanding during the taxable year, in lieu of the close
  of  the taxable year. The taxpayer can elect to compute an average using
  the assets measured on the first day of the taxable year and on the last
  day of each subsequent quarter, or month or day during the taxable year.
  This election may be made annually.
    (C) For purposes of item (iv) of clause (A) of this subparagraph, if a
  multifamily structure securing a loan is used in part for nonresidential
  use purposes, the entire loan is deemed a residential real property loan
  if the planned residential use exceeds eighty percent of the  property's
  planned  use  (measured,  at  the  taxpayer's  election, by using square
  footage or gross rental revenue, and determined as of the time the  loan
  is made).
    (D)  For  purposes  of  item  (iv) of clause (A) of this subparagraph,
  loans made to finance the acquisition or development of  land  shall  be
  deemed  to  be loans secured by an interest in residential real property
  if there is  a  reasonable  assurance  that  the  property  will  become
  residential  real  property within a period of three years from the date
  of acquisition of such land; but this sentence shall not apply  for  any
  taxable  year  unless,  within such three year period, such land becomes
  residential real property.  For  purposes  of  determining  whether  any
  interest  in  a  REMIC  qualifies  under item (vi) of clause (A) of this
  subparagraph, any regular interest in another REMIC held by  such  REMIC
  shall  be  treated  as  a  loan  described  in  a  preceding  item under
  principles similar to the principle of such item (vi),  except  that  is
  such REMICs are part of a tiered structure, they shall be treated as one
  REMIC for purposes of such item (vi).
    (3)  For  purposes  of  this  paragraph,  a  "thrift institution" is a
  savings  bank,  a  savings  and  loan  association,  or  other   savings
  institution chartered and supervised as such under federal or state law.
    (s)  Subtraction  modification  for community banks and small thrifts.
  (1) A taxpayer  that  is  a  qualified  community  bank  as  defined  in
  subparagraph  two  of  this  paragraph  or a small thrift institution as
  defined in subparagraph two-a of  this  paragraph  shall  be  allowed  a
  deduction  in  computing  entire net income equal to the amount computed
  under subparagraph three of this paragraph.
    (2) To be a qualified community bank,  a  taxpayer  must  satisfy  the
  following conditions.
    (A)  It  is  a bank or trust company organized under or subject to the
  provisions of article three of the banking law or a comparable provision
  of the laws of another state, or a national banking association.
    (B) The average value during the taxable year of  the  assets  of  the
  taxpayer,  or,  if  the  taxpayer  is included in a combined report, the
  assets of the combined reporting group of the taxpayer under section two
  hundred ten-C of this article, must not exceed eight billion dollars.
    (2-a) To be a small thrift institution, a taxpayer  must  satisfy  the
  following conditions.


   (A)  It  is  a  savings bank, a savings and loan association, or other
  savings institution chartered and supervised as such  under  federal  or
  state law.
    (B)  The  average  value  during the taxable year of the assets of the
  taxpayer, or, if the taxpayer is included  in  a  combined  report,  the
  assets of the combined reporting group of the taxpayer under section two
  hundred ten-C of this article, must not exceed eight billion dollars.
    (3)(A) The subtraction modification shall be computed as follows:
    (i)  Multiply the taxpayer's net interest income from loans during the
  taxable year by a fraction, the numerator of which is the gross interest
  income during the taxable year from qualifying loans and the denominator
  of which is the gross interest income during the taxable year  from  all
  loans.
    (ii)  Multiply  the  amount determined in clause (i) by fifty percent.
  This  product  is  the  amount  of  the  deduction  allowed  under  this
  paragraph.
    (B)(i) Net interest income from loans shall mean gross interest income
  from  loans  less  gross  interest  expense  from  loans. Gross interest
  expense from loans is determined by multiplying gross  interest  expense
  by  a  fraction,  the  numerator  of which is the average total value of
  loans owned by the thrift  institution  or  community  bank  during  the
  taxable year and the denominator of which is the average total assets of
  the thrift institution or community bank during the taxable year.
    (ii) Measurement of assets. (I) Total assets are those assets that are
  properly reflected on a balance sheet, computed in the same manner as is
  required  by  the  banking  regulator  of  the taxpayers included in the
  combined return. In addition, total assets includes leased real property
  that is not properly reflected on a balance sheet.
    (II) Assets will only be included if the income or expenses  of  which
  are  properly  reflected  (or  would have been properly reflected if not
  fully depreciated or expensed, or depreciated or expensed to  a  nominal
  amount)  in  the computation of the taxpayer's entire net income for the
  taxable year. Assets will not include deferred tax assets and intangible
  assets identified as "goodwill".
    (III) Tangible real and personal property, such  as  buildings,  land,
  machinery,  and  equipment shall be valued at cost. Leased real property
  that is not properly reflected on that balance sheet will be  valued  at
  the  annual lease payment multiplied by eight. Intangible property, such
  as loans and investments, shall be valued at  book  value  exclusive  of
  reserves.
    (IV)  Average  assets  are  computed  using the assets measured on the
  first day of the taxable year, and on the last day  of  each  subsequent
  quarter of the taxable year or month or day during the taxable year.
    (C) A qualifying loan is a loan that meets the conditions specified in
  subclause (i) of this clause and subclause (ii) of this clause.
    (i)  The  loan  is originated by the qualified community bank or small
  thrift institution or purchased by the qualified community bank or small
  thrift institution immediately after its origination in connection  with
  a commitment to purchase made by the bank or thrift institution prior to
  the loan's origination.
    (ii) The loan is a small business loan or a residential mortgage loan,
  the  principal amount of which loan is five million dollars or less, and
  either the borrower is located in this state as determined under section
  two hundred ten-A of this article and the loan is not  secured  by  real
  property, or the loan is secured by real property located in New York.
    (iii) A loan that meets the definition of a qualifying loan in a prior
  taxable  year  (including  years  prior  to  the  effective date of this
  paragraph) remains a qualifying loan in taxable years during  and  after


 which  such  loan  is  acquired by another corporation in the taxpayer's
  combined reporting  group  under  section  two  hundred  ten-C  of  this
  article.
    (t)  A  small  thrift  institution  or  a qualified community bank, as
  defined in paragraph (s) of this subdivision, that maintained a  captive
  REIT  on  April  first,  two  thousand  fourteen  shall  utilize  a REIT
  subtraction equal to one hundred sixty percent  of  the  dividends  paid
  deductions allowed to that captive REIT for the taxable year for federal
  income  tax purposes and shall not be allowed to utilize the subtraction
  modification for qualified residential loan portfolios  under  paragraph
  (r)  of  this  subdivision or the subtraction modification for community
  banks and small thrifts under paragraph (s) of this subdivision  in  any
  tax  year  in  which such thrift institution or community bank maintains
  that captive REIT.
    10. The term "calendar year" means a period of twelve calendar  months
  (or  any  shorter  period  beginning  on  the  date the taxpayer becomes
  subject to the tax imposed by this article) ending on  the  thirty-first
  day  of  December, provided the taxpayer keeps its books on the basis of
  such period or on the basis of any period ending on any day  other  than
  the last day of a calendar month, or provided the taxpayer does not keep
  books,  and  includes,  in  case  the taxpayer changes the period on the
  basis of which it keeps its books from a fiscal year to a calendar year,
  the period from the close  of  its  last  old  fiscal  year  up  to  and
  including  the  following  December thirty-first. The term "fiscal year"
  means a  period  of  twelve  calendar  months  (or  any  shorter  period
  beginning on the date the taxpayer becomes subject to the tax imposed by
  this  article)  ending on the last day of any month other than December,
  provided the taxpayer keeps its books on the basis of such  period,  and
  includes,  in case the taxpayer changes the period on the basis of which
  it keeps it books from a calendar year to a  fiscal  year  or  from  one
  fiscal  year  to  another  fiscal year, the period from the close of its
  last old calendar or fiscal year up to the date designated as the  close
  of its new fiscal year.
    11.  The  term  "tangible  personal property" means corporeal personal
  property,  such  as  machinery,  tools,  implements,  goods,  wares  and
  merchandise,  and  does  not  mean  money,  deposits in banks, shares of
  stock, bonds, notes, credits or evidences of an interest in property and
  evidences of debt.
    12. The term elected or appointed officer shall include the  chairman,
  president,  vice-president,  secretary,  assistant secretary, treasurer,
  assistant  treasurer,  comptroller,  and   also   any   other   officer,
  irrespective  of  his title, who is charged with and performs any of the
  regular functions of any such officer, unless the total compensation  of
  such  officer  is derived exclusively from the receipt of commissions. A
  director shall be considered an elected or appointed officer only if  he
  performs duties ordinarily performed by an officer.




   §  209.  Imposition  of  tax;  exemptions. 1. (a) For the privilege of
  exercising  its  corporate  franchise,  or  of  doing  business,  or  of
  employing  capital,  or of owning or leasing property in this state in a
  corporate or organized capacity, or of maintaining  an  office  in  this
  state,  or  of deriving receipts from activity in this state, for all or
  any part of each of its fiscal or  calendar  years,  every  domestic  or
  foreign  corporation,  except corporations specified in subdivision four
  of this section, shall annually pay a franchise tax, upon the  basis  of
  its  business income base, or upon such other basis as may be applicable
  as hereinafter provided, for  such  fiscal  or  calendar  year  or  part
  thereof,  on  a  report  which  shall  be  filed,  except as hereinafter
  provided, on or before the fifteenth day of March  next  succeeding  the
  close  of  each  such  year,  for taxable years beginning before January
  first, two thousand sixteen, and on or before the fifteenth day of April
  next succeeding the close of each such year, for taxable years beginning
  on or after January first, two thousand sixteen, or, in the  case  of  a
  corporation  which reports on the basis of a fiscal year, within two and
  one-half months after the close of such fiscal year, for  taxable  years
  beginning  before  January first, two thousand sixteen, and on or before
  the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the  close  of  such  fiscal
  year,  for  taxable  years  beginning  on  or  after  January first, two
  thousand sixteen, and shall be paid as hereinafter provided.
    (b) A corporation is deriving receipts from activity in this state  if
  it  has receipts within this state of one million dollars or more in the
  taxable year. For purposes of this section, the  term  "receipts"  means
  the  receipts  that  are subject to the apportionment rules set forth in
  section two hundred ten-A of this article, and the term "receipts within
  this state"  means  the  receipts  included  in  the  numerator  of  the
  apportionment  factor determined under section two hundred ten-A of this
  article. For purposes of this paragraph, receipts from processing credit
  card transactions for merchants include merchant discount fees  received
  by the corporation.
    (c) A corporation is doing business in this state if (i) it has issued
  credit  cards  to  one  thousand  or  more  customers who have a mailing
  address within this state as of the last day of its taxable  year,  (ii)
  it  has  merchant customer contracts with merchants and the total number
  of locations covered by those contracts  equals  one  thousand  or  more
  locations  in  this  state to whom the corporation remitted payments for
  credit card transactions during the taxable year, or (iii)  the  sum  of
  the  number of customers described in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph
  plus the number of locations  covered  by  its  contracts  described  in
  subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph equals one thousand or more. As used
  in  this  subdivision,  the  term  "credit  card" includes bank, credit,
  travel and entertainment cards.
    (d)(i) A corporation with less than one million dollars but  at  least
  ten  thousand  dollars  of  receipts within this state in a taxable year
  that is part of a unitary group that  meets  the  ownership  test  under
  section  two  hundred  ten-C  of  this article is deriving receipts from
  activity in this state if the receipts within this state of the  members
  of the unitary group that have at least ten thousand dollars of receipts
  within  this  state  in  the  aggregate  meet the threshold set forth in
  paragraph (b) of this subdivision.
    (ii) A corporation that does not meet any of the thresholds set  forth
  in  paragraph (c) of this subdivision but has at least ten customers, or
  locations, or customers and locations, as described in paragraph (c)  of
  this  subdivision,  and  is  part  of  a  unitary  group  that meets the
  ownership test under section two hundred ten-C of this article is  doing
  business  in  this  state  if  the  number  of  customers, locations, or


 customers and locations, within this state of the members of the unitary
  group that have at least ten  customers,  locations,  or  customers  and
  locations,  within  this  state  in  the  aggregate  meets  any  of  the
  thresholds set forth in paragraph (c) of this subdivision.
    (iii)  For  purposes  of  this paragraph, any corporation described in
  paragraph (c) of subdivision two of section two hundred  ten-C  of  this
  article shall not be considered.
    (e)  At  the  end  of  each  year,  the  commissioner shall review the
  cumulative  percentage  change  in  the  consumer   price   index.   The
  commissioner  shall  adjust  the  receipt  thresholds  set forth in this
  subdivision if the consumer price index has changed by  ten  percent  or
  more  since  January first, two thousand fifteen, or since the date that
  the thresholds were last adjusted under this subdivision. The thresholds
  shall be adjusted to reflect that cumulative percentage  change  in  the
  consumer  price  index.  The adjusted thresholds shall be rounded to the
  nearest one thousand dollars. As used in this paragraph, "consumer price
  index" means the consumer price index for all  urban  consumers  (CPI-U)
  available  from  the  bureau  of  labor  statistics of the United States
  department of labor. Any adjustment shall  apply  to  tax  periods  that
  begin after the adjustment is made.
    (f)  If  a partnership is doing business, employing capital, owning or
  leasing property in this state, maintaining an office in the  state,  or
  deriving receipts from activity in this state, any corporation that is a
  partner  in  such partnership shall be subject to tax under this article
  as described in the regulations of the commissioner.
    2. A foreign corporation shall not be deemed  to  be  doing  business,
  employing  capital, owning or leasing property, or maintaining an office
  in this state, or deriving receipts from activity in this state, for the
  purposes of this article, by reason  of  (a)  the  maintenance  of  cash
  balances  with  banks  or  trust  companies  in  this  state, or (b) the
  ownership of shares of stock or securities kept in this state,  if  kept
  in  a  safe  deposit box, safe, vault or other receptacle rented for the
  purpose, or if pledged as collateral security, or if deposited with  one
  or  more  banks  or  trust  companies,  or  brokers who are members of a
  recognized security exchange, in safekeeping or custody accounts, or (c)
  the taking of any action by any such bank or trust  company  or  broker,
  which is incidental to the rendering of safekeeping or custodian service
  to  such  corporation, or (d) the maintenance of an office in this state
  by one or more officers or directors of  the  corporation  who  are  not
  employees  of  the corporation if the corporation otherwise is not doing
  business in this state, and does not employ  capital  or  own  or  lease
  property  in  this  state,  or  (e) the keeping of books or records of a
  corporation in this state if such books  or  records  are  not  kept  by
  employees of such corporation and such corporation does not otherwise do
  business, employ capital, own or lease property or maintain an office in
  this state, or (f) any combination of the foregoing activities.
    2-a.  An  alien  corporation shall not be deemed to be doing business,
  employing capital, owning or leasing property, maintaining an office  in
  this  state,  or  deriving receipts from activity in this state, for the
  purposes of this article, if its activities in this  state  are  limited
  solely  to (a) investing or trading in stocks and securities for its own
  account within the  meaning  of  clause  (ii)  of  subparagraph  (A)  of
  paragraph  (2)  of subsection (b) of section eight hundred sixty-four of
  the internal revenue code or (b) investing or trading in commodities for
  its own account within the meaning of clause (ii) of subparagraph (B) of
  paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of section eight hundred  sixty-four  of
  the internal revenue code or (c) any combination of activities described
  in paragraphs (a) and (b) of this subdivision. An alien corporation that


 under  any  provision  of  the internal revenue code is not treated as a
  "domestic corporation"  as  defined  in  section  seven  thousand  seven
  hundred one of such code and has no effectively connected income for the
  taxable  year  pursuant  to  clause  (iv)  of  the  opening paragraph of
  subdivision nine of section two hundred eight of this article shall  not
  be subject to tax under this article for that taxable year. For purposes
  of  this  article, an alien corporation is a corporation organized under
  the laws of a country, or any political subdivision thereof, other  than
  the  United  States,  or  organized  under  the  laws  of  a possession,
  territory or commonwealth of the United States.
    3. Any receiver, referee, trustee, assignee or other fiduciary, or any
  officer or agent appointed by any court, who conducts  the  business  of
  any  corporation, shall be subject to the tax imposed by this article in
  the same manner and to the same extent as if the business were conducted
  by the agents or officers of such corporation. A  dissolved  corporation
  which  continues  to  conduct  business shall also be subject to the tax
  imposed by this article.
    4. Corporations liable to tax under sections one hundred  eighty-three
  to  one  hundred  eighty-four-a,  inclusive,  corporations taxable under
  article thirty-three of this chapter, any trust company organized  under
  a  law of this state all of the stock of which is owned by not less than
  twenty savings banks organized under a law of this state, a captive REIT
  or a captive RIC filing a  combined  return  under  subdivision  (f)  of
  section  fifteen  hundred fifteen of this chapter, and housing companies
  organized and operating pursuant to the provisions  of  article  two  or
  article  five of the private housing finance law and housing development
  fund companies organized pursuant to the provisions of article eleven of
  the private housing finance law shall not be subject to tax  under  this
  article.
    5.  For  any taxable year of a real estate investment trust as defined
  in section eight hundred fifty-six of the internal revenue code in which
  such trust is subject to federal income  taxation  under  section  eight
  hundred  fifty-seven  of such code, such trust shall be subject to a tax
  computed under either paragraph (a) or (d) of subdivision one of section
  two hundred ten of this chapter, whichever is greater, and shall not  be
  subject to any tax under article thirty-three of this chapter except for
  a  captive REIT required to file a combined return under subdivision (f)
  of section fifteen hundred fifteen of this chapter. In the case of  such
  a  real  estate investment trust, including a captive REIT as defined in
  section two of this chapter, the term "entire net  income"  means  "real
  estate  investment  trust taxable income" as defined in paragraph two of
  subdivision (b) of section eight hundred  fifty-seven  (as  modified  by
  section eight hundred fifty-eight) of the internal revenue code, subject
  to the modifications required by subdivision nine of section two hundred
  eight of this article.
    6. For any taxable year of a DISC, not exempt from tax under paragraph
  (i)  of  subdivision  nine of section two hundred eight of this article,
  the taxes imposed by subdivision one of this section shall  be  computed
  only under either paragraph (b) or (d) of subdivision one of section two
  hundred ten of this chapter, whichever is greater.
    7. For any taxable year, beginning on or after January first, nineteen
  hundred  eighty of a regulated investment company, as defined in section
  eight hundred fifty-one of the internal  revenue  code,  in  which  such
  company  is  subject  to  federal  income  taxation  under section eight
  hundred fifty-two of such code, such company shall be subject to  a  tax
  computed under either paragraph (a) or (d) of subdivision one of section
  two  hundred ten of this chapter, whichever is greater, and shall not be
  subject to any tax under article thirty-three of this chapter except for


 a captive RIC required to file a combined return under  subdivision  (f)
  of  section fifteen hundred fifteen of this chapter. In the case of such
  a regulated investment company, including a captive RIC  as  defined  in
  section  two  of  this  chapter,  the  term  "entire  net  income" means
  "investment company taxable income"  as  defined  in  paragraph  two  of
  subdivision  (b)  of  section  eight  hundred  fifty-two, as modified by
  section eight hundred fifty-five, of the internal revenue code plus  the
  amount taxable under paragraph three of subdivision (b) of section eight
  hundred  fifty-two of such code subject to the modifications required by
  subdivision nine of section two hundred eight of this chapter.
    8. For any taxable year beginning  on  or  after  January  first,  two
  thousand  six, a corporation that is no longer doing business, employing
  capital, or owning  or  leasing  property,  or  deriving  receipts  from
  activity  in  this  state  in a corporate or organized capacity that has
  filed a final tax return with the department for the last  tax  year  it
  was  doing  business and has no outstanding tax liability for such final
  tax return or any tax return for prior tax years shall  be  exempt  from
  all  taxes  imposed  by  paragraph (d) of subdivision one of section two
  hundred ten of this article for tax years following the last  year  such
  corporation was doing business.
    9.  For any taxable year beginning on or after January first, nineteen
  hundred eighty-seven, an organization  described  in  paragraph  two  or
  twenty-five  of  subdivision  (c)  of  section  five  hundred one of the
  internal revenue code of nineteen hundred  eighty-six  shall  be  exempt
  from all taxes imposed by this article.
    10.  QSSS.  For  exemption  from  tax  of  a  qualified  subchapter  S
  subsidiary, see paragraph (k) of subdivision nine of section two hundred
  eight of this article.
    11. Except as provided in subparagraph eighteen of  paragraph  (a)  of
  subdivision  nine  of  section  two  hundred  eight  of  this article, a
  corporation that is a qualified entity of a New  York  state  innovation
  hot  spot  shall  be  subject only to the fixed dollar minimum tax under
  paragraph (d) of subdivision one of section  two  hundred  ten  of  this
  article, as provided in section thirty-eight of this chapter.
    12.   All   farmers',  fruit  growers'  and  other  like  agricultural
  corporations organized and operated on  a  co-operative  basis  for  the
  purposes   expressed   in   and   as  provided  under  the  co-operative
  corporations law  of  the  state  of  New  York,  whether  or  not  such
  corporations have capital stock, shall be exempt from taxation under the
  provisions of this article.




   §  209-B. Metropolitan transportation business tax surcharge.  1.  (a)
  For the privilege of exercising its corporate  franchise,  or  of  doing
  business, or of employing capital, or of owning or leasing property in a
  corporate  or  organized  capacity,  or  of maintaining an office, or of
  deriving  receipts  from   activity   in   the   metropolitan   commuter
  transportation  district, for all or any part of its taxable year, there
  is hereby imposed  on  every  corporation,  other  than  a  New  York  S
  corporation,  subject  to  tax  under  section  two hundred nine of this
  article, or any receiver, referee, trustee, assignee or other fiduciary,
  or any officer or  agent  appointed  by  any  court,  who  conducts  the
  business  of  any  such corporation, a tax surcharge, in addition to the
  tax imposed under section two  hundred  nine  of  this  article,  to  be
  computed  at the rate of seventeen percent of the tax imposed under such
  section for such taxable years or any part of such taxable years  ending
  on  or  after  December  thirty-first, nineteen hundred eighty-three and
  before January first, two thousand fifteen after the  deduction  of  any
  credits   otherwise  allowable  under  this  article,  at  the  rate  of
  twenty-five and six-tenths percent of the tax imposed under such section
  for taxable years beginning on or  after  January  first,  two  thousand
  fifteen  and  before  January  first,  two  thousand  sixteen before the
  deduction of any credits otherwise allowable under this article, at  the
  rate  determined  by  the commissioner pursuant to paragraph (f) of this
  subdivision of the tax imposed under such  section,  for  taxable  years
  beginning  on  or  after  January first, two thousand sixteen and before
  January first, two thousand twenty-four  before  the  deduction  of  any
  credits  otherwise  allowable  under  this  article,  and at the rate of
  thirty percent of the tax imposed under such section for  taxable  years
  beginning on or after January first, two thousand twenty-four before the
  deduction  of  any  credits  otherwise  allowable  under  this  article.
  However, such rate of tax  surcharge  shall  be  applied  only  to  that
  portion  of  the  tax  imposed  under  section  two hundred nine of this
  article before the deduction of any credits  otherwise  allowable  under
  this  article  which is attributable to the taxpayer's business activity
  carried on within the metropolitan commuter transportation district; and
  provided, further, the surcharge computed on  a  combined  report  shall
  include  a  surcharge on the fixed dollar minimum tax for each member of
  the combined group subject to the surcharge under this subdivision.
    (b)  A  corporation  is  deriving  receipts  from  activity   in   the
  metropolitan  commuter transportation district if it has receipts within
  the metropolitan commuter transportation district of one million dollars
  or more in a taxable year.  For  purposes  of  this  section,  the  term
  "receipts"  means  the  receipts  that  are subject to the apportionment
  rules set forth in section two hundred ten-A of this  article,  and  the
  term "receipts within the metropolitan commuter transportation district"
  means the receipts included in the numerator of the apportionment factor
  determined  under  subdivision two of this section. For purposes of this
  paragraph,  receipts  from  processing  credit  card  transactions   for
  merchants include merchant discount fees received by the corporation.
    (c)  A  corporation  is  doing  business  in the metropolitan commuter
  transportation district if  (i)  it  has  issued  credit  cards  to  one
  thousand  or  more  customers  who  have  a  mailing  address within the
  metropolitan commuter transportation district as of the last day of  its
  taxable year, (ii) it has merchant customer contracts with merchants and
  the  total  number  of  locations  covered by those contracts equals one
  thousand or more locations in the metropolitan  commuter  transportation
  district  to  whom  the  corporation  remitted  payments for credit card
  transactions during the taxable year, or (iii) the sum of the number  of
  customers  described  in  subparagraph  (i)  of  this paragraph plus the


 number of locations covered by its contracts described  in  subparagraph
  (ii)  of  this  paragraph  equals  one thousand or more. As used in this
  paragraph, the term "credit card"  includes  bank,  credit,  travel  and
  entertainment cards.
    (d)(i)  A  corporation with less than one million dollars but at least
  ten thousand  dollars  of  receipts  within  the  metropolitan  commuter
  transportation  district  in  a  taxable  year that is part of a unitary
  group that meets the ownership test under section two hundred  ten-C  of
  this  article  is  deriving  receipts  from activity in the metropolitan
  commuter transportation district if the receipts within the metropolitan
  commuter transportation district of the members  of  the  unitary  group
  that  have  at  least  ten  thousand  dollars  of  receipts  within  the
  metropolitan commuter transportation district in the aggregate meet  the
  threshold set forth in paragraph (b) of this subdivision.
    (ii)  A corporation that does not meet any of the thresholds set forth
  in paragraph (c) of this subdivision but has at least ten customers,  or
  locations,  or  customers  and locations, as described in paragraph (c),
  and is part of a unitary group  that  meets  the  ownership  test  under
  section  two  hundred  ten-C  of  this  article is doing business in the
  metropolitan  commuter  transportation  district  if   the   number   of
  customers,   locations,   or   customers   and   locations,  within  the
  metropolitan commuter transportation district  of  the  members  of  the
  unitary  group that have at least ten customers, locations, or customers
  and locations, within the metropolitan commuter transportation  district
  in  the aggregate meets any of the thresholds set forth in paragraph (c)
  of this subdivision.
    (iii) For purposes of this paragraph,  any  corporation  described  in
  paragraph  (c)  of  subdivision two of section two hundred ten-C of this
  article shall not be considered.
    (e) At the end  of  each  year,  the  commissioner  shall  review  the
  cumulative   percentage   change   in  the  consumer  price  index.  The
  commissioner shall adjust the  receipt  thresholds  set  forth  in  this
  subdivision  if  the  consumer price index has changed by ten percent or
  more since the January first, two thousand fifteen  or  since  the  date
  that  the  thresholds  were  last  adjusted  under this subdivision. The
  thresholds shall be  adjusted  to  reflect  that  cumulative  percentage
  change  in  the  consumer  price index. The adjusted thresholds shall be
  rounded to the nearest one thousand dollars. As used in this  paragraph,
  "consumer  price  index"  means  the  consumer price index for all urban
  consumers (CPI-U) available from the bureau of labor statistics  of  the
  United  States  department  of  labor. Any adjustment shall apply to tax
  periods that begin after the adjustment is made.
    (f) The commissioner shall determine the rate of tax for taxable years
  beginning on or after January first, two  thousand  sixteen  and  before
  January  first,  two  thousand  twenty-four  by  adjusting  the rate for
  taxable years beginning on or after January first, two thousand  fifteen
  and  before  January  first, two thousand sixteen as necessary to ensure
  that the receipts attributable to such surcharge, as impacted by part  A
  of  chapter  fifty-nine  of the laws of two thousand fourteen, will meet
  and not exceed the financial  projections  for  state  fiscal  year  two
  thousand  sixteen-two  thousand  seventeen, as reflected in state fiscal
  year two thousand  fifteen-two  thousand  sixteen  enacted  budget.  The
  commissioner  shall  annually determine the rate thereafter, for taxable
  years beginning before January first, two  thousand  twenty-four,  using
  the  financial  projections  for the state fiscal year that commences in
  the year for which the rate is to be set as  reflected  in  the  enacted
  budget for the fiscal year commencing on the previous April first.


   2.  The  portion of the taxpayer's business activity carried on within
  the metropolitan commuter transportation district shall be determined by
  multiplying the tax imposed under  section  two  hundred  nine  of  this
  article  before  the  deduction of any credits otherwise allowable under
  this article by a percentage to be determined as follows:
    (a)  ascertaining  the  percentage  which  the  average  value  of the
  taxpayer's real and tangible personal property, whether owned or  rented
  to  it,  within the metropolitan commuter transportation district during
  the period covered by its report bears to the average value of  all  the
  taxpayer's  real and tangible personal property, whether owned or rented
  to it, within the state during  such  period;  provided  that  the  term
  "value of the taxpayer's real and tangible personal property" shall mean
  the  adjusted  bases  of such properties for federal income tax purposes
  (except that in the case of rented property such value  shall  mean  the
  product  of (i) eight and (ii) the gross rents payable for the rental of
  such property during the taxable  year);  provided,  however,  that  the
  taxpayer  may  make  a  one-time,  revocable election to use fair market
  value as the value of all of its real and  tangible  personal  property,
  provided that such election is made on or before the due date for filing
  a  report  under  section  two  hundred  eleven for the taxpayer's first
  taxable year commencing on or after January first, two thousand  fifteen
  and provided that such election shall not apply to any taxable year with
  respect  to  which  the taxpayer is included on a combined report unless
  each of the taxpayers included on such report has made such an  election
  which remains in effect for such year;
    (b)  ascertaining the percentage of the taxpayer's receipts within the
  metropolitan commuter transportation district  pursuant  to  the  method
  prescribed in section two hundred ten-A of this article, except that
    (i) the numerator of the apportionment fraction under such section two
  hundred  ten-A  shall  be  the denominator of the apportionment fraction
  under this paragraph,
    (ii) the numerator of the apportionment fraction under this  paragraph
  shall  be  determined  by applying the rules in such section two hundred
  ten-A relating to the numerator of  the  apportionment  fraction  as  if
  those rules referenced the metropolitan commuter transportation district
  rather than this state,
    (iii) to the extent that a provision in such section two hundred ten-A
  provides  that eight percent of the receipts specified in that provision
  should be included in  the  numerator  of  the  apportionment  fraction,
  ninety  percent  of such eight percent amount shall be considered within
  the  metropolitan  commuter  transportation  district  and  one  hundred
  percent  of  such  eight percent amount shall be considered to be within
  the state, and
    (iv) to the extent that a provision in such section two hundred  ten-A
  of  this  article provides that the receipts specified in that provision
  shall not be included in the numerator  of  the  apportionment  fraction
  under  such  section  two  hundred  ten-A,  such  receipts  shall not be
  included in determining the portion of the taxpayer's business  activity
  carried on within the metropolitan commuter transportation district;
    (c) ascertaining the percentage of the total wages, salaries and other
  personal  service  compensation, similarly computed, during such period,
  of employees within the metropolitan commuter  transportation  district,
  except  general  executive  officers,  to  the total wages, salaries and
  other personal service compensation,  similarly  computed,  during  such
  period, of all the taxpayer's employees within the state, except general
  executive officers; and
    (d)  adding  together  the  percentages so determined and dividing the
  result by the number of percentages.


   3. A corporation shall not be deemed to be doing  business,  employing
  capital,  owning  or  leasing  property,  or  maintaining  an office, or
  deriving  receipts  from   activity   in   the   metropolitan   commuter
  transportation  district, for the purposes of this section, by reason of
  (a)  the  maintenance  of cash balances with banks or trust companies in
  the metropolitan commuter transportation district, or (b) the  ownership
  of  shares  of  stock  or  securities  kept in the metropolitan commuter
  transportation district, if kept in a safe deposit box, safe,  vault  or
  other  receptacle  rented  for  the purpose, or if pledged as collateral
  security, or if deposited with one or more banks or trust companies,  or
  brokers   who   are  members  of  a  recognized  security  exchange,  in
  safekeeping or custody accounts, or (c) the taking of any action by  any
  such  bank  or  trust  company  or  broker,  which  is incidental to the
  rendering of safekeeping or custodian service to  such  corporation,  or
  (d)   the   maintenance  of  an  office  in  the  metropolitan  commuter
  transportation district by one or more  officers  or  directors  of  the
  corporation  who are not employees of the corporation if the corporation
  otherwise  is  not  doing  business   in   the   metropolitan   commuter
  transportation  district,  and  does  not employ capital or own or lease
  property in the metropolitan commuter transportation  district,  or  (e)
  the  keeping  of  books  or records of a corporation in the metropolitan
  commuter transportation district if such books or records are  not  kept
  by employees of such corporation and such corporation does not otherwise
  do business, employ capital, own or lease property or maintain an office
  in  the  metropolitan  commuter  transportation  district,  or  (f)  any
  combination of the foregoing activities.
    4. Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of state or local law,  the
  tax  surcharge  imposed  under  this  section  shall not be allowed as a
  deduction in the computation of any  tax  imposed  under  this  chapter.
  Furthermore,  the  credits  otherwise allowable under this article shall
  not be allowed against the tax surcharge imposed by this section.
    5. The provisions concerning reports under sections two hundred  ten-C
  and  two hundred eleven shall be applicable to this section, except that
  for purposes of an automatic extension  for  six  months  for  filing  a
  report  covering  the  tax  surcharge  imposed  by  this  section,  such
  automatic extension shall be allowed only if a taxpayer files  with  the
  commissioner   an  application  for  extension  in  such  form  as  said
  commissioner may prescribe by regulation and pays on or before the  date
  of  such  filing  in  addition  to any other amounts required under this
  article, either ninety percent of the entire tax surcharge  required  to
  be  paid  under this section for the applicable period, or not less than
  the tax surcharge shown on  the  taxpayer's  return  for  the  preceding
  taxable  year,  if  such  preceding  taxable  year was a taxable year of
  twelve months; provided, however, that in no event shall such amount  be
  less  than  the  product  of  the  following  three amounts: (1) the tax
  surcharge rate in effect for the taxable year  pursuant  to  subdivision
  one  of  this  section,  (2) the fixed dollar minimum applicable to such
  taxpayer as determined under paragraph (d) of subdivision one of section
  two hundred ten of this chapter  for  the  taxable  year,  and  (3)  the
  percentage  determined  under  subdivision  two  of this section for the
  preceding taxable year, unless the taxpayer was not subject to  the  tax
  surcharge imposed pursuant to this section with respect to such year, in
  which  case  such  percentage shall be deemed to be one hundred percent.
  The tax surcharge imposed by  this  section  shall  be  payable  to  the
  commissioner in full at the time the report is required to be filed, and
  such tax surcharge or the balance thereof, imposed on any taxpayer which
  ceases  to  exercise  its  franchise  or be subject to the tax surcharge
  imposed by this section shall be payable to the commissioner at the time


 the report is required to be filed, provided such  tax  surcharge  of  a
  domestic  corporation  which continues to possess its franchise shall be
  subject to adjustment as the circumstances may require;  all  other  tax
  surcharges  of  any  such  taxpayer,  which  pursuant  to  the foregoing
  provisions of this section would otherwise be payable subsequent to  the
  time  such report is required to be filed, shall nevertheless be payable
  at such time. All of the provisions of this article presently applicable
  are applicable to the tax surcharge imposed by this section.
    6. The term metropolitan commuter transportation district as  used  in
  this  section  shall  be  defined  pursuant  to  section  twelve hundred
  sixty-two of the public authorities law.




   §  209-C. Gift for fish and wildlife management. Effective for any tax
  year  commencing  on  or   after   January   first,   nineteen   hundred
  ninety-three,  a taxpayer in any taxable year may elect to contribute to
  the conservation fund for fish and wildlife  management  purposes.  Such
  contribution  shall  be  in any whole dollar amount and shall not reduce
  the amount of state tax owed by such taxpayer. The tax commission  shall
  include space on the corporate income tax return to enable a taxpayer to
  make  such contribution. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all
  revenues collected pursuant to this section shall  be  credited  to  the
  conservation fund and used only for those purposes enumerated in section
  eighty-three of the state finance law.




   § 209-D. Gift for breast cancer research and education.  Effective for
  any  tax  year  commencing  on  or after January first, nineteen hundred
  ninety-six, a taxpayer in any taxable year may elect  to  contribute  to
  the  support  of  the  breast  cancer  research and education fund. Such
  contribution shall be in any whole dollar amount and  shall  not  reduce
  the  amount  of  the  state  tax owed by such taxpayer. The commissioner
  shall include space on the corporate  income  tax  return  to  enable  a
  taxpayer  to make such contribution. Notwithstanding any other provision
  of law, all  revenues  collected  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be
  credited  to  the breast cancer research and education fund and shall be
  used only for those purposes enumerated in  section  ninety-seven-yy  of
  the state finance law.




   §  209-E.  Gift  for  prostate  and  testicular  cancer  research  and
  education.  Effective for any tax year commencing on  or  after  January
  first,  two  thousand  four, a taxpayer in any taxable year may elect to
  contribute to the support of the New York State prostate and  testicular
  cancer  research  and  education fund. Such contribution shall be in any
  whole dollar amount and shall not reduce the amount  of  the  state  tax
  owed  by  such  taxpayer.  The  commissioner  shall include space on the
  corporate  income  tax  return  to  enable  a  taxpayer  to  make   such
  contribution.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all revenues
  collected pursuant to this section shall be credited  to  the  New  York
  State  prostate  and  testicular  cancer research and education fund and
  shall  be  used  only  for  those   purposes   enumerated   in   section
  ninety-five-e of the state finance law.




   §  209-F.  Gift  for  the  World  Trade  Center  memorial  foundation.
  Effective for any tax year commencing on or  after  January  first,  two
  thousand five, a taxpayer in any taxable year may elect to contribute to
  the  support  of  the  World Trade Center memorial foundation fund. Such
  contribution shall be in any whole dollar amount and  shall  not  reduce
  the  amount  of  the  state  tax owed by such taxpayer. The commissioner
  shall include space on the corporate  income  tax  return  to  enable  a
  taxpayer  to make such contribution. Notwithstanding any other provision
  of law, all  revenues  collected  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be
  credited to the World Trade Center memorial foundation fund and shall be
  used  only  for those purposes enumerated in section seventy-nine of the
  state finance law.




   §  209-G.  Gift  for  volunteer  firefighter  and  volunteer emergency
  services workers recruitment and retention. Effective for any  tax  year
  commencing on or after the effective date of this section, a taxpayer in
  any taxable year may elect to contribute to the support of the volunteer
  firefighter  and  volunteer  emergency  services workers recruitment and
  retention fund. Such contribution shall be in any  whole  dollar  amount
  and  shall not reduce the amount of the state tax owed by such taxpayer.
  The commissioner shall include space on the corporate income tax  return
  to  enable  a  taxpayer  to  make such contribution. Notwithstanding any
  other provision of law, all revenues collected pursuant to this  section
  shall  be  credited to the volunteer firefighter and volunteer emergency
  services recruitment and retention fund and shall be used only for those
  purposes enumerated in section ninety-nine-q of the state finance law.




   § 209-H. Gift for honor and remembrance of veterans. Effective for any
  tax  year  commencing  on or after January first, two thousand thirteen,
  any taxpayer in any taxable year may elect to contribute to the veterans
  remembrance  and  cemetery  maintenance   and   operation   fund.   Such
  contribution  shall  be  in any whole dollar amount and shall not reduce
  the amount of state tax owed by such taxpayer.  The  commissioner  shall
  include space on the corporate income tax return to enable a taxpayer to
  make  such contribution. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all
  revenues collected pursuant to this section shall  be  credited  to  the
  veterans  remembrance  and  cemetery  maintenance and operation fund and
  used only for those purposes enumerated in section ninety-seven-mmmm  of
  the state finance law.




   § 209-I. Gift for women's cancers education and prevention. A taxpayer
  in  any  taxable  year  may  elect  to  contribute to the support of the
  women's cancers education and prevention fund. Such  contribution  shall
  be  in  any  whole  dollar amount and shall not reduce the amount of the
  state tax owed by such taxpayer. The commissioner shall include space on
  the corporate income tax return  to  enable  a  taxpayer  to  make  such
  contribution.  Notwithstanding  any other provision of law, all revenues
  collected pursuant to this section shall  be  credited  to  the  women's
  cancers  education  and prevention fund and shall be used only for those
  purposes enumerated in section ninety-seven-llll of  the  state  finance
  law.




   §  209-J.  Gift  for New York state veterans' homes. Effective for any
  tax year commencing on or after January first, two  thousand  seventeen,
  any  taxpayer  in  any  taxable  year  may  elect  to  contribute to the
  veterans' home assistance fund. Such contribution shall be in any  whole
  dollar  amount and shall not reduce the amount of state tax owed by such
  taxpayer. The commissioner shall include space on the  corporate  income
  tax   return   to   enable   a   taxpayer  to  make  such  contribution.
  Notwithstanding any other  provision  of  law,  all  revenues  collected
  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be  credited  to  the veterans' home
  assistance fund and used only for those purposes enumerated  in  section
  eighty-one of the state finance law.




   §  209-K.  Gift  to  the love your library fund. Effective for any tax
  year commencing on or after January  first,  two  thousand  eighteen,  a
  taxpayer  in  any  taxable year may elect to contribute to the love your
  library fund. Such contribution shall be in any whole dollar amount  and
  shall  not reduce the amount of the state tax owed by such taxpayer. The
  commissioner shall include space on the corporate income tax  return  to
  enable  a  taxpayer to make such contribution. Notwithstanding any other
  provision of law, all revenues collected pursuant to this section  shall
  be  credited  to  the  love your library fund and shall be used only for
  those purposes enumerated in section ninety-nine-l of the state  finance
  law, as added by chapter three hundred three of the laws of two thousand
  four.




   * §  209-L. Gift for ALS research and education. Effective for any tax
  year commencing on or after January  first,  two  thousand  nineteen,  a
  taxpayer  in  any taxable year may elect to contribute to the support of
  the New York state ALS  (Amyotrophic  Lateral  Sclerosis)  research  and
  education  fund.  Such  contribution shall be in any whole dollar amount
  and shall not reduce the amount of the state tax owed by such  taxpayer.
  The  commissioner shall include space on the corporate income tax return
  to enable a taxpayer to  make  such  contribution.  Notwithstanding  any
  other  provision of law, all revenues collected pursuant to this section
  shall be credited to the New York state ALS research and education  fund
  and  shall  be  used  only  for  those  purposes  enumerated  in section
  ninety-five-i of the state finance law.
    * NB There are 3 § 209-L's




   * §  209-L. Gift for lupus education and prevention. A taxpayer in any
  taxable year may elect  to  contribute  to  the  support  of  the  lupus
  education  and  prevention fund. Such contribution shall be in any whole
  dollar amount and shall not reduce the amount of the state tax  owed  by
  such  taxpayer.  The  commissioner  shall include space on the corporate
  income tax return to  enable  a  taxpayer  to  make  such  contribution.
  Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  of  law,  all revenues collected
  pursuant to this section shall be credited to the  lupus  education  and
  prevention  fund and shall be used only for those purposes enumerated in
  section ninety-seven-rrrr of the state finance law.
    * NB There are 3 § 209-L's




   * §  209-L.  Gift  for  military  families. Effective for any tax year
  commencing on or after January first, two thousand eighteen, a  taxpayer
  in  any  taxable  year  may  elect  to  contribute to the support of the
  military family relief fund. Such contribution shall  be  in  any  whole
  dollar  amount  and shall not reduce the amount of the state tax owed by
  such taxpayer. The commissioner shall include  space  on  the  corporate
  income  tax  return  to  enable  a  taxpayer  to make such contribution.
  Notwithstanding any other  provision  of  law,  all  revenues  collected
  pursuant to this section shall be credited to the military family relief
  fund  and  shall  be  used only for those purposes enumerated in section
  eighty-nine-i of the state finance law.
    * NB There are 3 § 209-L's




   * § 209-M. Gift for leukemia, lymphoma and myeloma research, education
  and treatment. Effective for any tax year commencing on or after January
  first,  two thousand twenty, a taxpayer in any taxable year may elect to
  contribute  to  the  support  of  the  leukemia,  lymphoma  and  myeloma
  research,  education  and  treatment fund. Such contribution shall be in
  any whole dollar amount and shall not reduce the amount of the state tax
  owed by such taxpayer. The  commissioner  shall  include  space  on  the
  corporate   income  tax  return  to  enable  a  taxpayer  to  make  such
  contribution. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,  all  revenues
  collected  pursuant  to  this section shall be credited to the leukemia,
  lymphoma and myeloma research, education and treatment fund and shall be
  used only for those purposes enumerated in section ninety-seven-ssss  of
  the state finance law.
    * NB There are 2 § 209-M's




   * §  209-M.  Gift  for home delivered meals for seniors. Effective for
  any tax  year  commencing  on  or  after  January  first,  two  thousand
  nineteen,  a taxpayer in any taxable year may elect to contribute to the
  support of the senior wellness in nutrition  fund  for  the  purpose  of
  providing home delivered meals to seniors. Such contribution shall be in
  any  whole  dollar  amount  and shall not reduce the amount of state tax
  owed by such taxpayer. The  commissioner  shall  include  space  on  the
  business franchise income tax return, entitled "Home Delivered Meals for
  Seniors",   to   enable   a   taxpayer   to   make   such  contribution.
  Notwithstanding any other  provision  of  law,  all  revenues  collected
  pursuant  to  this  section  shall be credited to the senior wellness in
  nutrition fund and shall only be used for those purposes  enumerated  in
  section ninety-one-g of the state finance law.
    * NB There are 2 § 209-M's




   * §  209-N.  Retired  and  rescued  thoroughbred race horse aftercare.
  Effective for any tax year commencing on or after the effective date  of
  this  section, a taxpayer in any taxable year may elect to contribute to
  the  New  York  state  thoroughbred  breeding   and   development   fund
  established  pursuant  to  section  two hundred fifty-two of the racing,
  pari-mutuel wagering and breeding law, for the purpose  of  funding  the
  operation  of retired race horse aftercare facilities. Any contributions
  made to the thoroughbred breeding and development fund pursuant to  this
  section shall be deposited into a dedicated account managed by the fund,
  which  shall  solely  be  used for funding the operation of retired race
  horse aftercare facilities, with a preference  for  those  organizations
  that   are   accredited  horse  retirement  and  rescue  programs.  Such
  contribution shall be in any whole dollar amount and  shall  not  reduce
  the  amount  of  the  state  tax owed by such taxpayer. The commissioner
  shall include space on the corporate  income  tax  return  to  enable  a
  taxpayer  to make such contribution. Notwithstanding any other provision
  of law, all  revenues  collected  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be
  credited  to  the  New York state thoroughbred retirement race horse and
  aftercare fund and shall be used only for those purposes  set  forth  in
  paragraph  h of subdivision two of section two hundred fifty-four of the
  racing, pari-mutuel wagering and breeding law.
    * NB Effective January 1, 2022




   * §  209-O.  Retired  and  rescued  standardbred race horse aftercare.
  Effective for any tax year commencing on or after the effective date  of
  this  section, a taxpayer in any taxable year may elect to contribute to
  the agriculture  and  New  York  horse  breeding  and  development  fund
  established  pursuant  to  section  three  hundred thirty of the racing,
  pari-mutuel wagering and breeding law, for the purpose  of  funding  the
  operation  of retired race horse aftercare facilities. Any contributions
  made to the agriculture and New York state  horse  breeding  development
  fund  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be  deposited into a dedicated
  account managed by the fund, which shall solely be used for funding  the
  operation  of retired race horse aftercare facilities, with a preference
  for those organizations that are accredited horse retirement and  rescue
  programs.  Such  contribution  shall  be  in any whole dollar amount and
  shall not reduce the amount of the state tax owed by such taxpayer.  The
  commissioner  shall  include space on the corporate income tax return to
  enable a taxpayer to make such contribution. Notwithstanding  any  other
  provision  of law, all revenues collected pursuant to this section shall
  be credited to the New York state standardbred retirement race horse and
  aftercare fund and shall be used only for those purposes  enumerated  in
  paragraph  j  of  subdivision one of section three hundred thirty-two of
  the racing, pari-mutuel wagering and breeding law.
    * NB Effective January 1, 2022




   § 209-P. Gift for Lyme and tick-borne diseases education, research and
  prevention.  Effective  for  any tax year commencing on or after January
  first, two thousand twenty-two, a taxpayer in any taxable year may elect
  to contribute to  the  support  of  the  Lyme  and  tick-borne  diseases
  education,  research  and  prevention. Such contribution shall be in any
  whole dollar amount and shall not reduce the amount of state tax owed by
  such taxpayer. The commissioner shall include  space  on  the  corporate
  income  tax  return  to  enable  a  taxpayer  to make such contribution.
  Notwithstanding any other  provision  of  law,  all  revenues  collected
  pursuant  to  this  section shall be credited to the Lyme and tick-borne
  diseases education, research and prevention fund and shall only be  used
  for  those  purposes  enumerated  in  section ninety-five-k of the state
  finance law.




   §  209-Q.  Gift for diabetes research and education. Effective for any
  tax year commencing on or after the effective date of  this  section,  a
  taxpayer  in  any taxable year may elect to contribute to the support of
  the diabetes research and education fund. Such contribution shall be  in
  any whole dollar amount and shall not reduce the amount of the state tax
  owed  by  such  taxpayer.  The  commissioner  shall include space on the
  corporate  income  tax  return  to  enable  a  taxpayer  to  make   such
  contribution.  Notwithstanding  any other provision of law, all revenues
  collected pursuant to this section shall be  credited  to  the  diabetes
  research  and  education  fund and shall be used only for those purposes
  enumerated in section eighty-nine-k of the state finance law.




   §  210.  Computation of tax.  1. The tax imposed by subdivision one of
  section two hundred nine of this chapter shall be: (A) in  the  case  of
  each  taxpayer  other  than  a  New  York  S  corporation or a qualified
  homeowners  association,  the  highest  of  the  amounts  prescribed  in
  paragraphs  (a),  (b),  and  (d) of this subdivision, (B) in the case of
  each New York S corporation, the amount prescribed in paragraph  (d)  of
  this  subdivision,  and  (C)  in  the  case  of  a  qualified homeowners
  association, the highest of the amounts prescribed in paragraphs (a) and
  (b) of this subdivision.  For  purposes  of  this  paragraph,  the  term
  "qualified  homeowners  association"  means a homeowners association, as
  such  term  is  defined  in  subsection  (c)  of  section  five  hundred
  twenty-eight of the internal revenue code without regard to subparagraph
  (E)  of  paragraph  one  of such subsection (relating to elections to be
  taxed pursuant to such section), which  has  no  homeowners  association
  taxable  income,  as  such  term  is  defined  in subsection (d) of such
  section. Provided, however,  that  in  the  case  of  a  small  business
  taxpayer  (other  than a New York S corporation) as defined in paragraph
  (f) of this subdivision, for  taxable  years  beginning  before  January
  first,  two thousand sixteen, if the amount prescribed in such paragraph
  (b) is higher than the amount prescribed in such paragraph (a) solely by
  reason of the application of  the  rate  applicable  to  small  business
  taxpayers, then with respect to such taxpayer the tax referred to in the
  previous   sentence  shall  be  higher  of  the  amounts  prescribed  in
  paragraphs (a) and (d) of this subdivision.
    (a) Business income base.  For taxable years beginning before  January
  first,  two  thousand  sixteen,  the amount prescribed by this paragraph
  shall be computed at the rate of seven  and  one-tenth  percent  of  the
  taxpayer's business income base. For taxable years beginning on or after
  January  first,  two  thousand  sixteen,  the  amount prescribed by this
  paragraph shall be six and one-half percent of the  taxpayer's  business
  income  base. For taxable years beginning on or after January first, two
  thousand twenty-one and before January first, two thousand  twenty-seven
  for  any  taxpayer  with  a business income base for the taxable year of
  more than five million dollars, the amount prescribed by this  paragraph
  shall be seven and one-quarter percent of the taxpayer's business income
  base.  The taxpayer's business income base shall mean the portion of the
  taxpayer's business income apportioned within the state  as  hereinafter
  provided.  However, in the case of a small business taxpayer, as defined
  in  paragraph  (f)  of  this  subdivision, the amount prescribed by this
  paragraph shall be  computed  pursuant  to  subparagraph  (iv)  of  this
  paragraph  and in the case of a manufacturer, as defined in subparagraph
  (vi) of this paragraph, the amount prescribed by this paragraph shall be
  computed pursuant to subparagraph (vi) of this paragraph,  and,  in  the
  case   of  a  qualified  emerging  technology  company,  as  defined  in
  subparagraph (vii) of this paragraph,  the  amount  prescribed  by  this
  paragraph  shall  be  computed  pursuant  to  subparagraph (vii) of this
  paragraph.
    (iv) for taxable years beginning before January  first,  two  thousand
  sixteen, if the business income base is not more than two hundred ninety
  thousand  dollars  the  amount  shall be six and one-half percent of the
  business income base; if the business  income  base  is  more  than  two
  hundred  ninety  thousand  dollars  but  not  over  three hundred ninety
  thousand dollars the amount shall be the sum of  (1)  eighteen  thousand
  eight  hundred  fifty  dollars,  (2)  seven and one-tenth percent of the
  excess of the business income base  over  two  hundred  ninety  thousand
  dollars  but not over three hundred ninety thousand dollars and (3) four
  and thirty-five hundredths percent of the excess of the business  income


 base  over  three  hundred  fifty  thousand  dollars  but not over three
  hundred ninety thousand dollars;
    (v) if the taxable period to which subparagraph (iv) of this paragraph
  applies  is  less  than  twelve  months,  the  amount prescribed by this
  paragraph shall be computed as follows:
    (A) Multiply the business income base for such taxpayer by twelve;
    (B) Divide the result obtained in (A) by the number of months  in  the
  taxable year;
    (C)  Compute  an amount pursuant to subparagraph (iv) as if the result
  obtained in (B) were the taxpayer's business income base;
    (D) Multiply the result obtained in (C) by the number of months in the
  taxpayer's taxable year;
    (E) Divide the result obtained in (D) by twelve.
    (vi) for taxable years  beginning  on  or  after  January  first,  two
  thousand  fourteen,  the  amount  prescribed  by  this  paragraph  for a
  taxpayer that is a qualified New York manufacturer, shall be computed at
  the rate of zero percent of the taxpayer's  business  income  base.  The
  term  "manufacturer"  shall mean a taxpayer that during the taxable year
  is principally engaged in the  production  of  goods  by  manufacturing,
  processing,   assembling,   refining,   mining,   extracting,   farming,
  agriculture,  horticulture,  floriculture,  viticulture  or   commercial
  fishing.  However,  the  generation and distribution of electricity, the
  distribution of natural gas, and the production of steam associated with
  the generation of electricity shall not be qualifying activities  for  a
  manufacturer  under  this  subparagraph.  Moreover,  in  the  case  of a
  combined report, the combined group shall be considered a "manufacturer"
  for purposes of this subparagraph only if the combined group during  the
  taxable  year is principally engaged in the activities set forth in this
  paragraph, or any combination thereof. A taxpayer or, in the case  of  a
  combined  report,  a  combined  group  shall be "principally engaged" in
  activities described above if, during the taxable year, more than  fifty
  percent  of  the  gross  receipts  of  the  taxpayer  or combined group,
  respectively, are derived from receipts from the sale of goods  produced
  by  such  activities.  In  computing  a combined group's gross receipts,
  intercorporate receipts shall  be  eliminated.  A  "qualified  New  York
  manufacturer"  is  a  manufacturer that has property in New York that is
  described in  clause  (A)  of  subparagraph  (i)  of  paragraph  (b)  of
  subdivision  one of section two hundred ten-B of this article and either
  (I) the adjusted basis of such property for New York state tax  purposes
  at the close of the taxable year is at least one million dollars or (II)
  all of its real and personal property is located in New York. A taxpayer
  or,  in  the  case of a combined report, a combined group, that does not
  satisfy the principally  engaged  test  may  be  a  qualified  New  York
  manufacturer  if  the  taxpayer or the combined group employs during the
  taxable  year  at  least  two  thousand  five   hundred   employees   in
  manufacturing  in  New  York  and the taxpayer or the combined group has
  property in the state used in manufacturing, the adjusted basis of which
  for New York state tax purposes at the close of the taxable year  is  at
  least one hundred million dollars.
    (vii)  For  a  taxpayer  that  is  defined  as  a  qualified  emerging
  technology company under paragraph (c) of  subdivision  one  of  section
  thirty-one hundred two-e of the public authorities law regardless of the
  ten  million  dollar  limitation  expressed  in subparagraph one of such
  paragraph (c) the amount prescribed by this paragraph shall be  computed
  at  the  rate  of  5.7  percent  for taxable years beginning on or after
  January first, two  thousand  fifteen  and  before  January  first,  two
  thousand  sixteen,  5.5  percent for taxable years beginning on or after
  January first  two  thousand  sixteen  and  before  January  first,  two


 thousand  eighteen,  and 4.875 percent for taxable years beginning on or
  after January first, two thousand eighteen.
    (viii)  (A)  In computing the business income base, taxpayers shall be
  allowed both a prior net operating  loss  conversion  subtraction  under
  this  subparagraph and a net operating loss deduction under subparagraph
  (ix)  of  this  paragraph.  The  prior  net  operating  loss  conversion
  subtraction  computed  under  this subparagraph shall be applied against
  the business  income  base  before  the  net  operating  loss  deduction
  computed under subparagraph (ix) of this paragraph.
    (B) Prior net operating loss conversion subtraction.
    (1) Definitions.
    (I)  "Base  year"  means  the  last taxable year beginning on or after
  January first, two thousand  fourteen  and  before  January  first,  two
  thousand fifteen.
    (II)  "Unabsorbed  net operating loss" means the unabsorbed portion of
  net operating loss as calculated under paragraph (f) of subdivision nine
  of section two hundred eight of this  article  or  subsection  (k-1)  of
  section  fourteen  hundred  fifty-three of this chapter as such sections
  were in effect on December thirty-first, two thousand fourteen, that was
  not deductible in previous taxable years and was eligible for  carryover
  on  the  last  day  of  the  base  year  subject  to the limitations for
  deduction  under  such  sections,  including  any  net  operating   loss
  sustained by the taxpayer during the base year.
    (III)  "Base  year  BAP"  means  the  taxpayer's  business  allocation
  percentage as calculated under paragraph (a)  of  subdivision  three  of
  this  section for the base year, or the taxpayer's allocation percentage
  as calculated under section fourteen hundred fifty-four of this  chapter
  for purposes of calculating entire net income for the base year, as such
  sections were in effect on December thirty-first, two thousand fourteen.
    (IV)  "Base  year tax rate" means the taxpayer's tax rate for the base
  year as calculated under this paragraph or  subsection  (a)  of  section
  fourteen  hundred fifty-five of this chapter, as such provisions were in
  effect on December thirty-first, two thousand fourteen.
    (2) The prior net  operating  loss  conversion  subtraction  shall  be
  calculated as follows:
    (I) The taxpayer shall first calculate the tax value of its unabsorbed
  net  operating loss for the base year. The value is equal to the product
  of (I) the amount of the taxpayer's unabsorbed net operating loss,  (II)
  the  taxpayer's  base  year  BAP, and (III) the taxpayer's base year tax
  rate.
    (II) The product determined under item (I) of this subclause  is  then
  divided  by  six and one-half percent, or in the case of a qualified New
  York manufacturer, five and  seven-tenths  percent.  This  result  shall
  equal  the  taxpayer's  prior  net operating loss conversion subtraction
  pool.
    (III) The taxpayer's prior net operating loss  conversion  subtraction
  for  the  taxable  year  shall equal one-tenth of its net operating loss
  conversion  subtraction  pool  plus  any  amount  of  unused  prior  net
  operating  loss  conversion  subtraction  from  preceding taxable years.
  Provided, however, the prior net operating loss  conversion  subtraction
  of  a  small  business  corporation, as defined in paragraph (f) of this
  subdivision, as of the last day of the base year, shall not  be  subject
  to the one-tenth limitation in the previous sentence.
    (IV)  In  lieu  of  the  subtraction  described  in item (III) of this
  subclause, if the taxpayer so elects, the taxpayer's prior net operating
  loss conversion subtraction for the tax  years  beginning  on  or  after
  January  first,  two  thousand  fifteen  and  before  January first, two
  thousand seventeen shall equal in each year, not more than  one-half  of


 its  net  operating  loss  conversion subtraction pool until the pool is
  exhausted. If the pool is not exhausted at the end of such time  period,
  the  remainder  of  the pool shall be forfeited. The taxpayer shall make
  such  revocable  election on its first return for the tax year beginning
  on or after January first,  two  thousand  fifteen  and  before  January
  first,  two thousand sixteen by the due date for such return (determined
  with regard to extensions).
    (3) Combined groups. (I) Where a taxpayer  was  properly  included  or
  required  to be included in a combined report for the base year pursuant
  to section two hundred eleven of this article or a combined return under
  section fourteen hundred sixty-two of this  chapter,  as  such  sections
  were  in effect on December thirty-first, two thousand fourteen, and the
  members of the combined group for the base year  are  the  same  as  the
  members   of  the  combined  group  for  the  taxable  year  immediately
  succeeding the base year, the combined group shall calculate  its  prior
  net  operating  loss  conversion  subtraction  pool  using  the combined
  group's total unabsorbed net operating loss, base  year  BAP,  and  base
  year tax rate.
    (II)  If  a  combined group includes additional members in the taxable
  year immediately succeeding the base year that were not included in  the
  combined  group  during the base year, each base year combined group and
  each taxpayer that filed separately in the base year but is included  in
  the  combined  group  in the taxable year succeeding the base year shall
  calculate its prior net operating loss conversion subtraction pool,  and
  the  sum  of  the  pools  shall be the combined prior net operating loss
  conversion subtraction pool of the combined group.
    (III) If a taxpayer was properly included in a combined report for the
  base year and files a separate report in a subsequent taxable year, then
  the amount of remaining prior net operating loss conversion  subtraction
  allowed   to   the   taxpayer  filing  such  separate  report  shall  be
  proportionate to the amount that such taxpayer contributed to the  prior
  net  operating loss conversion subtraction pool on a combined basis, and
  the remaining prior net operating loss conversion subtraction allowed to
  the  remaining  members  of  the  combined  group   shall   be   reduced
  accordingly.
    (IV)  If  a  taxpayer filed a separate report for the base year and is
  properly included in a combined report in  a  subsequent  taxable  year,
  then  the  prior  net  operating loss conversion subtraction pool of the
  combined group shall be increased by the amount  of  the  remaining  net
  operating  loss  conversion  subtraction  allowed to the taxpayer at the
  time the taxpayer is properly included in the combined group.
    (4) The prior net operating loss conversion subtraction may be used to
  reduce the taxpayer's tax on the apportioned business income base to the
  higher of the tax on the  capital  base  under  paragraph  (b)  of  this
  subdivision  or  the  fixed  dollar  minimum under paragraph (d) of this
  subdivision. Unless the taxpayer has made the election provided  for  in
  item  (IV)  of  subclause  two  of  this  clause,  any  amount of unused
  subtraction shall be carried forward to subsequent  tax  year  or  years
  until  the  prior  net  operating  loss  conversion  subtraction pool is
  exhausted, but for no longer than twenty taxable years, or  the  taxable
  year  beginning  on or after January first, two thousand thirty-five but
  before January first, two thousand thirty-six,  whichever  comes  first.
  Such  amount  carried  forward  shall  not  be  subject to the one-tenth
  limitation for the  subsequent  tax  year  or  years.  However,  if  the
  taxpayer  elects  to  compute  its  prior  net operating loss conversion
  subtraction pursuant to item (IV) of subclause two of this  clause,  the
  taxpayer  shall  not carry forward any unused amount of such subtraction


 to any tax year beginning  on  or  after  January  first,  two  thousand
  seventeen.
    (ix)  Net  operating loss deduction.  In computing the business income
  base, a net operating loss deduction shall be allowed. A  net  operating
  loss deduction is the amount of net operating loss or losses from one or
  more  taxable  years  that  are  carried  forward  or  carried back to a
  particular taxable year. A  net  operating  loss  is  the  amount  of  a
  business  loss  incurred  in  a  particular  tax  year multiplied by the
  apportionment factor for that  year  as  determined  under  section  two
  hundred  ten-A of this article. The maximum net operating loss deduction
  that is allowed in a  taxable  year  is  the  amount  that  reduces  the
  taxpayer's  tax on the apportioned business income base to the higher of
  the tax on the capital base or the fixed dollar minimum.  Such deduction
  and loss are determined in accordance with the following:
    (1) Such net operating loss deduction is not  limited  to  the  amount
  allowed  under  section  one hundred seventy-two of the internal revenue
  code or the amount that would have been allowed if the taxpayer had  not
  made  an  election  under  subchapter  S  of chapter one of the internal
  revenue code.
    (2) Such net operating  loss  deduction  shall  not  include  any  net
  operating  loss  incurred  during  any  taxable  year beginning prior to
  January first, two thousand fifteen, or during any taxable year in which
  the taxpayer was not subject to the tax imposed by this article.
    (3) A taxpayer that files as part of a federal consolidated return but
  on a separate basis for  purposes  of  this  article  must  compute  its
  deduction  and loss as if it were filing on a separate basis for federal
  income tax purposes.
    (4) A net operating loss may  be  carried  back  three  taxable  years
  preceding  the  taxable  year  of the loss ("the loss year"). However no
  loss can be carried back to a  taxable  year  beginning  before  January
  first,  two  thousand fifteen. The loss is first carried to the earliest
  of the three taxable years. If it is not entirely used in that year,  it
  is  carried  to the second taxable year preceding the loss year, and any
  remaining amount is carried to the taxable  year  immediately  preceding
  the  loss  year. Any unused amount of loss then remaining may be carried
  forward for as many as twenty taxable years  following  the  loss  year.
  Losses  carried  forward  are  carried forward first to the taxable year
  immediately following the loss year, then to  the  second  taxable  year
  following  the  loss  year,  and then to the next immediately subsequent
  taxable year or years until the loss is used up or the twentieth taxable
  year following the loss year, whichever comes first.
    (5) Such net operating  loss  deduction  shall  not  include  any  net
  operating  loss  incurred during a New York S year; provided, however, a
  New York S year must be treated  as  a  taxable  year  for  purposes  of
  determining  the  number  of taxable years to which a net operating loss
  may be carried forward.
    (6) Where there are two or more apportioned net operating  losses,  or
  portions  thereof, carried back or carried forward to be deducted in one
  particular tax year  from  apportioned  business  income,  the  earliest
  apportioned loss incurred must be applied first.
    (7)  A  taxpayer  may  elect to waive the entire carryback period with
  respect to a net operating loss. Such  election  must  be  made  on  the
  taxpayer's  original  timely  filed  return  (determined  with regard to
  extensions) for the taxable year of the net operating loss for which the
  election is to be in effect. Once an election  is  made  for  a  taxable
  year, it shall be irrevocable for that taxable year. A separate election
  must be made for each loss year. This election applies to all members of
  a combined group.


   (b)  Capital  base.    (1) (i) The amount prescribed by this paragraph
  shall be computed at .15 percent for each dollar of the taxpayer's total
  business capital, or the portion thereof apportioned within the state as
  hereinafter provided for taxable years beginning before  January  first,
  two  thousand  sixteen.    However, in the case of a cooperative housing
  corporation as defined in the internal revenue code, the applicable rate
  shall be .04 percent until taxable years beginning on or  after  January
  first,  two thousand twenty and zero percent for taxable years beginning
  on or after January first, two thousand twenty-one. The rate of tax  for
  subsequent tax years shall be as follows: .125 percent for taxable years
  beginning  on  or  after  January first, two thousand sixteen and before
  January first, two thousand seventeen; .100 percent  for  taxable  years
  beginning  on  or after January first, two thousand seventeen and before
  January first, two thousand eighteen; .075  percent  for  taxable  years
  beginning  on  or  after January first, two thousand eighteen and before
  January first, two thousand nineteen; .050  percent  for  taxable  years
  beginning  on  or  after January first, two thousand nineteen and before
  January first, two thousand  twenty;  .025  percent  for  taxable  years
  beginning  on  or  after  January  first, two thousand twenty and before
  January first, two thousand twenty-one;  and  .1875  percent  for  years
  beginning  on or after January first, two thousand twenty-one and before
  January first, two thousand twenty-seven, and zero percent  for  taxable
  years  beginning  on  or after January first, two thousand twenty-seven.
  Provided however, for taxable years beginning on or after January first,
  two thousand twenty-one, the rate of tax for a small business as defined
  in paragraph (f) of this subdivision shall be zero percent. The rate  of
  tax  for  a  qualified  New  York manufacturer shall be .132 percent for
  taxable years beginning on or after January first, two thousand  fifteen
  and before January first, two thousand sixteen, .106 percent for taxable
  years  beginning  on  or  after  January first, two thousand sixteen and
  before January first, two thousand seventeen, .085 percent  for  taxable
  years  beginning  on  or after January first, two thousand seventeen and
  before January first, two thousand eighteen; .056  percent  for  taxable
  years  beginning  on  or  after January first, two thousand eighteen and
  before January first, two thousand nineteen; .038  percent  for  taxable
  years  beginning  on  or  after January first, two thousand nineteen and
  before January first, two thousand  twenty;  .019  percent  for  taxable
  years  beginning  on  or  after  January  first, two thousand twenty and
  before January first, two thousand  twenty-one;  and  zero  percent  for
  years beginning on or after January first, two thousand twenty-one. (ii)
  In  no  event shall the amount prescribed by this paragraph exceed three
  hundred fifty thousand dollars for qualified New York manufacturers  and
  for all other taxpayers five million dollars.
    (2)  For  purposes  of  subparagraph  one  of this paragraph, the term
  "manufacturer" shall mean a taxpayer that during  the  taxable  year  is
  principally  engaged  in  the  production  of  goods  by  manufacturing,
  processing,   assembling,   refining,   mining,   extracting,   farming,
  agriculture,   horticulture,  floriculture,  viticulture  or  commercial
  fishing. Moreover, for purposes of  computing  the  capital  base  in  a
  combined report, the combined group shall be considered a "manufacturer"
  for  purposes of this subparagraph only if the combined group during the
  taxable year is principally engaged in the activities set forth in  this
  subparagraph,  or any combination thereof. A taxpayer or, in the case of
  a combined report, a combined group shall be  "principally  engaged"  in
  activities  described above if, during the taxable year, more than fifty
  percent of the  gross  receipts  of  the  taxpayer  or  combined  group,
  respectively,  are derived from receipts from the sale of goods produced
  by such activities. In computing  a  combined  group's  gross  receipts,


 intercorporate  receipts  shall  be  eliminated.  A  "qualified New York
  manufacturer" is a manufacturer that has property in New  York  that  is
  described  in  clause  (A)  of  subparagraph  (i)  of  paragraph  (b) of
  subdivision  one of section two hundred ten-B of this article and either
  (i) the adjusted basis of that property for New York state tax  purposes
  at the close of the taxable year is at least one million dollars or (ii)
  all  of  its  real  and  personal  property  is  located in New York. In
  addition, a "qualified New York manufacturer" means a taxpayer  that  is
  defined  as  a qualified emerging technology company under paragraph (c)
  of subdivision one of section thirty-one hundred  two-e  of  the  public
  authorities   law  regardless  of  the  ten  million  dollar  limitation
  expressed in subparagraph one of such paragraph. A taxpayer or,  in  the
  case  of  a combined report, a combined group, that does not satisfy the
  principally engaged test may be a qualified New York manufacturer if the
  taxpayer or the combined group employs during the taxable year at  least
  two thousand five hundred employees in manufacturing in New York and the
  taxpayer  or  the  combined  group  has  property  in  the state used in
  manufacturing, the adjusted basis  of  which  for  New  York  state  tax
  purposes  at  the  close  of  the  taxable  year is at least one hundred
  million dollars.
    (d) Fixed dollar minimum.   (1) (A)  The  amount  prescribed  by  this
  paragraph   for   New  York  S  corporations,  other  than  New  York  S
  corporations that are qualified  New  York  manufacturers  or  qualified
  emerging technology companies, will be determined in accordance with the
  following table:
 
  If New York receipts are:                The fixed dollar minimum tax is:
   not more than $100,000                               $   25
   more than $100,000 but not over $250,000             $   50
   more than $250,000 but not over $500,000             $  175
   more than $500,000 but not over $1,000,000           $  300
   more than $1,000,000 but not over $5,000,000         $1,000
   more than $5,000,000 but not over $25,000,000        $3,000
   Over $25,000,000                                     $4,500
 
    (B)  Provided further, the amount prescribed by this paragraph for New
  York S corporations  that  are  qualified  New  York  manufacturers,  as
  defined  in  subparagraph (vi) of paragraph (a) of this subdivision, and
  for New York S  corporations  that  are  qualified  emerging  technology
  companies  under  paragraph (c) of subdivision one of section thirty-one
  hundred two-e of the  public  authorities  law  regardless  of  the  ten
  million   dollar  limitation  expressed  in  subparagraph  one  of  such
  paragraph (c), will be  determined  in  accordance  with  the  following
  tables.
 
  For  taxable  years  beginning  on  or  after January 1, 2015 and before
  January 1, 2016:
 
  If New York receipts are:                The fixed dollar minimum tax is:
 
   not more than $100,000                               $   22
   more than $100,000 but not over $250,000             $   44
   more than $250,000 but not over $500,000             $  153
   more than $500,000 but not over $1,000,000           $  263
   more than $1,000,000 but not over $5,000,000         $  877
   more than $5,000,000 but not over $25,000,000        $2,631
   Over $25,000,000                                     $3,947


 For taxable years beginning on or  after  January  1,  2016  and  before
  January 1, 2018:
 
  If New York receipts are:                The fixed dollar minimum tax is:
   not more than $100,000                               $   21
   more than $100,000 but not over $250,000             $   42
   more than $250,000 but not over $500,000             $  148
   more than $500,000 but not over $1,000,000           $  254
   more than $1,000,000 but not over $5,000,000         $  846
   more than $5,000,000 but not over $25,000,000        $2,538
   Over $25,000,000                                     $3,807
 
  For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2018:
 
  If New York receipts are:                The fixed dollar minimum tax is:
   not more than $100,000                               $   19
   more than $100,000 but not over $250,000             $   38
   more than $250,000 but not over $500,000             $  131
   more than $500,000 but not over $1,000,000           $  225
   more than $1,000,000 but not over $5,000,000         $  750
   more than $5,000,000 but not over $25,000,000        $2,250
   Over $25,000,000                                     $3,375
 
    (C)  Provided  further,  the amount prescribed by this paragraph for a
  qualified New York manufacturer, as  defined  in  subparagraph  (vi)  of
  paragraph  (a)  of this subdivision, and a qualified emerging technology
  company under paragraph (c) of subdivision  one  of  section  thirty-one
  hundred  two-e  of  the  public  authorities  law  regardless of the ten
  million  dollar  limitation  expressed  in  subparagraph  one  of   such
  paragraph  (c), that is not a New York S corporation, will be determined
  in accordance with  the  following  tables.  However,  with  respect  to
  qualified New York manufacturers, the amounts in these tables will apply
  in  the  case  of a combined report only if the combined group satisfies
  the requirements to be a qualified New York manufacturer as set forth in
  such subparagraph (vi).
 
  For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2015 and  before  January
  1, 2016:
 
  If New York receipts are:                The fixed dollar minimum tax is:
   not more than $100,000                               $   22
   more than $100,000 but not over $250,000             $   66
   more than $250,000 but not over $500,000             $  153
   more than $500,000 but not over $1,000,000           $  439
   more than $1,000,000 but not over $5,000,000         $1,316
   more than $5,000,000 but not over $25,000,000        $3,070
   Over $25,000,000                                     $4,385
 
  For  tax  years beginning on or after January 1, 2016 and before January
  1, 2018:
 
  If New York receipts are:                The fixed dollar minimum tax is:
   not more than $100,000                               $   21
   more than $100,000 but not over $250,000             $   63
   more than $250,000 but not over $500,000             $  148
   more than $500,000 but not over $1,000,000           $  423
   more than $1,000,000 but not over $5,000,000         $1,269


  more than $5,000,000 but not over $25,000,000        $2,961
   Over $25,000,000                                     $4,230
 
  For tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2018:
 
  If New York receipts are:                The fixed dollar minimum tax is:
   not more than $100,000                               $   19
   more than $100,000 but not over $250,000             $   56
   more than $250,000 but not over $500,000             $  131
   more than $500,000 but not over $1,000,000           $  375
   more than $1,000,000 but not over $5,000,000         $1,125
   more than $5,000,000 but not over $25,000,000        $2,625
   Over $25,000,000                                     $3,750
 
    (D)  Otherwise,  for  all  other taxpayers not covered by clauses (A),
  (B), (C) and (D-1) of this subparagraph, the amount prescribed  by  this
  paragraph will be determined in accordance with the following table:
 
  If New York receipts are:                The fixed dollar minimum tax is:
   not more than $100,000                               $   25
   more than $100,000 but not over $250,000             $   75
   more than $250,000 but not over $500,000             $  175
   more than $500,000 but not over $1,000,000           $  500
   more than $1,000,000 but not over $5,000,000         $1,500
   more than $5,000,000 but not over $25,000,000        $3,500
   more than $25,000,000 but not over $50,000,000       $5,000
   more than $50,000,000 but not over $100,000,000      $10,000
   more than $100,000,000 but not over $250,000,000     $20,000
   more than $250,000,000 but not over $500,000,000     $50,000
   more than $500,000,000 but not over $1,000,000,000   $100,000
   Over $1,000,000,000                                  $200,000
 
    (D-1)  In  the  case  of a REIT or a RIC that is not a captive REIT or
  captive RIC, the amount prescribed by this paragraph will be  determined
  in accordance with the following table:
 
  If New York receipts are:                The fixed dollar minimum tax is:
   not more than $100,000                               $   25
   more than $100,000 but not over $250,000             $   75
   more than $250,000 but not over $500,000             $  175
   more than $500,000                                   $  500
 
    (E) For purposes of this paragraph, New York receipts are the receipts
  included  in  the numerator of the apportionment factor determined under
  section two hundred ten-A for the taxable year.
    (2) If the taxable year is less than twelve months, the amount of  New
  York  receipts  is determined by dividing the amount of the receipts for
  the taxable year by the  number  of  months  in  the  taxable  year  and
  multiplying  the  result  by  twelve,  and the amount prescribed by this
  paragraph shall be reduced by twenty-five  percent  of  the  period  for
  which  the  taxpayer  is  subject to tax is more than six months but not
  more than nine months and by fifty percent if the period for  which  the
  taxpayer is subject to tax is not more than six months. In the case of a
  termination  year  of  a  New  York  S  corporation,  the sum of the tax
  computed under this paragraph for the S short year and for the  C  short
  year  shall not be less than the amount computed under this paragraph as
  if the corporation were a New York C corporation for the entire  taxable
  year.


   (f)  For  purposes of this section, the term "small business taxpayer"
  shall mean a taxpayer (i) which has an entire net  income  of  not  more
  than  three  hundred  ninety thousand dollars for the taxable year; (ii)
  the aggregate amount  of  money  and  other  property  received  by  the
  corporation  for  stock,  as  a  contribution to capital, and as paid-in
  surplus, does not exceed one million dollars; (iii) which is not part of
  an affiliated group, as defined in section 1504 of the internal  revenue
  code,  unless such group, if it had filed a report under this article on
  a combined basis, would have  itself  qualified  as  a  "small  business
  taxpayer"  pursuant  to  this subdivision; and (iv) which has an average
  number of individuals, excluding general  executive  officers,  employed
  full-time  in the state during the taxable year of one hundred or fewer.
  If the taxable period  to  which  subparagraph  (i)  of  this  paragraph
  applies  is  less  than  twelve  months,  entire  net  income under such
  subparagraph shall be placed on  an  annual  basis  by  multiplying  the
  entire  net  income  by  twelve and dividing the result by the number of
  months in  the  period.  For  purposes  of  subparagraph  (ii)  of  this
  paragraph,  the  amount  taken into account with respect to any property
  other than money shall be the amount equal to the adjusted basis to  the
  corporation  of  such  property  for  determining  gain,  reduced by any
  liability to which the property was subject or which was assumed by  the
  corporation.  The  determination  under  the preceding sentence shall be
  made as of the time the property was received by  the  corporation.  For
  purposes  of  subparagraph  (iv)  of  this paragraph, "average number of
  individuals, excluding general executive officers,  employed  full-time"
  shall  be  computed  by  ascertaining  the  number  of  such individuals
  employed by the taxpayer on the thirty-first day of March, the thirtieth
  day of June, the thirtieth day of September and the thirty-first day  of
  December  during each taxable year or other applicable period, by adding
  together the number of such individuals  ascertained  on  each  of  such
  dates  and  dividing  the  sum  so  obtained by the number of such dates
  occurring within such  taxable  year  or  other  applicable  period.  An
  individual  employed  full-time means an employee in a job consisting of
  at least thirty-five hours per week, or two or more employees who are in
  jobs  that  together  constitute  the  equivalent  of  a  job  at  least
  thirty-five  hours per week (full-time equivalent). Full-time equivalent
  employees in the state include all employees regularly connected with or
  working out of an office or place of business of the taxpayer within the
  state.
    1-c. The computations specified in paragraph (b) of subdivision one of
  this section shall not apply  to  the  first  two  taxable  years  of  a
  taxpayer which, for one or both such years, is a small business taxpayer
  as defined in paragraph (f) of subdivision one of this section.
    2. The amount of investment capital and business capital shall each be
  determined  by  taking  the average value of the assets included therein
  (less liabilities deductible therefrom pursuant  to  the  provisions  of
  subdivisions  five  and seven of section two hundred eight), and, if the
  period covered by the report is other than a period of  twelve  calendar
  months,  by  multiplying  such value by the number of calendar months or
  major parts thereof included in such period, and  dividing  the  product
  thus obtained by twelve. For purposes of this subdivision, real property
  and  marketable  securities shall be valued at fair market value and the
  value of personal property other than marketable securities shall be the
  value thereof shown  on  the  books  and  records  of  the  taxpayer  in
  accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
    3.  A corporation that is a partner in a partnership shall compute tax
  under this  article  using  the  aggregate  method  as  defined  in  the
  regulations  of  the  commissioner,  unless another method for computing


 such tax is required or allowed by such regulations. Under the aggregate
  method, a corporation that is a partner in a partnership  is  viewed  as
  having  an  undivided interest in the partnership's assets, liabilities,
  and  items  of  receipts,  income,  gain,  loss and deduction. Under the
  aggregate method, the corporation that is a partner in a partnership  is
  treated   as   participating   in  the  partnership's  transactions  and
  activities.






   § 210-A. Apportionment.  1. General. Business income and capital shall
  be  apportioned  to  the  state  by  the apportionment factor determined
  pursuant to this section.   The  apportionment  factor  is  a  fraction,
  determined  by including only those receipts, net income, net gains, and
  other  items  described  in  this  section  that  are  included  in  the
  computation of the taxpayer's business income (determined without regard
  to  the  modification provided in subparagraph nineteen of paragraph (a)
  of subdivision nine of section two hundred eight of  this  article)  for
  the  taxable  year. The numerator of the apportionment fraction shall be
  equal to the sum of all the amounts  required  to  be  included  in  the
  numerator pursuant to the provisions of this section and the denominator
  of  the  apportionment  fraction  shall  be  equal to the sum of all the
  amounts required to be included  in  the  denominator  pursuant  to  the
  provisions of this section.
    2.   Sales  of  tangible  personal  property,  electricity,  and  real
  property.  (a) Receipts from sales of tangible personal  property  where
  shipments  are made to points within the state or the destination of the
  property is a point in the state shall be included in the  numerator  of
  the  apportionment  fraction.  Receipts  from sales of tangible personal
  property where shipments are made to points within and without the state
  or the destination is within and without the state shall be included  in
  the denominator of the apportionment fraction.
    (b)  Receipts from sales of electricity delivered to points within the
  state shall be included in the numerator of the apportionment  fraction.
  Receipts  from  sales  of  electricity  delivered  to  points within and
  without  the  state  shall  be  included  in  the  denominator  of   the
  apportionment fraction.
    (c)  Receipts from sales of tangible personal property and electricity
  that are traded as commodities, as the term "commodity"  is  defined  in
  section   475  of  the  internal  revenue  code,  are  included  in  the
  apportionment fraction in accordance with clause (I) of subparagraph two
  of paragraph (a) of subdivision five of this section.
    (d) Net gains (not less than zero) from the  sales  of  real  property
  located  within  the  state  shall  be  included in the numerator of the
  apportionment fraction. Net gains (not less than zero) from the sales of
  real property located within and without the state shall be included  in
  the denominator of the apportionment fraction.
    3.  Rentals  and  royalties.  (a)  Receipts  from  rentals of real and
  tangible personal property located within the state are included in  the
  numerator  of  the apportionment fraction. Receipts from rentals of real
  and tangible personal property located  within  and  without  the  state
  shall be included in the denominator of the apportionment fraction.
    (b)  Receipts  of  royalties  from  the  use  of  patents, copyrights,
  trademarks, and similar intangible personal property  within  the  state
  are included in the numerator of the apportionment fraction. Receipts of
  royalties  from  the  use of patents, copyrights, trademarks and similar
  intangibles within and without the state are included in the denominator
  of the apportionment fraction. A patent, copyright, trademark or similar
  intangible property is  used  in  the  state  to  the  extent  that  the
  activities thereunder are carried on in the state.
    (c)  Receipts  from  the  sales of rights for closed-circuit and cable
  television transmissions of an event (other than events occurring  on  a
  regularly  scheduled basis) taking place within the state as a result of
  the rendition of services by employees of the corporation, as  athletes,
  entertainers  or performing artists are included in the numerator of the
  apportionment fraction to the extent that such receipts are attributable
  to such transmissions received or exhibited within the  state.  Receipts
  from  all  sales  of  rights  for  closed-circuit  and  cable television


 transmissions of an  event  are  included  in  the  denominator  of  the
  apportionment fraction.
    4. Digital products. (a) For purposes of determining the apportionment
  fraction  under  this  section,  the  term  "digital  product" means any
  property  or  service,  or  combination  thereof,  of  whatever   nature
  delivered  to the purchaser through the use of wire, cable, fiber-optic,
  laser, microwave, radio wave, satellite or similar successor  media,  or
  any  combination  thereof.  Digital product includes, but is not limited
  to, an audio work, audiovisual work, visual work, book or literary work,
  graphic work, game, information or  entertainment  service,  storage  of
  digital  products and computer software by whatever means delivered. The
  term "delivered to" includes furnished or provided to or accessed by.  A
  digital   product   does   not   include   legal,  medical,  accounting,
  architectural, research, analytical, engineering or consulting  services
  provided by the taxpayer.
    (b)  Receipts  from the sale of, licence to use, or granting of remote
  access to digital products within the state, determined according to the
  hierarchy of methods set forth in  subparagraphs  one  through  four  of
  paragraph (c) of this subdivision, shall be included in the numerator of
  the  apportionment  fraction. Receipts from the sale of, license to use,
  or granting of remote access to digital products within and without  the
  state  shall  be  included  in  the  denominator  of  the  apportionment
  fraction. The taxpayer must exercise due  diligence  under  each  method
  described  in  paragraph (c) of this subdivision before rejecting it and
  proceeding to the next method  in  the  hierarchy,  and  must  base  its
  determination  on  information known to the taxpayer or information that
  would be known to the taxpayer upon reasonable inquiry. If  the  receipt
  for  a  digital  product  is  comprised of a combination of property and
  services,  it  cannot  be  divided  into  separate  components  and   is
  considered  to  be  one  receipt  regardless of whether it is separately
  stated for billing purposes. The entire receipt  must  be  allocated  by
  this hierarchy.
    (c)  Hierarchy  of  sourcing  methods.  (1) The customer's primary use
  location of the digital product;
    (2) The  location  where  the  digital  product  is  received  by  the
  customer,  or  is  received  by  a  person designated for receipt by the
  customer;
    (3) The apportionment fraction determined pursuant to this subdivision
  for the preceding taxable year for such digital product; or
    (4) The apportionment fraction in the current taxable year  for  those
  digital  products  that  can  be sourced using the hierarchy of sourcing
  methods in subparagraphs one and two of this paragraph.
    5. Financial transactions. (a) Financial  instruments.    A  financial
  instrument  is  a  "nonqualified  financial  instrument"  if it is not a
  qualified financial instrument. A qualified financial instrument means a
  financial instrument that is of a type described in any of clauses  (A),
  (B), (C), (D), (G), (H) or (I) of subparagraph two of this paragraph and
  that has been marked to market in the taxable year by the taxpayer under
  section  475  or section 1256 of the internal revenue code.  Further, if
  the taxpayer has in the  taxable  year  marked  to  market  a  financial
  instrument  of  the  type described in any of the clauses (A), (B), (C),
  (D), (G), (H) or (I) of subparagraph two of  this  paragraph,  then  any
  financial  instrument  within that type described in the above specified
  clause or clauses that has not been marked to  market  by  the  taxpayer
  under  section  475  or  section  1256 of the internal revenue code is a
  qualified financial instrument in the taxable year. Notwithstanding  the
  two  preceding  sentences, (i) a loan secured by real property shall not
  be a qualified financial instrument, (ii) if the  only  loans  that  are


 marked  to  market  by the taxpayer under section 475 or section 1256 of
  the internal revenue code are loans secured by real  property,  then  no
  loans  shall  be  qualified  financial  instruments, (iii) stock that is
  investment  capital  as  defined in paragraph (a) of subdivision five of
  section two hundred eight of this  article  shall  not  be  a  qualified
  financial  instrument, and (iv) stock that generates other exempt income
  as defined in subdivision six-a of section two  hundred  eight  of  this
  article  and  that  is not marked to market under section 475 or section
  1256 of the internal revenue  code  shall  not  constitute  a  qualified
  financial  instrument with respect to the income from that stock that is
  described in such subdivision six-a. If a corporation is included  in  a
  combined  report, the definition of qualified financial instrument shall
  be determined on a combined basis. In the case of a RIC or a REIT  that
  is not a captive RIC or a captive REIT, a qualified financial instrument
  means  a  financial  instrument  that  is  of a type described in any of
  clauses (A), (B), (C), (D), (G), (H) or (I) of subparagraph two of  this
  paragraph,  other  than  (i) a loan secured by real property, (ii) stock
  that is investment capital as defined in paragraph  (a)  of  subdivision
  five  of section two hundred eight of this article, and (iii) stock that
  generates other exempt income as defined in subdivision six-a of section
  two hundred eight of this article with respect to the income  from  that
  stock that is described in such subdivision six-a.
    (1)  Fixed  percentage  method for qualified financial instruments. In
  determining the inclusion of  receipts  and  net  gains  from  qualified
  financial instruments in the apportionment fraction, taxpayers may elect
  to  use  the  fixed percentage method described in this subparagraph for
  qualified financial instruments. The election is irrevocable, applies to
  all qualified financial instruments, and must be made on an annual basis
  on the taxpayer's original, timely filed return, determined with  regard
  to  extensions  of  time  for  filing.  If the taxpayer elects the fixed
  percentage method, then all income, gain or loss,  including  marked  to
  market  net  gains  as defined in clause (J) of subparagraph two of this
  paragraph, from qualified  financial  instruments  constitutes  business
  income,  gain  or  loss. If the taxpayer does not elect to use the fixed
  percentage method, then receipts and  net  gains  are  included  in  the
  apportionment  fraction  in accordance with the customer sourcing method
  described in  subparagraph  two  of  this  paragraph.  Under  the  fixed
  percentage  method, eight percent of all net income (not less than zero)
  from qualified financial instruments is included in the numerator of the
  apportionment fraction.  All  net  income  (not  less  than  zero)  from
  qualified  financial  instruments  is included in the denominator of the
  apportionment fraction.
    (2) Customer sourcing method. Receipts and net  gains  from  qualified
  financial  instruments, in cases where the taxpayer did not elect to use
  the fixed percentage  method  described  in  subparagraph  one  of  this
  paragraph,  and  from nonqualified financial instruments are included in
  the apportionment fraction in accordance  with  this  subparagraph.  For
  purposes of this paragraph, an individual is deemed to be located in the
  state  if  his or her billing address is in the state. A business entity
  is deemed to be located in the  state  if  its  commercial  domicile  is
  located in the state.
    (A)  Loans.  (i)  Receipts constituting interest from loans secured by
  real property  located  within  the  state  shall  be  included  in  the
  numerator  of the apportionment fraction. Receipts constituting interest
  from loans secured by real property located within and without the state
  shall be included in the denominator of the apportionment fraction.
    (ii) Receipts constituting interest from loans  not  secured  by  real
  property  shall  be  included  in  the  numerator  of  the apportionment


 fraction if the borrower is located in the state. Receipts  constituting
  interest  from  loans not secured by real property, whether the borrower
  is located within or  without  the  state,  shall  be  included  in  the
  denominator of the apportionment fraction.
    (iii)  Net  gains  (not less than zero) from sales of loans secured by
  real property  are  included  in  the  numerator  of  the  apportionment
  fraction as provided in this subclause. The amount of net gains from the
  sale  of loans secured by real property included in the numerator of the
  apportionment fraction is determined by multiplying the net gains  by  a
  fraction  the  numerator  of  which is the amount of gross proceeds from
  sales of loans secured by real property located within the state and the
  denominator of which is the gross proceeds from sales of  loans  secured
  by  real  property within and without the state. Gross proceeds shall be
  determined after the deduction of any cost incurred to acquire the loans
  but shall not be less than zero. Net gains (not  less  than  zero)  from
  sales of loans secured by real property within and without the state are
  included in the denominator of the apportionment fraction.
    (iv) Net gains (not less than zero) from sales of loans not secured by
  real  property  are  included  in  the  numerator  of  the apportionment
  fraction as provided in this subclause. The amount of net gains from the
  sale of loans not secured by real property included in the numerator  of
  the apportionment fraction is determined by multiplying the net gains by
  a  fraction, the numerator of which is the amount of gross proceeds from
  sales of loans not secured by real property to purchasers located within
  the state and the denominator of which is the amount of  gross  proceeds
  from  sales  of loans not secured by real property to purchasers located
  within and without the state. Gross proceeds shall be  determined  after
  the deduction of any cost incurred to acquire the loans but shall not be
  less  than  zero. Net gains (not less than zero) from sales of loans not
  secured by  real  property  are  included  in  the  denominator  of  the
  apportionment fraction.
    (v)  For  purposes  of  this  subdivision,  a  loan is secured by real
  property if fifty percent or more of the value of the collateral used to
  secure the loan, when valued at fair market value as  of  the  time  the
  loan was entered into, consists of real property.
    (B) Federal, state, and municipal debt. Receipts constituting interest
  and  net  gains  from  sales  of  debt  instruments issued by the United
  States, any state, or political subdivision of  a  state  shall  not  be
  included  in  the  numerator  of  the  apportionment  fraction. Receipts
  constituting interest and net gains (not less than zero) from  sales  of
  debt  instruments  issued by the United States and the state of New York
  or its political subdivisions shall be included in  the  denominator  of
  the  apportionment  fraction. Fifty percent of the receipts constituting
  interest and  net  gains  (not  less  than  zero)  from  sales  of  debt
  instruments issued by other states or their political subdivisions shall
  be included in the denominator of the apportionment fraction.
    (C)  Asset  backed  securities and other government agency debt. Eight
  percent of the interest income from asset  backed  securities  or  other
  securities  issued  by government agencies, including but not limited to
  securities  issued  by  the  Government  National  Mortgage  Association
  (GNMA),  the  Federal  National Mortgage Association (FNMA), the Federal
  Home  Loan  Mortgage  Corporation  (FHLMC),  or   the   Small   Business
  Administration,  or  asset  backed  securities  issued by other entities
  shall be included in the numerator of the apportionment fraction.  Eight
  percent  of  the  net gains (not less than zero) from (i) sales of asset
  backed securities or other securities  issued  by  government  agencies,
  including  but not limited to securities issued by GNMA, FNMA, or FHLMC,
  the Small Business Administration, or (ii) sales of other  asset  backed


 securities  that  are  sold  through  a  registered securities broker or
  dealer or  through  a  licensed  exchange,  shall  be  included  in  the
  numerator  of  the  apportionment fraction. The amount of net gains (not
  less  than  zero)  from  sales  of  other  asset  backed  securities not
  referenced in subclause (i) or (ii)  of  this  clause  included  in  the
  numerator  of  the  apportionment  fraction is determined by multiplying
  such net gains by a fraction, the numerator of which is  the  amount  of
  gross  proceeds  from  such sales to purchasers located in the state and
  the denominator of which is the amount of gross proceeds from such sales
  to  purchasers  located  within  and   without   the   state.   Receipts
  constituting  interest from asset backed securities and other securities
  referenced in this clause and net gains (not less than zero) from  sales
  of  asset  backed  securities  and  other  securities referenced in this
  clause are included in the denominator of  the  apportionment  fraction.
  Gross  proceeds  shall  be determined after the deduction of any cost to
  acquire the securities but shall not be less than zero.
    (D) Corporate bonds. Receipts  constituting  interest  from  corporate
  bonds are included in the numerator of the apportionment fraction if the
  commercial  domicile  of  the issuing corporation is in the state. Eight
  percent of the net gains (not less than zero) from  sales  of  corporate
  bonds sold through a registered securities broker or dealer or through a
  licensed  exchange  is  included  in  the numerator of the apportionment
  fraction. The amount of net gains (not less than zero) from other  sales
  of  corporate  bonds  included  in  the  numerator  of the apportionment
  fraction is determined by multiplying such net gains by a fraction,  the
  numerator  of  which  is the amount of gross proceeds from such sales to
  purchasers located in the state and the  denominator  of  which  is  the
  amount  of  gross  proceeds  from sales to purchasers located within and
  without the state. Receipts constituting interest from corporate  bonds,
  whether  the  issuing  corporation's  commercial  domicile  is within or
  without the state, and net gains (not less  than  zero)  from  sales  of
  corporate  bonds to purchasers within and without the state are included
  in the denominator of the apportionment fraction. Gross  proceeds  shall
  be  determined  after the deduction of any cost to acquire the bonds but
  shall not be less than zero.
    (E) Reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowing agreements.
  Eight percent of net interest income (not less than zero)  from  reverse
  repurchase  agreements  and  securities  borrowing  agreements  shall be
  included in the numerator of the apportionment  fraction.  Net  interest
  income  (not  less  than  zero)  from  reverse repurchase agreements and
  securities borrowing agreements is included in the  denominator  of  the
  apportionment  fraction.  Net  interest  income  from reverse repurchase
  agreements  and  securities  borrowing  agreements  is  determined   for
  purposes of this subdivision after the deduction of the interest expense
  from   the  taxpayer's  repurchase  agreements  and  securities  lending
  agreements but cannot be less  than  zero.  For  this  calculation,  the
  amount  of such interest expense is the interest expense associated with
  the sum of the value of the taxpayer's repurchase agreements where it is
  the seller/borrower plus the value of the taxpayer's securities  lending
  agreements  where  it  is  the  securities  lender, provided such sum is
  limited to the sum of the value of  the  taxpayer's  reverse  repurchase
  agreements  where  it  is  the  purchaser/lender  plus  the value of the
  taxpayer's securities lending agreements  where  it  is  the  securities
  borrower.
    (F)  Federal  funds.  Eight percent of the net interest (not less than
  zero)  from  federal  funds  is  included  in  the  numerator   of   the
  apportionment  fraction.  The  net  interest  (not  less than zero) from
  federal funds is  included  in  the  denominator  of  the  apportionment


 fraction.  Net interest from federal funds is determined after deduction
  of interest expense from federal funds.
    (G)  Dividends  and  net  gains  from  sales  of  stock or partnership
  interests. Dividends from stock, net gains (not  less  than  zero)  from
  sales  of  stock  and  net  gains  (not less than zero) from the sale of
  partnership interests are  not  included  in  either  the  numerator  or
  denominator  of  the  apportionment  fraction  unless  the  commissioner
  determines pursuant to subdivision eleven of this section that inclusion
  of such dividends and net gains (not less than  zero)  is  necessary  to
  properly reflect the business income or capital of the taxpayer.
    (H)  Other  financial  instruments. (i) Receipts constituting interest
  from other financial instruments shall be included in the  numerator  of
  the  apportionment  fraction  if  the  payor  is  located  in the state.
  Receipts constituting interest from other financial instruments, whether
  the  payor  is  within  or  without  the  state,  are  included  in  the
  denominator of the apportionment fraction.
    (ii)  Net  gains  (not  less  than zero) from sales of other financial
  instruments and other income (not less than zero) from  other  financial
  instruments  where  the  purchaser  or payor is located in the state are
  included in the numerator of the apportionment fraction, provided  that,
  if the purchaser or payor is a registered securities broker or dealer or
  the  transaction is made through a licensed exchange, then eight percent
  of the net gains (not less than zero) or other  income  (not  less  than
  zero)  is  included  in the numerator of the apportionment fraction. Net
  gains (not less than zero) from sales of other financial instruments and
  other income (not less than zero) from other financial  instruments  are
  included in the denominator of the apportionment fraction.
    (I)  Physical  commodities. Net income (not less than zero) from sales
  of  physical  commodities  are  included  in  the   numerator   of   the
  apportionment  fraction  as  provided  in this clause. The amount of net
  income from sales of physical commodities included in the  numerator  of
  the  apportionment  fraction is determined by multiplying the net income
  from sales of physical commodities by a fraction, the numerator of which
  is the amount of receipts from sales of  physical  commodities  actually
  delivered  to points within the state or, if there is no actual delivery
  of the physical commodity, sold to purchasers located in the state,  and
  the  denominator  of  which  is  the  amount  of  receipts from sales of
  physical commodities actually delivered to points within and without the
  state or, if there is no actual delivery of the physical commodity, sold
  to purchasers located within and without the state. Net income (not less
  than zero) from  sales  of  physical  commodities  is  included  in  the
  denominator  of  the  apportionment  fraction. Net income (not less than
  zero) from  sales  of  physical  commodities  is  determined  after  the
  deduction of the cost to acquire or produce the physical commodities.
    (J)  Marked to market net gains. (i) For purposes of this subdivision,
  "marked to market" means that a financial instrument is,  under  section
  475  or  section  1256  of  the  internal  revenue  code, treated by the
  taxpayer as sold for its fair market value on the last business  day  of
  the  taxpayer's  taxable year. "Marked to market gain or loss" means the
  gain or loss recognized by the taxpayer under  section  475  or  section
  1256  of  the  internal revenue code because the financial instrument is
  treated as sold for its fair market value on the last  business  day  of
  the taxpayer's taxable year.
    (ii)  The  amount  of  marked to market net gains (not less than zero)
  from each type of financial instrument that is marked to market included
  in  the  numerator  of  the  apportionment  fraction  is  determined  by
  multiplying the marked to market net gains (but not less than zero) from
  such  type  of  the financial instrument by a fraction, the numerator of


 which is the numerator of the apportionment fraction for the  net  gains
  from  that  type of financial instrument determined under the applicable
  clause of  this  subparagraph  and  the  denominator  of  which  is  the
  denominator  of  the  apportionment  fraction for the net gains for that
  type of financial instrument determined under the applicable  clause  of
  this subparagraph.  Marked to market net gains (not less than zero) from
  financial  instruments  for  which  the  numerator  of the apportionment
  fraction is determined under  the  immediately  preceding  sentence  are
  included in the denominator of the apportionment fraction.
    (iii)  If the type of financial instrument that is marked to market is
  not otherwise sourced by the taxpayer under this subparagraph, or if the
  taxpayer has a net loss  from  the  sales  of  that  type  of  financial
  instrument  under the applicable clause of this subparagraph, the amount
  of marked to market net gains (not less than zero)  from  that  type  of
  financial  instrument  included  in  the  numerator of the apportionment
  fraction is determined by multiplying the marked  to  market  net  gains
  (but  not  less  than  zero) from that type of financial instrument by a
  fraction, the numerator of which is the sum of the  amount  of  receipts
  included  in  the  numerator of the apportionment fraction under clauses
  (A), (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), (G), (H) and (I) of this subparagraph  and
  subclause  (ii)  of this clause, and the denominator of which is the sum
  of  the  amount  of  receipts  included  in  the  denominator   of   the
  apportionment  fraction under clauses (A), (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), (G),
  (H) and (I) and subclause (ii) of this  clause.  Marked  to  market  net
  gains  (not  less  than zero) for which the amount to be included in the
  numerator  of  the  apportionment  fraction  is  determined  under   the
  immediately  preceding  sentence  are included in the denominator of the
  apportionment fraction.
    (b) Other receipts from broker or dealer  activities.  Receipts  of  a
  registered  securities  broker  or dealer from securities or commodities
  broker or dealer activities described in this paragraph shall be  deemed
  to  be  generated  within  the  state  as described in subparagraphs one
  through eight of this paragraph. Receipts from such activities generated
  within the state shall be included in the numerator of the apportionment
  fraction. Receipts from such activities generated within and without the
  state  shall  be  included  in  the  denominator  of  the  apportionment
  fraction.  For  the  purposes  of  this paragraph, the term "securities"
  shall have the same meaning as in  section  475(c)(2)  of  the  internal
  revenue  code  and the term "commodities" shall have the same meaning as
  in section 475(e)(2) of the internal revenue code.
    (1) Receipts  constituting  brokerage  commissions  derived  from  the
  execution  of securities or commodities purchase or sales orders for the
  accounts of customers shall be deemed to be generated within  the  state
  if  the  mailing  address in the records of the taxpayer of the customer
  who is responsible for paying such commissions is within the state.
    (2)  Receipts  constituting  margin  interest  earned  on  behalf   of
  brokerage  accounts  shall be deemed to be generated within the state if
  the mailing address in the records of the taxpayer of the  customer  who
  is responsible for paying such margin interest is within the state.
    (3)(A)  Receipts constituting fees earned by the taxpayer for advisory
  services to a customer in connection with the underwriting of securities
  for such customer (such customer being the entity that is  contemplating
  issuing  or  is  issuing  securities) or fees earned by the taxpayer for
  managing an underwriting shall be deemed  to  be  generated  within  the
  state  if  the  mailing  address  in the records of the taxpayer of such
  customer who is responsible for paying such fees is within the state.


   (B) Receipts constituting the primary  spread  of  selling  concession
  from  underwritten securities shall be deemed to be generated within the
  state if the customer is located in the state.
    (C)  The  term "primary spread" means the difference between the price
  paid by the taxpayer to the issuer of the securities being marketed  and
  the  price  received  from  the  subsequent  sale  of  the  underwritten
  securities at the  initial  public  offering  price,  less  any  selling
  concession  and  any  fees paid to the taxpayer for advisory services or
  any manager's fees, if such fees are not paid by  the  customer  to  the
  taxpayer  separately.  The  term "public offering price" means the price
  agreed upon by the taxpayer and the issuer at which the  securities  are
  to  be  offered  to  the public. The term "selling concession" means the
  amount paid to the taxpayer for participating in the underwriting  of  a
  security where the taxpayer is not the lead underwriter.
    (4)  Receipts constituting account maintenance fees shall be deemed to
  be generated within the state if the mailing address in  the  record  of
  the  taxpayer of the customer who is responsible for paying such account
  maintenance fees is within the state.
    (5) Receipts constituting fees for management  or  advisory  services,
  including   fees   for  advisory  services  in  relation  to  merger  or
  acquisition activities, but excluding fees paid for  services  described
  in  paragraph  (d)  of this subdivision, shall be deemed to be generated
  within the state if the mailing address in the records of  the  taxpayer
  of  the  customer  who is responsible for paying such fees is within the
  state.
    (6) Receipts constituting interest earned by the taxpayer on loans and
  advances made by the taxpayer  to  a  corporation  affiliated  with  the
  taxpayer  but  with  which  the taxpayer is not permitted or required to
  file a combined report pursuant to section two  hundred  ten-C  of  this
  article  shall  be  deemed  to  arise  from  services  performed  at the
  principal place of business of such affiliated corporation.
    (7) If the  taxpayer  receives  any  of  the  receipts  enumerated  in
  subparagraphs  one  through  four  of  this  paragraph  as a result of a
  securities correspondent relationship such  taxpayer  has  with  another
  broker  or  dealer  with the taxpayer acting in this relationship as the
  clearing firm, such receipts shall be deemed to be generated within  the
  state  to  extent set forth in each of such subparagraphs. The amount of
  such receipts shall exclude the amount the taxpayer is required  to  pay
  to  the  correspondent  firm for such correspondent relationship. If the
  taxpayer receives any of the receipts enumerated  in  subparagraphs  one
  through   four   of   this  paragraph  as  as  result  of  a  securities
  correspondent relationship such taxpayer  has  with  another  broker  or
  dealer  with the taxpayer acting in this relationship as the introducing
  firm, such receipts shall be deemed to be generated within the state  to
  the extent set forth in each of such subparagraphs.
    (8)  If,  for  purposes  of  subparagraphs  one,  two,  clause  (A) of
  subparagraph three, four, or five of  this  paragraph  the  taxpayer  is
  unable  from  its  records  to  determine  the  mailing  address  of the
  customer, eight percent of the receipts is included in the numerator  of
  the apportionment fraction.
    (c)  Receipts  from  credit  card  and  similar  activities.  Receipts
  relating to the bank, credit, travel and entertainment  card  activities
  described  in  this paragraph shall be deemed to be generated within the
  state as described in subparagraphs one through four of this  paragraph.
  Receipts  from  such  activities  generated  within  the  state shall be
  included in the numerator of the apportionment fraction.  Receipts  from
  such activities generated within and without the state shall be included
  in the denominator of the apportionment fraction.


   (1)  Receipts  constituting  interest,  and  fees and penalties in the
  nature of interest, from bank, credit,  travel  and  entertainment  card
  receivables  shall  be  deemed  to  be generated within the state if the
  mailing address of the card holder in the records of the taxpayer is  in
  the state;
    (2)  Receipts  from  service charges and fees from such cards shall be
  deemed to be generated within the state if the mailing  address  of  the
  card holder in the records of the taxpayer is in the state; and
    (3)  Receipts  from merchant discounts shall be deemed to be generated
  within the state if the merchant is located within  the  state.  In  the
  case  of  a  merchant  with  locations  both within and without New York
  state, only receipts from merchant discounts attributable to sales  made
  from locations within New York state are allocated to New York state. It
  shall  be  presumed  that the location of the merchant is the address of
  the merchant shown on the invoice  submitted  by  the  merchant  to  the
  taxpayer.
    (4)  Receipts  from credit card authorization processing, and clearing
  and settlement processing received by credit card  processors  shall  be
  deemed to be generated within the state if the location where the credit
  card  processor's  customer accesses the credit card processor's network
  is located within the state. The amount of all other  receipts  received
  by credit card processors not specifically addressed in subdivisions one
  through  nine  of  this  section deemed to be generated within the state
  shall be determined by  multiplying  the  total  amount  of  such  other
  receipts by the average of (i) eight percent and (ii) the percent of its
  New  York  access  points.  The percent of New York access points is the
  number of locations in New York from which the credit  card  processor's
  customers  access  the  credit  card  processor's network divided by the
  total number of locations in the United States  where  the  credit  card
  processor's customers access the credit card processor's network.
    (d)  Receipts  from certain services to investment companies. Receipts
  received from an investment company arising from the sale of management,
  administration or distribution services to such investment  company  are
  included  in  the denominator of the apportionment fraction. The portion
  of such receipts included in the numerator of the apportionment fraction
  (such portion referred to herein as  the  New  York  portion)  shall  be
  determined as provided in this paragraph.
    (1)  The  New  York  portion shall be the product of the total of such
  receipts from the sale of such services and a fraction. The numerator of
  that fraction  is  the  sum  of  the  monthly  percentages  (as  defined
  hereinafter)  determined  for  each  month  of  the investment company's
  taxable year for federal income tax purposes  which  taxable  year  ends
  within  the taxable year of the taxpayer (but excluding any month during
  which the investment company had no  outstanding  shares).  The  monthly
  percentage  for  each such month is determined by dividing the number of
  shares in the investment company that are owned on the last day  of  the
  month  by shareholders that are located in the state by the total number
  of shares in the  investment  company  outstanding  on  that  date.  The
  denominator of the fraction is the number of such monthly percentages.
    (2)(A)  For purposes of this paragraph, an individual, estate or trust
  is deemed to be located in the state if his, her or its mailing  address
  on  the  records  of  the investment company is in the state. A business
  entity is deemed to be located in the state if its  commercial  domicile
  is located in the state.
    (B)  For  purposes  of  this  paragraph, the term "investment company"
  means a regulated investment company, as defined in section 851  of  the
  internal revenue code, and a partnership to which section 7704(a) of the
  internal  revenue  code applies (by virtue of section 7704(c)(3) of such


 code) and that meets the requirements of section 851(b)  of  such  code.
  The  preceding sentence shall be applied to the taxable year for federal
  income  tax  purposes  of  the  business  entity  that  is  asserted  to
  constitute  an  investment  company that ends within the taxable year of
  the taxpayer.
    (C) For  purposes  of  this  paragraph  the  term  "receipts  from  an
  investment   company"   includes   amounts  received  directly  from  an
  investment company as well as amounts received from the shareholders  in
  such investment company, in their capacity as such.
    (D)  For  purposes  of  this paragraph, the term "management services"
  means the rendering of  investment  advice  to  an  investment  company,
  making  determinations  as to when sales and purchases of securities are
  to be made on behalf  of  an  investment  company,  or  the  selling  or
  purchasing  of  securities constituting assets of an investment company,
  and related activities, but only where such activity or  activities  are
  performed  pursuant  to  a  contract with the investment company entered
  into pursuant to section 15(a) of the federal investment company act  of
  nineteen hundred forty, as amended.
    (E)  For  purposes of this paragraph, the term "distribution services"
  means  the  services  of  advertising,   servicing   investor   accounts
  (including  redemptions),  marketing  shares  or  selling  shares  of an
  investment company, but, in the case of advertising, servicing  investor
  accounts  (including  redemptions)  or marketing shares, only where such
  service is performed by a person who is (or was, in the case of a closed
  end company) also engaged in the service of selling such shares. In  the
  case  of  an  open  end  company, such service of selling shares must be
  performed pursuant to a contract entered into pursuant to section  15(b)
  of  the  federal  investment  company  act of nineteen hundred forty, as
  amended.
    (F) For purposes of this paragraph, the term "administration services"
  includes clerical, accounting, bookkeeping,  data  processing,  internal
  auditing, legal and tax services performed for an investment company but
  only if the provider of such service or services during the taxable year
  in  which  such  service  or  services are sold also sells management or
  distribution  services,  as  defined  hereinabove,  to  such  investment
  company.
    (e)  For  purposes  of  this  subdivision,  a  taxpayer  shall use the
  following hierarchy to determine the commercial domicile of  a  business
  entity,  based  on  the information known to the taxpayer or information
  that would be known upon reasonable inquiry: (i) the seat of  management
  and  control of the business entity; and (ii) the billing address of the
  business entity in the taxpayer's records. The  taxpayer  must  exercise
  due  diligence  before  rejecting the first method in this hierarchy and
  proceeding to the next method.
    (f) For purposes of this subdivision, the term "registered  securities
  broker  or  dealer"  means  a broker or dealer registered as such by the
  securities and exchange commission or a broker or dealer  registered  as
  such by the commodities futures trading commission, and shall include an
  OTC  derivatives  dealer  as defined under regulations of the securities
  and exchange commission at title 17, part 240, section 3b-12 of the code
  of federal regulations (17 CFR 240.3b-12).
    5-a. Global intangible low-taxed income. (a) Notwithstanding any other
  provision of this section, global intangible low-taxed income  shall  be
  included in the apportionment fraction as provided in this subdivision.
    (b)  For  New  York C corporations, global intangible low-taxed income
  shall not be included in the numerator of  the  apportionment  fraction.
  Five  percent of global intangible low-taxed income shall be included in
  the denominator of the apportionment fraction.


   (c) For New York S corporations, global  intangible  low-taxed  income
  shall  not  be  included in the numerator of the apportionment fraction.
  Global intangible low-taxed income shall be included in the  denominator
  of the apportionment fraction.
    (d)  For  purposes  of  this  subdivision, the term "global intangible
  low-taxed income" means the  amount  required  to  be  included  in  the
  taxpayer's  federal  gross  income pursuant to subsection (a) of section
  951A of the internal revenue code.
    6. Receipts from railroad and trucking  business.  Receipts  from  the
  conduct  of  a railroad business (including surface railroad, whether or
  not operated by steam, subway railroad, elevated railroad, palace car or
  sleeping car business) or  a  trucking  business  are  included  in  the
  numerator  of  the  apportionment  fraction  as  follows.  The amount of
  receipts from the conduct of a railroad business or a trucking  business
  included in the numerator of the apportionment fraction is determined by
  multiplying the amount of receipts from such business by a fraction, the
  numerator of which is the miles in such business within the state during
  the period covered by the taxpayer's report and the denominator of which
  is  the  miles in such business within and without the state during such
  period. Receipts from the conduct of the railroad business or a trucking
  business are included in the denominator of the apportionment fraction.
    6-a. Receipts  from  the  operation  of  vessels.  Receipts  from  the
  operation  of vessels are included in the numerator of the apportionment
  fraction as follows. The  amount  of  receipts  from  the  operation  of
  vessels  included  in  the  numerator  of  the apportionment fraction is
  determined by multiplying the amount of such receipts by a fraction, the
  numerator of which is the  aggregate  number  of  working  days  of  the
  vessels  owned  or  leased  by the taxpayer in territorial waters of the
  state during the  period  covered  by  the  taxpayer's  report  and  the
  denominator  of  which  is  the  aggregate number of working days of all
  vessels owned or leased by the taxpayer  during  such  period.  Receipts
  from  the  operation  of  vessels are included in the denominator of the
  apportionment fraction.
    7. Receipts  from  aviation  services.  (a)  Air  freight  forwarding.
  Receipts  of  a  taxpayer  from  the  activity of air freight forwarding
  acting as principal and like indirect air carrier receipts arising  from
  such  activity  shall  be included in the numerator of the apportionment
  fraction as follows: one hundred percent of such receipts  if  both  the
  pickup  and delivery associated with such receipts are made in the state
  and fifty percent of such receipts if  either  the  pickup  or  delivery
  associated  with  such  receipts  is  made in this state. Such receipts,
  whether the pickup or delivery associated with the receipts is within or
  without  the  state,  shall  be  included  in  the  denominator  of  the
  apportionment fraction.
    (b)  Other  aviation  services.  (1)(A)  The  portion of receipts of a
  taxpayer from  aviation  services  (other  than  services  described  in
  paragraph  (a)  of  this  subdivision,  but  including the receipts of a
  qualified air freight forwarder) to be included in the numerator of  the
  apportionment  fraction  shall be determined by multiplying its receipts
  from such aviation services by  a  percentage  which  is  equal  to  the
  arithmetic average of the following three percentages:
    (i)  the  percentage  determined  by  dividing  sixty  percent  of the
  aircraft arrivals and departures  within  this  state  by  the  taxpayer
  during  the  period covered by its report by the total aircraft arrivals
  and departures  within  and  without  this  state  during  such  period;
  provided,  however,  arrivals  and  departures solely for maintenance or
  repair, refueling  (where  no  debarkation  or  embarkation  of  traffic
  occurs), arrivals and departures of ferry and personnel training flights


 or  arrivals  and  departures in the event of emergency situations shall
  not be included in computing  such  arrival  and  departure  percentage;
  provided, further, the commissioner may also exempt from such percentage
  aircraft  arrivals  and  departures of all non-revenue flights including
  flights involving the transportation of officers or employees  receiving
  air  transportation  to  perform maintenance or repair services or where
  such officers or  employees  are  transported  in  conjunction  with  an
  emergency  situation or the investigation of an air disaster (other than
  on a scheduled flight); provided, however, that arrivals and  departures
  of   flights   transporting   officers   and   employees  receiving  air
  transportation for purposes other than specified above  (without  regard
  to  remuneration)  shall  be  included  in  computing  such  arrival and
  departure percentage;
    (ii) the percentage  determined  by  dividing  sixty  percent  of  the
  revenue  tons  handled  by  the  taxpayer  at airports within this state
  during such period by the total revenue tons handled by it  at  airports
  within and without this state during such period; and
    (iii)  the  percentage  determined  by  dividing  sixty percent of the
  taxpayer's originating revenue within this state for such period by  its
  total originating revenue within and without this state for such period.
    (B)  As  used herein the term "aircraft arrivals and departures" means
  the number of landings and takeoffs of the aircraft of the taxpayer  and
  the  number  of  air  pickups  and  deliveries  by  the aircraft of such
  taxpayer; the term "originating revenue" means revenue to  the  taxpayer
  from the transportation or revenue passengers and revenue property first
  received  by the taxpayer either as originating or connecting traffic at
  airports; and the  term  "revenue  tons  handled"  by  the  taxpayer  at
  airports  means the weight in tons of revenue passengers (at two hundred
  pounds per  passenger)  and  revenue  cargo  first  received  either  as
  originating  or connecting traffic or finally discharged by the taxpayer
  at airports;
    (2) All such receipts of a taxpayer from aviation  services  described
  in  this  paragraph are included in the denominator of the apportionment
  fraction.
    (3) A corporation is a qualified air freight forwarder with respect to
  another corporation:
    (A) if it owns or controls either directly or indirectly  all  of  the
  capital  stock of such other corporation, or if all of its capital stock
  is owned or controlled either  directly  or  indirectly  by  such  other
  corporation,  or  if  all  of  the capital stock of both corporations is
  owned or controlled either directly or indirectly by the same interests,
    (B) if it is principally  engaged  in  the  business  of  air  freight
  forwarding, and
    (C)  if  its air freight forwarding business is carried on principally
  with the airline or airlines operated by such other corporation.
    8. Receipts from sales of advertising. (a) The amount of receipts from
  sales of advertising  in  newspapers  or  periodicals  included  in  the
  numerator of the apportionment fraction is determined by multiplying the
  total  of  such  receipts  by  a fraction, the numerator of which is the
  number of newspapers and periodicals  delivered  to  points  within  the
  state  and  the  denominator  of  which  is the number of newspapers and
  periodicals delivered to points within and without the state. The  total
  of  such receipts from sales of advertising in newspapers or periodicals
  is included in the denominator of the apportionment fraction.
    (b) The amount of receipts from sales of advertising on television  or
  radio  included  in  the  numerator  of  the  apportionment  fraction is
  determined by multiplying the total of such receipts by a fraction,  the
  numerator  of  which  is  the  number of viewers or listeners within the


 state and the denominator of which is the number of viewers or listeners
  within and without the state. The total of such receipts from  sales  of
  advertising  on  television  and radio is included in the denominator of
  the apportionment fraction.
    (c)  The amount of receipts from sales of advertising not described in
  paragraph (a) or (b) of this subdivision that is furnished, provided  or
  delivered  to,  or accessed by the viewer or listener through the use of
  wire, cable, fiber-optic, laser, microwave,  radio  wave,  satellite  or
  similar  successor  media  or  any  combination thereof, included in the
  numerator of the apportionment fraction is determined by multiplying the
  total of such receipts by a fraction, the  numerator  of  which  is  the
  number  of  viewers or listeners within the state and the denominator of
  which is the number of viewers  or  listeners  within  and  without  the
  state. The total of such receipts from sales of advertising described in
  this  paragraph  is  included  in  the  denominator of the apportionment
  fraction.
    9. Receipts from transportation or transmission of gas through  pipes.
  Receipts  from  the  transportation or transmission of gas through pipes
  are included in the numerator of the apportionment fraction as  follows.
  The  amount  of  receipts from the transportation or transmission of gas
  through pipes included in the numerator of the apportionment fraction is
  determined by multiplying  the  total  amount  of  such  receipts  by  a
  fraction,  the numerator of which is the taxpayer's transportation units
  within the  state  and  the  denominator  of  which  is  the  taxpayer's
  transportation units within and without the state. A transportation unit
  is  the  transportation  of one cubic foot of gas over a distance of one
  mile.  The  total  amount  of  receipts  from  the   transportation   or
  transmission  of gas through pipes is included in the denominator of the
  apportionment fraction.
    10. (a) Receipts from other  services  and  other  business  receipts.
  Receipts from services not addressed in subdivisions one through nine of
  this   section  and  other  business  receipts  not  addressed  in  such
  subdivisions shall be included in the  numerator  of  the  apportionment
  fraction  if  the  location  of  the  customer is within the state. Such
  receipts from customers within and without the state are included in the
  denominator of the apportionment  fraction.  Whether  the  receipts  are
  included  in  the  numerator of the apportionment fraction is determined
  according to the hierarchy of method set forth in paragraph (b) of  this
  subdivision.  The taxpayer must exercise due diligence under each method
  described in such paragraph (b) before rejecting it  and  proceeding  to
  the  next  method  in  the hierarchy, and must base its determination on
  information known to the taxpayer or information that would be known  to
  the taxpayer upon reasonable inquiry.
    (b) Hierarchy of methods. (1) The benefit is received in this state;
    (2) Delivery destination;
    (3)  The  apportionment  fraction  for  such receipts within the state
  determined pursuant to this subdivision for the preceding taxable  year;
  or
    (4)  The apportionment fraction in the current taxable year determined
  pursuant to this subdivision for those  receipts  that  can  be  sourced
  using  the hierarchy of sourcing methods in subparagraphs one and two of
  this paragraph.
    11. If it shall appear  that  the  apportionment  fraction  determined
  pursuant  to  this section does not result in a proper reflection of the
  taxpayer's business income or capital within the state, the commissioner
  is authorized in his or her discretion to adjust it, or the taxpayer may
  request that the commissioner adjust it, by (a) excluding  one  or  more
  items  in  such  determination, (b) including one or more other items in


 such determination,  or  (c)  any  other  similar  or  different  method
  calculated  to  effect  a  fair and proper apportionment of the business
  income and capital reasonably attributed to the state. The party seeking
  the  adjustment  shall  bear the burden of proof to demonstrate that the
  apportionment fraction determined pursuant  to  this  section  does  not
  result  in  a  proper  reflection  of  the taxpayer's business income or
  capital  within  the  state  and  that  the   proposed   adjustment   is
  appropriate.